Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (this MD&A) together with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This MD&A contains forward-looking statements that are subject to risks and uncertainties, such as those set forth in the sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K captioned “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Risk Factors” and elsewhere. As a result, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage, research and development biotechnology company focused on developing novel immunotherapeutic candidates for the treatment of different forms of cancer. We have developed two versatile and enabling platform technologies for rational design of precision immune modulatory drugs. Our lead clinical candidate, APVO436, and preclinical candidates, ALG.APV-527 and APVO603, were developed using our ADAPTIR™ modular protein technology platform. Our preclinical candidate APVO442 was developed using our ADAPTIR-FLEX™ modular protein technology platform.
The versatile and robust ADAPTIR and ADAPTIR-FLEX platforms are designed to generate monospecific, bispecific, and multispecific antibody candidates that are capable of enhancing the human immune system against cancer cells. ADAPTIR and ADAPTIR-FLEX are both modular platforms, which gives us the flexibility to generate immunotherapeutic candidates with a variety of mechanisms of action. This flexibility in design allows us to potentially generate novel therapeutic candidates that may provide the foundation for the establishment of effective strategies against difficult to treat, as well as advanced forms cancer. We have successfully designed and constructed numerous investigational-stage prototype product candidates based on our ADAPTIR platform. The ADAPTIR platform technology is designed to generate monospecific and bispecific immunotherapeutic proteins that specifically bind to one or more targets, for example, bispecific therapeutic molecules, which may have structural and functional advantages over monoclonal antibodies. The structural differences of ADAPTIR molecules over monoclonal antibodies allow for the development of ADAPTIR immunotherapeutics that are designed to engage immune effector cells and disease targets in a novel manner to produce unique signaling responses and ultimately kill tumors or modulate the immune system to kill tumors.
We are skilled at candidate generation, validation, and subsequent preclinical and clinical development using the ADAPTIR platform and have added the ADAPTIR-FLEX platform to generate multi-specific candidates or other candidates to our platform capabilities. We have developed preclinical candidates based on the ADAPTIR-FLEX platform which are advancing in our pipeline. We are developing our ADAPTIR and ADAPTIR-FLEX molecules by way of our protein engineering, preclinical development, process development, and clinical development capabilities.
2020 Corporate Highlights:
On February 28, 2020, we entered into an LLC Purchase Agreement with Medexus, pursuant to which we sold all of the issued and outstanding limited liability company interests of Aptevo BioTherapeutics, a wholly owned subsidiary of Aptevo. As consideration for the sale, at closing Aptevo received an amount equal to $30 million in cash. We used $22.1 million of the $30 million in proceeds to repay in full our previous term debt facility with MidCap Financial, including $20 million of principal and $2.1 million in an end of facility fee, accrued interest, legal fees and prepayment fees. As a result of the transaction, Medexus obtained all right, title and interest to the IXINITY® product and the related Hemophilia B business and intellectual property. In addition, Aptevo BioTherapeutics personnel responsible for the sale and marketing of IXINITY also transitioned to Medexus as part of the transaction. We receive deferred payments (royalties) from Medexus related to sales of IXINITY and may earn milestone payments in the future. Royalties are earned at the rate of 2% of net revenue through the earlier of June 2022 or completion of the IXINITY pediatric trial being run by Medexus. After that, the royalty rate will increase to 5%.
In July 2020, we announced that we engaged Piper Sandler & Co to sell our RUXIENCE and IXINITY royalty stream and deferred payments and milestones, respectively. Aptevo is entitled to receive a CD20 biosimilar product (royalty) payments from Pfizer Inc. of 2.5% of global net sales of RUXIENCE. The royalty term runs for seven years, until early 2027, and payments are due quarterly. Additionally, Aptevo is entitled to receive deferred payments from Medexus pertaining to the net sales of IXINITY in the United States and Canada. Royalties are earned at the rate of 2% of net revenue through the earlier of June 2022 or completion of the IXINITY pediatric trial being run by Medexus. After that, the royalty rate will increase to 5%. The royalty term runs for up to fifteen years, until early 2035, and payments are due quarterly. Additionally, milestone payments totaling up to $11 million may be earned from Medexus related to certain regulatory and commercial achievements.
On August 5, 2020, we entered into a Credit and Security Agreement (Credit Agreement), with MidCap Financial. The Credit Agreement provided us with up to $25 million of available borrowing capacity. The full $25 million was drawn on the closing date of the Credit Agreement. The MidCap Financial loan has a 48-month term, is interest-only for the first 18 months, with straight-line amortization for the remaining 30 months and bears interest at a rate of one month LIBOR plus 6.25% per annum, subject to a 1.50% LIBOR floor and a 2.50% LIBOR cap. The loan includes additional repayment provisions should either or both of the royalties or milestones related to IXINITY or royalties related to RUXIENCE be sold during the term of the loan.
As of December 2020, we have advanced ALG.APV-527 into Phase 1 clinical development in a co-development 50/50 partnership. Aptevo and Alligator plan to file a clinical trial application (CTA) in Europe in 2021 and to subsequently commence first in human dosing in the fourth quarter of 2021.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, certain of the holders of the Company’s warrants exercised warrants with a strike price of $18.20 per share, resulting in the issuance of approximately 1.2 million shares of the Company’s common stock and aggregate proceeds to the Company of approximately $21.2 million. As of December 31, 2020, there were 404,694 warrants outstanding.
Recent Developments
On November 6, 2020, Tang filed a statement on Schedule 13D to report that Tang had purchased 1,760,000 shares of our common stock, representing approximately 54% of our issued and outstanding shares of common stock as of the date of filing such Schedule 13D. As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, Tang has subsequently been diluted to a 39.6% beneficial ownership position, primarily through the exercise of certain warrants that were issued and outstanding prior to Tang acquiring its ownership position in Aptevo. Additionally, on November 18, 2020, our Board received a written unsolicited, non-binding indication of interest from Tang, proposing to acquire all of the outstanding shares of our common stock not already beneficially owned by Tang for $50.00 per share in cash, subject to confirmatory due diligence conducted under a customary non-disclosure agreement. We have had a series of communications during which we attempted to negotiate a non-disclosure agreement with Tang to permit discussions covering our nonpublic information and our operations. Further, on February 9, 2021, Tang announced its intention to nominate two candidates for election to our board of directors at our 2021 annual meeting of stockholders and submitted an advisory stockholder proposal for consideration at our 2021 annual meeting to commence a process to sell Aptevo to the highest bidder. We have incurred and may continue to incur additional expenses by retaining the services of various professionals to advise us on responding to these matters.
The Aptevo Board was open to exploring the indication of interest from Tang and made earnest efforts to evaluate it. However, it was unable to do so because it was unable to reach agreement with Tang on the terms of a customary non-disclosure agreement, including limitations on the use of confidential information by Tang. Had agreement on the terms of a non-disclosure agreement been reached, it would have permitted the exchange of confidential information and would have enabled both parties to conduct due diligence. In this early stage of the Company’s development, the Aptevo Board believes it is difficult for the market to accurately value the potential of Aptevo’s proprietary platform technologies and therapeutic candidates, which have just begun to demonstrate their effectiveness and potentially life-saving capabilities to the Company’s patients, shareholders and other stakeholders. The Board will continue to carefully evaluate any indications of interest and proposals for strategic transactions that it receives from current shareholders or otherwise, in line with its fiduciary duties and commitment to acting in the best interests of all of the Company’s shareholders.
On March 30, 2021, the Company entered into and closed a Royalty Purchase Agreement with HCR pursuant to which the Company sold to HCR the right to receive all royalty payments made by Pfizer in respect of net sales of RUXIENCE. Under the terms of the agreement, the Company received $35 million (the Investment Amount) at closing and the Company is eligible to receive additional payments in aggregate of up to an additional $32.5 million based on the achievement of sales milestones in 2021, 2022, and 2023 (collectively, the Milestone Amounts). The Royalty Purchase Agreement further provides that, once HCR reaches aggregate royalty payments totaling 190% of the Investment Amount plus the Milestone Amounts to the extent paid by HCR to the Company, Aptevo will be entitled to receive 50% of any additional royalty payments by Pfizer thereafter.
In connection with the Royalty Purchase Agreement, we amended our Credit Agreement with MidCap Financial and used $10 million of the proceeds received from the Royalty Purchase Agreement with HCR to pay down the outstanding principal under this agreement from $25 million to $15 million.
Results of Operations
Except as otherwise stated below, the following discussions of our results of operations reflect the results of our continuing operations, excluding the results related to Aptevo BioTherapeutics, which has been separated from continuing operations and reflected as a discontinued operation. See Note 2 - Discontinued Operations to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had net losses of $17.8 million and $40.4 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $185.6 million.
Royalty Revenue
We recorded royalty revenue of $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase is related to a 2.5% royalty we are entitled to receive from Pfizer related to global net sales of RUXIENCE (rituximab biosimilar), which was approved by the FDA in July 2019 and launched by Pfizer in early 2020. The payment from Pfizer relates to an agreement acquired by Aptevo as part of our spin-off from Emergent in 2016. The agreement was originally executed by Trubion Pharmaceuticals, which was subsequently acquired by Emergent, and Wyeth, a wholly-own subsidiary of Pfizer. The royalty term runs through January 2027, which is the seventh anniversary of the first commercial sale of the CD20 biosimilar.
Research and Development Expenses
We expense research and development costs as incurred. These expenses consist primarily of the costs associated with our research and development activities, including conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, fees to professional service providers for analytical testing, independent monitoring or other administration of our clinical trials and obtaining and evaluating data from our clinical trials and non-clinical studies, as well as costs of contract manufacturing services for clinical trial material, and costs of materials used in clinical trials and research and development.
Our research and development expenses include:
•
employee salaries and related expenses, including stock-based compensation and benefits for our employees involved in our drug discovery and development activities;
•
external research and development expense incurred under agreements with third-party contract research organizations (CROs) and investigative sites;
•
manufacturing expenses and material for third-party manufacturing; and,
•
overhead costs such as rent, utilities and depreciation.
We expect our future research and development spending will also be dependent upon such factors as the results from our clinical trials, the availability of reimbursement of research and development spending, the number of product candidates under development, the size, structure and duration of any clinical programs that we may initiate, and the costs associated with manufacturing our product candidates on a large-scale basis for later stage clinical trials. We may experience interruption of key clinical trial activities, such as patient enrollment and clinical trial site monitoring, and key non-clinical activities due to COVID-19. While programs are still in the pre-clinical trial phase, we do not provide a breakdown of the initial associated expenses, as we are often evaluating multiple product candidates simultaneously. Costs are reported in preclinical research and discovery until the program enters the clinic.
Our principal research and development expenses by program for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are shown in the following table:
Research and development expenses decreased by $6.9 million, to $17.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $24.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Expenses decreased primarily related to decreased spending on programs discontinued in 2019. Pre-clinical program, general research and discovery costs decreased primarily due to decreased spending on outside testing and manufacturing for ALG.APV-527. This decrease was offset by an increase in spending in APVO436 for the year ended December 31, 2020, related to increased clinical trial costs.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs and professional fees in support of our executive, business development, finance, accounting, information technology, legal and human resource functions. Other costs include facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 general and administrative expenses decreased by $2.2 million, or 14%, to $14.0 million from $16.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to reduced personnel and professional services costs.
Other Expense
Other expense consists primarily of gains or losses realized on foreign currency revaluation, costs related to debt extinguishment, accrued exit fees on debt, and interest on debt. Other expense was $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase is primarily due to a loss on extinguishment of debt of $2.1 million, which consisted of interest, exit, prepayment, and legal fees recognized during the first quarter of 2020.
Discontinued Operations
The accompanying consolidated financial statements include discontinued operations from two separate transactions: the sale of hyperimmune business to Saol International Limited in September 2017, from which milestone payments were recognized in 2019, and the sale of Aptevo BioTherapeutics LLC (Aptevo BioTherapeutics) in 2020.
The following table represents the components attributable to Aptevo BioTherapeutics presented as income from discontinued operations in the consolidated statements of operations (in thousands):
Income from discontinued operations was $13.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. On February 28, 2020, we entered into an LLC Purchase Agreement with Medexus, pursuant to which we sold all of the issued and outstanding limited liability company interests of Aptevo BioTherapeutics, our former wholly-owned subsidiary which owns the IXINITY and related Hemophilia B business. As a result of the transaction, Medexus obtained all rights, title, and interest to the IXINITY product and intellectual property. In addition, Aptevo BioTherapeutics personnel responsible for the sale and marketing of IXINITY also transitioned to Medexus as part of the transaction.
In addition to the payment received at closing, we may also earn milestone and deferred payments from Medexus in the future. Pursuant to the LLC Purchase Agreement, we agreed to provide certain transition services for a limited period of time following the closing. We used $22.1 million of the $30 million in proceeds to repay in full our term debt facility with MidCap Financial, including $20 million of principal and $2.1 million in an end of facility fee, accrued interest, legal fees, and prepayment fees.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, income from discontinued operations was primarily due to the receipt of the $4.3 million milestone payment from Saol International Limited, in conjunction with the sale in September 2017 of our hyperimmune business.
Income Taxes
During the periods prior to the spin-off from Emergent, the Company did not file separate tax returns as it was included in the tax returns of Emergent entities within the respective tax jurisdictions. The income tax provision included in these financial statements was calculated using a separate return basis, as if the Company was a separate taxpayer. Under this approach, the Company determines its current taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities and related tax expense as if it were filing separate tax returns in each tax jurisdiction.
We did not have an income tax benefit or income tax expense from continuing operations in the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements at December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to our net operating loss of $17.8 million, the gain on sale of Aptevo BioTherapeutics of $14.3 million, and changes in working capital accounts. Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to our net operating loss of $40.4 million, and changes in working capital accounts.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to the cash received from the sale of Aptevo BioTherapeutics, net of transaction fees. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the net cash provided by investing activities was primarily due to the receipt of the $4.25 million milestone payment from Saol International Limited, in conjunction with the sale in September 2017 of our hyperimmune business, net of the purchase of property and equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to $21.2 million received from the exercises of warrants and common stock, and proceeds of $24.7 million from the credit agreement we entered into with MidCap Financial on August 5, 2020, which was offset by the $22.1 million repayment of long-term debt in the first quarter of 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to $20.3 million received from the issuance of common stock and related warrants and the exercise of warrants.
Sources of Liquidity
Equity Distribution Agreement
On December 14, 2020, we entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement with Piper Sandler & Co (Piper Sandler). The Equity Distribution Agreement provides that, upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth therein, we may issue and sell through Piper Sandler, acting as sales agent, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $50 million. We have no obligation to sell any such shares under the Equity Distribution Agreement. The sale of the shares of our common stock by Piper Sandler will be effected pursuant to a Registration Statement on Form S-3 which we filed on November 9, 2017 and updated on December 14, 2020.
The Equity Distribution Agreement will terminate upon the issuance and sale of all shares under the Equity Distribution Agreement or upon the earlier termination thereof at any time by us or Piper Sandler upon notice to the other party.
Registration Statement
We previously filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission on November 13, 2017, amended on December 6, 2017 and declared effective on December 15, 2017 (the Prior Registration Statement). The Prior Registration Statement registered the offer and sale of an indeterminate number of shares of common stock and preferred stock, an indeterminate principal amount of debt securities and an indeterminate number of warrants to purchase common stock, preferred stock, and various series of debt securities and/or warrants to purchase any of such securities, having an aggregate initial offering price of $150 million, of which an aggregate of $127.8 million remained unsold as of the December 14, 2020. On December 14, 2020, we filed a new registration statement covering the offering, issuance, and sale up to $200 million in common stock, preferred stock, and various series of debt securities and/or warrants to purchase any of such securities, which included the unsold securities from the Prior Registration Statement.
Purchase Agreement
On December 20, 2018, we entered into the Purchase Agreement, and a registration rights agreement with Lincoln Park. Pursuant to the purchase agreement, Lincoln Park has committed to purchase up to $35.0 million worth of our common stock over a 36-month period commencing on February 13, 2019, the date the registration statement covering the resale of the shares was declared effective by the SEC. Pursuant to this purchase agreement, we issued 13,991 commitment shares of common stock in the first quarter of 2019 and none in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Under the Purchase Agreement, on any business day selected by us, we may direct Lincoln Park to purchase shares of our common stock provided that Lincoln Park’s maximum commitment on any single day does not exceed $2.0 million. The purchase price per share will be based off of prevailing market prices of our common stock immediately preceding the time of sale; provided, however, that we cannot direct any such purchase if the prevailing market price is less than $1.00. In addition, we may also direct Lincoln Park to purchase other amounts as accelerated purchases or as additional accelerated purchases if the closing sale price of our common stock exceeds certain threshold prices as set forth in the Purchase Agreement. We have not sold any shares under the Purchase Agreement through the year ended December 31, 2020.
Actual sales of shares of our common stock to Lincoln Park under the Purchase Agreement will occur at our discretion from time to time and depend on a variety of factors, including, among others, market conditions, the trading price of our common stock and additional determinations as to the appropriate sources of funding for our operations. Lincoln Park has no right to require any sales, but is obligated to make purchases as we direct, in accordance with the Purchase Agreement.
Warrants
On March 11, 2019, we completed a public offering of common stock and warrants, as follows:
•
for a combined public offering price of $14.00 per share of common stock and related warrants, 1,417,857 shares of common stock and related warrants with a 5-year life to purchase up to 1,417,857 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $18.20 per share,
•
for a combined public offering price of $13.86 per pre-funded warrant and related warrant, pre-funded warrants with a 10-year life to purchase up to 153,571 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.14 per share and related warrants with a 5-year life to purchase up to 153,571 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $18.20 per share. These pre-funded warrants were exercised on March 21, 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, certain of the holders of the Company’s warrants exercised warrants with a strike price of $18.20 per share, resulting in the issuance of 1,166,735 million shares of the Company’s common stock and aggregate proceeds to the Company of approximately $21.2 million. As of December 31, 2020, there were 404,694 warrants outstanding.
Liquidity
We have financed our operations to date primarily through revenue generated from our commercial products, royalty payments from Pfizer, deferred payments from Medexus, the sale of our hyperimmune products business in September 2017, the sale of Aptevo BioTherapeutics on February 28, 2020, public offerings of our common stock, loan proceeds, milestone payments, research and development funding from strategic partners, and funds received at the date of our spin-off from Emergent. We had a net loss of $17.8 million and $40.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. We had cash and cash equivalents of $39.9 million, restricted cash - current of $2.6 million, and an accumulated deficit of $185.6 million as of December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in our operating activities was $29.3 million.
Our future success is dependent on our ability to develop our product candidates and ultimately upon our ability to attain profitable operations. We anticipate that we will continue to incur significant operating losses for the next several years as we incur expenses to continue to execute on our development strategy to advance our preclinical and clinical stage assets. We will not generate revenues from our development stage product candidates unless and/or until we or our collaborators successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for such product candidates, which we expect will take a number of years and is subject to significant uncertainty. If we obtain regulatory approval for one of our development stage product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution, to the extent that such costs are not paid by collaborators. We do not have sufficient cash to complete the clinical development of any of our development stage product candidates and will require additional funding in order to complete the development activities required for regulatory approval of such product candidates. We will require substantial additional funds to continue our development programs and to fulfill our planned operating goals.
Due to COVID-19, we may experience delays in opportunities to partner our product candidates, due to financial and other impacts on potential partners. Additionally, we may experience potential impacts on our future deferred payments and milestones from Medexus due to effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, which may impact Medexus’ ability to continue to successfully commercialize the IXINITY businesses, respectively. We believe that our existing cash resources, the Investment Amount from the Royalty Purchase Agreement with HCR, the cash to be generated from future IXINITY deferred payments, access to cash under the Purchase Agreement with Lincoln Park LLC, release of restricted cash securing letters of credit, and the Credit Agreement with Midcap Financial, will be sufficient to meet our projected operating requirements and debt service for at least twelve months from the date of this filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In July 2020, we announced that we engaged Piper Sandler to sell our RUXIENCE and IXINITY royalty streams and, deferred payments and milestones, respectively, in order to provide additional funding for the development of our product candidates. On March 30, 2021, the Company entered into and closed a Royalty Purchase Agreement with HCR pursuant to which the Company sold to HCR the right to receive all royalty payments made by Pfizer in respect of net sales of RUXIENCE. Under the terms of the agreement, the Company received $35 million (the Investment Amount) at closing and the Company is eligible to receive additional payments in aggregate of up to an additional $32.5 million based on the achievement of sales milestones in 2021, 2022, and 2023 (collectively, the Milestone Amounts). The Royalty Purchase Agreement further provides that, once HCR reaches aggregate royalty payments totaling 190% of the Investment Amount plus the Milestone Amounts to the extent paid by HCR to the Company, Aptevo will be entitled to receive 50% of any additional royalty payments by Pfizer thereafter.
There are numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development, and commercialization of pharmaceutical products. Accordingly, our future funding requirements may vary from our current expectations and will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•
our ability to establish and maintain strategic partnerships, licensing or other arrangements and the financial terms of such agreements;
•
the number and characteristics of the product candidates we pursue;
•
the scope, progress, results, and costs of researching and developing our product candidates, and of conducting preclinical and clinical trials;
•
the timing of, and the costs involved in, completing our clinical trials, and obtaining regulatory approvals for our product candidates;
•
the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims, including litigation costs and the outcome of such litigation;
•
the cost of commercialization activities if any of our product candidates are approved for sale, including marketing, sales, and distribution costs;
•
the cost of manufacturing our product candidates and any products we successfully commercialize;
•
the cost of attracting and retaining skilled personnel;
•
whether and to what extent future proceeds are received under our royalty purchase agreement with HCR; and,
•
the timing, receipt and amount of any milestone payments and deferred payments from Medexus with respect to IXINITY.
If we are unable to raise substantial additional capital in the next year, whether on terms that are acceptable to us or at all, then we may be required to:
•
delay, limit, reduce or terminate our clinical trials or other development activities for one or more of our product candidates; and/or,
•
delay, limit, reduce or terminate our establishment of other activities that may be necessary to commercialize our product candidates, if approved.
The sale of additional equity or convertible debt securities may result in additional dilution to our stockholders. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of debt securities or preferred stock or through credit facilities, these securities and/or the loans under credit facilities could provide for rights senior to those of our common stock and could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. Additional funds may not be available when we need them, on terms that are acceptable to us, or at all. We also expect to seek additional funds through arrangements with collaborators, licensees or other third parties. These arrangements would generally require us to relinquish or encumber rights to some of our technologies or drug candidates, and we may not be able to enter into such arrangements on acceptable terms, if at all. Due to COVID-19, we may experience delays in clinical trials and pre-clinical work, and opportunities to partner our product candidates, due to financial and other impacts on potential partners.
Contractual Obligations
We have an operating lease related to our office and laboratory space in Seattle, Washington. This lease was amended and extended in March 2019. The term of the amended lease is through April 2030 and we have two options to extend the lease term, each by five years, as well as a one-time option to terminate the lease in April 2023.
In January 2020, we entered into a contract with The Leukemia & Lymphoma Society (LLS) to be part of an ongoing national AML master clinical trial called the ‘Beat AML Master Clinical Trial.’ The Beat AML Master Clinical Trial provides access to leading academic cancer centers and allows us to study APVO436 in a front-line AML setting. Our purchase obligation for the Beat AML Master Clinical Trial totals $8.1 million over the next three years, with payments anticipated to begin in 2021. We note that the Clinical Trial Participation Agreement contains a termination for convenience clause where we may terminate the agreement with 180 days prior written notice.
On August 5, 2020, we entered into a new Credit and Security Agreement (Credit Agreement), with MidCap Financial. The Credit Agreement provided us with up to $25 million of available borrowing capacity. The MidCap Financial loan has a 48 month term, is interest-only for the first 18 months, with straight-line amortization for the remaining 30 months and bears interest at a rate of one month LIBOR plus 6.25% per annum, subject to a 1.50% LIBOR floor and a 2.50% LIBOR cap. Additionally, on March 30, 2021, we amended our Credit Agreement with MidCap Financial and used $10 million of the proceeds received from the Royalty Purchase Agreement with HCR to pay down the outstanding principal under this agreement from $25 million to $15 million.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgements and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP, requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors. Although we believe that our judgments and estimates are appropriate, actual results may differ materially from our estimates and changes in these estimates are recorded when known. An accounting policy is considered critical if it is important to a company’s financial condition and results of operations and if it requires the exercise of significant judgment and the use of estimates on the part of management in its application.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 to our audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this report, we believe the following accounting policies are the most critical to the judgments and estimates we use in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses are expensed as incurred. Research and development costs primarily consist of internal labor costs, fees paid to outside service providers and the costs of materials used in clinical trials and research and development. Other research and development expenses include facility, maintenance, and related support expenses.
A substantial portion of our pre-clinical studies and all of our clinical studies have been performed by third-party contract research organizations (CRO). We review the activities performed by the CROs each period. For pre-clinical studies, the significant factors used in estimating accruals include the percentage of work completed to date and contract milestones achieved. For clinical study expenses, the significant factors used in estimating accruals include the number of patients enrolled and percentage of work completed to date. Our estimates are highly dependent upon the timeliness and accuracy of the data provided by our CROs regarding the status of each program and total program spending and adjustments are made when deemed necessary.
Stock-Based Compensation
Under ASC 718, Compensation-Stock-based Compensation, we measure and recognize compensation expense for restricted stock units (RSUs), and stock options granted to our employees and directors based as of the fair value of the awards on the date of grant. The fair value of stock options is estimated at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model that requires management to apply judgment and make estimates, including:
•
the expected term of the stock option award, which we calculate using the simplified method, as permitted by the SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 110, Share-Based Payment, as we have insufficient historical information regarding our stock options to provide a basis for an estimate;
•
the expected volatility of our underlying common stock, which we estimate based on the historical volatility of a representative group of publicly traded biopharmaceutical companies with similar characteristics to us, and our own historical and implied future volatility;
•
the risk-free interest rate, which we based on the yield curve of U.S. Treasury securities with periods commensurate with the expected term of the options being valued;
•
the expected dividend yield, which we estimate to be zero based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends and have no present intention to pay cash dividends; and
•
the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant.
Stock-based compensation expense for RSUs, and stock options is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. We are required to estimate a forfeiture rate to calculate the stock-based compensation expense for our awards. Our forfeiture rate is based on an analysis of our actual forfeitures since the adoption of our equity award plan. We routinely evaluate the appropriateness of the forfeiture rate based on actual forfeiture experience, analysis of employee turnover, and expectations of future option exercise behavior.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for using the liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for future tax consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and net operating loss and tax credit carry forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the year in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled.
Aptevo’s ability to realize deferred tax assets depends upon future taxable income as well as the limitations discussed below. For financial reporting purposes, a deferred tax asset must be reduced by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized prior to expiration. Aptevo considers historical and future taxable income, future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, taxable income in prior carryback years, and ongoing tax planning strategies in assessing the need for valuation allowances. In general, if Aptevo determines that it is more likely than not to realize more than the recorded amounts of net deferred tax assets in the future, Aptevo will reverse all or a portion of the valuation allowance established against its deferred tax assets, resulting in a decrease to the provision for income taxes in the period in which the determination is made. Likewise, if Aptevo determines that it is not more likely than not to realize all or part of the net deferred tax asset in the future, Aptevo will establish a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets, with an offsetting increase to the provision for income taxes, in the period in which the determination is made.
Because tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations, significant judgment is required. As a result, Aptevo makes certain estimates and assumptions, in (1) calculating Aptevo’s income tax expense, deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities, (2) determining any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets and (3) evaluating the amount of unrecognized tax benefits, as well as the interest and penalties related to such uncertain tax positions. Aptevo’s estimates and assumptions may differ significantly from tax benefits ultimately realized.