Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
General
Aqua Metals (NASDAQ: AQMS) is engaged in the business of equipment supply, technology licensing and related services for recycling lead through a novel, proprietary and patented process we developed and named AquaRefining™. AquaRefining is a room temperature, water and organic acid-based process that greatly reduces environmental emissions. Lead is a globally traded commodity with a worldwide market value in excess of $20 billion. We believe our suite of patented and patent pending AquaRefining technologies will allow the lead-acid battery industry to simultaneously improve the environmental impact of lead recycling and scale recycling production to meet demand. Furthermore, our AquaRefining technologies result in high purity lead. We were formed as a Delaware corporation on June 20, 2014 and since our formation, we have focused our efforts on the development and testing of our AquaRefining process, the construction of our initial lead acid battery, or LAB, recycling facility at the Tahoe Reno Industrial Center, or TRIC, located in McCarran, Nevada and commercializing the AquaRefining process.
We completed the development of our LAB recycling facility at TRIC, and commenced production of battery breaking and limited operations during the first quarter of 2017. In April 2017, we commenced the shipment of products for sale, consisting of lead compounds as well as plastics. In April 2018, we commenced the limited production of lead bullion, including AquaRefined lead. In July 2018, we commenced the sale of pure AquaRefined lead in the form of two tonne blocks and in October 2018, we commenced the sale of AquaRefined lead in the form of battery manufacturing ready ingots. In November 2018, we received official vendor certification from Clarios for our AquaRefined lead and in December 2018, we commenced shipments directly to Clarios owned and partner battery manufacturing facilities. In 2019, we operated our demonstration AquaRefinery at commercial quantity production levels and produced over 35,000 AquaRefined ingots by operating the AquaRefinery 24 hours a day and 7 days a week for sustained periods of time. The AquaRefining Aqualyzers produced at or above the target 100 Kg/Hr of production throughput per module of six Aqualyzers or ~16-17 Kg/Hr per Aqualyzer and ran sustained endurance runs for over one month several times.
In order to expand the demonstration AquaRefinery to its full capacity, we chose to idle the AquaRefinery beginning in September 2019 to facilitate contracting work required to increase the plant capacity planned for late 2019 or early 2020. On the evening of November 29, 2019, a fire occurred in the AquaRefining area of the recycling facility at TRIC. The cause of the fire was not due to the technology or process of AquaRefining but rather to contracting activities. The fire and related intense heat and smoke caused significant damage to a material amount of equipment in the AquaRefinery area, including all 16 AquaRefining modules, electrical and tank infrastructure, steel superstructure, control wiring and other supporting infrastructure. The floor to ceiling firewall between the AquaRefining area and the rest of the plant isolated the worst of the damage to the AquaRefining area. The firewall also appears to have spared material damage to much of the key front-end process equipment, such as the battery breaker/separation system, concentrate production area, kettles and ingot casting, water treatment and recovery and other important areas of the plant. The administrative office area also remained intact.
As of December 31, 2020, we have received approximately $23.4 million of insurance proceeds from our insurance carriers. Based on our estimates, as of the date of this report, we believe that the replacement value of the equipment and plant lost or damaged in the fire will likely be higher. We have also submitted a significant claim on our business interruption cost recovery. We intend to vigorously pursue receipt of insurance proceeds to satisfy in full all of our property, casualty and business interruption losses, subject to the coverage limits. Assets on our balance sheet as of December 31, 2020 that were not affected by the fire total approximately $24.9 million in book value, including the battery breaker, melting kettles, kiln, filter presses, mixing and storage tanks, water recovery system and the building infrastructure plus the land. Our policy in place at the time of the fire includes up to $50 million in combined property, equipment and business interruption insurance.
During the first half of 2020, we successfully performed test runs on the first and second iterations of our Aqualyzer as part of our V1.25L program. The program consists of three iterations that are classified as V1.25a, V1.25b and the final iteration, V1.25L, the latter of which will be used to create the AquaRefining Aqualyzer package for our equipment supply and licensing offerings. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we completed our V1.25L Aqualyzer program on time and under budget, achieving lead production that is 100% greater compared to the V1.0 Aqualyzer deployed at the AquaRefinery during commercial production in 2018 and 2019. The Company previously guided a 20% increase of throughput, yet the V.125L Aqualyzer surpassed that guidance by 500%. The V1.25L program concluded with a multi-day 24/7 endurance run that ended on December 24, 2020. These results should positively impact capital and operating expenses for our future equipment supply and licensee customers. The doubling of throughput results in a 50% reduction in the number of Aqualyzers needed for equivalent lead production. V1.25L also has a lower build cost and reduced assembly time compared to the V1.0 Aqualyzer, which correlates to a 50% decrease in capital expenditures for Aqua Metals equipment installations. In addition, Aqualyzer operating expenses have been reduced by greater than 60% compared to the V1.0 Aqualyzer, with the combined impact of improvements in automation and increased throughput. The current design has a single button start and stop functionality with no manual interaction required during operation, along with automated maintenance capability. The 60% reduction in operating expenses and 50% reduction in capital expenditures greatly exceeds the targets that were set in early 2020.
Our business model focus is on global licensing opportunities to incorporate AquaRefining in the recycling industry.
We have been engaged in the pursuit of a capital light strategy that is based on the pursuit of licensing opportunities within the lead battery recycling marketplace without maintaining and operating a capital-intensive lead recycling facility. Our capital light business strategy is designed to optimize shareholder value by focusing on equipment supply and licensing opportunities, which have always been a core part of our business plans. We believe this path has the potential to maximize shareholder value in that it could be far less capital intensive than a plant rebuild.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued 3,217,426 shares of common stock pursuant to an At the Market Issuance Sales Agreement ("ATM") for net proceeds of $3.7 million.
Results of Operations for the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2019
Our lead recycling facility was not in production during 2020 due to the fire that occurred in November of 2019 and the acceleration of our licensing strategy. During the year ended December 31, 2020, revenue resulted from the sale of inventory consisting of lead compounds that were generated during pre-fire operations. During the year ended December 31, 2019, product sales consisted of lead bullion, lead compounds and plastics that were generated through the AquaRefining process. The following table summarizes results of operations with respect to the items set forth below for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 together with the percentage change from the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 for those items (in thousands).
Except for nominal sales of inventory, we did not generate revenue during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as there has been not significant production subsequent to the year ended December 31, 2019. The plant was not in production during 2020 except for the operation and testing of our improved Aqualyzers as part of the V1.25 program.
Cost of product sales includes raw materials, supplies and related costs, salaries and benefits, consulting and outside services costs, depreciation and amortization costs, insurance, travel and overhead costs. Cost of product sales decreased approximately 78% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. Cost of product sales decreased during 2020, due to the discontinuation of commercial production at the AquaRefinery.
Research and development cost included expenditures related to the improvement of the AquaRefining technology. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, research and development costs decreased approximately 34% from the comparable period in 2019. The decline in research and development cost is primarily the result of staff reduction and management's focus on expediting our transition to a capital light business strategy.
General and administrative expense decreased approximately 53% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The suspension of activities under our Operations, Maintenance and Management Agreement with Veolia, reduced Company payroll and
improvements in nearly all other expense categories drove the decrease. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, we had $9.0 million of non-cash expense related to the Veolia agreement.
The following table summarizes our other income and interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 together with the percentage change in those items (in thousands).
Insurance proceeds net of related expenses resulted from collection and payment activity that began in 2020 as a result of the November 2019 fire. In connection with our year-end accounting, we recognized a non-cash impairment charge for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $11.7 million, subsequent to an analysis of our fixed assets and a write-down to fair market values. Historically, interest expense has been related primarily to the $5.0 million Interstate Battery convertible note and the $10.0 million note payable to Veritex Community Bank, the successor in interest to Green Bank, amortization of debt issuance costs incurred in connection with both of these notes, as well as an accrual for the USDA guarantee fee on the $10.0 million note to Veritex. On January 24, 2019, we repaid Interstate Battery the outstanding principal and interest on the convertible debt in the amount of $6.7 million. As a result of this debt repayment, we amortized the remaining discount on the note of $2.6 million and remaining deferred financing expenses of $20,000 to interest expense. On December 10, 2020, we retired the loan with Veritex. As part of the loan payoff, we expensed the remaining unamortized loan costs of $0.6 million. In addition, we incurred a prepayment penalty of $0.4 million, which is also included in interest expense. Interest income decreased for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 due to lower cash balances during the year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had total assets of $35.1 million and working capital of $4.9 million.
The following table summarizes our cash provided by (used in) operating, investing and financing activities (in thousands):
Net cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 was $11.0 million and $25.2 million, respectively. Net cash used in operating activities during each of these periods consisted primarily of our net loss adjusted for noncash items such as depreciation, amortization, and stock-based compensation charges as well as net changes in working capital. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized an $11.7 million expense for impairment on fixed assets and $0.5 million for the elimination of our asset retirement obligation. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized non-cash payments to Veolia of approximately $9.0 million for shares issued and warrant expense.
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $6.6 million compared to net cash used in investing activities of $10.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash used in investing activities during each of these periods consists primarily of purchases of fixed assets and insurance proceeds received.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $3.7 million net proceeds from ATM shares sales. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of $29.4 million in net proceeds from two public share offerings, which was partially offset by a $6.7 million payoff of the Interstate Battery convertible note.
As of December 31, 2020, we had total cash of $6.5 million and working capital of $4.9 million. As of the date of this report, we believe that we may require additional capital in order to fund our current level of ongoing costs over the next twelve months and move forward with our capital light licensing strategy. There can be no assurance that we will be able to acquire the necessary funding on commercially reasonable terms or at all. We intend to seek funds through the recovery of potential remaining insurance proceeds and the possible sale of equipment that is not required for our capital light strategy. However, there can be no assurance that such funds will be available. If needed, we may seek funding through the sale of equity or debt financing. Funding that includes the sale of our equity may be dilutive. If such financing is not available on satisfactory terms, we may be unable to further pursue our business plan and we may be unable to continue operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet financing arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of expenses during the period. Significant items subject to such estimates and assumptions include the carrying amount and valuation of long-lived assets, the valuation of conversion features of convertible debt, valuation allowances for deferred tax assets, the determination of estimated asset retirement obligations, the determination of stock option expense, and the determination of the fair value of stock warrants issued. Our actual results could differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to assist stockholders and investors reading the consolidated financial statements in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Accounts receivable
We sell our products to large well-established companies and extend credit without requiring collateral, based on an ongoing evaluation of the customer’s business prospects and financial condition. In the event that payment of a customer’s account receivable is doubtful, we would reserve the receivable under an allowance for doubtful accounts.
Inventory
Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Inventory cost is recorded on a first-in, first-out basis using the weighted average method. Net realizable value is determined as the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business, less reasonably predictable costs of completion, disposal, and transportation.
Property and equipment
Property and equipment are stated at cost net of accumulated depreciation. Depreciation on property and equipment is calculated on the straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets. Leasehold improvements are depreciated over the shorter of the life of the asset or the remaining term of the lease. We periodically evaluate our property and equipment assets for indications that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. At December 31, 2020, management reviewed the remaining estimated lives of our long-lived assets. Any reduction in the useful life assumption will result in increased depreciation and amortization expense in the period when such determination is made, as well as in subsequent periods. We evaluate the need to record impairment during each reporting period. We determined that the remaining useful lives of the equipment has decreased due to our focus on a capital light strategy. We recognized a $11.7 million impairment during the period. The impairment expense included a write-down of $7.7 million to equipment under construction that was not yet capitalized. In addition, certain other equipment was written down by $4.0 million to fair values, resulting in the acceleration to depreciation for identified assets.
Intangible and other long-lived assets
The intangible assets consist of a patent application contributed to us by five founding stockholders, patent applications for technology developed by us and trademark applications. The useful life of the intangible assets has been determined to be ten years and the assets are being amortized. We periodically evaluate our intangible and other long-lived assets for indications that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. In reviewing for impairment, we compare the carrying value of such assets to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected from the use of the assets and their eventual disposition. When the estimated undiscounted future cash flows are less than their carrying amount, an impairment loss is recognized equal to the difference between the assets’ fair value and their carrying value. In addition to the recoverability assessment, we routinely review the remaining estimated lives of our long-lived assets. Any reduction in the useful life assumption will result in increased depreciation and amortization expense in the period when such determination is made, as well as in subsequent periods. We evaluate the need to record impairment during each reporting period. No impairment has been recorded. We determined that the estimated life of the intellectual property properly reflected the current remaining economic life of the asset.
Asset retirement obligations
We have historically recorded the fair value of estimated asset retirement obligations associated with tangible long-lived assets in the period incurred. Retirement obligations associated with long-lived assets are those for which there is an obligation for closures and/or site remediation at the end of the assets’ useful lives. These obligations were initially estimated based on discounted cash flow estimates and are accreted to full value over time through charges to operating expense. In addition, asset retirement costs were capitalized as part of the related asset’s carrying value and are depreciated on a straight-line basis over the assets’ respective useful lives. Due to the change in the primary use of the Company's McCarran, Nevada facility, the Written Determination issued to the Company requiring the Facility Closure Trust deposit was terminated by the NDEP on December 9, 2020. As a result of this termination, the Trust account was closed and the Trustee reimbursed the Company the entire balance of the Trust account. As a result of the elimination of the Trust obligation and the refund of the balance, the original amount of the estimated closure cost that was capitalized and the accumulated accretion were written off.
Revenue Recognition
The Company records revenue recognition in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. ASC 606 provides a single comprehensive model for the recognition of revenue arising from contracts with customers and supersedes most current revenue recognition guidance, including industry-specific guidance. It requires an entity to recognize revenue when the entity transfers promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. ASC 606 creates a five-step model that requires entities to exercise judgment when considering the terms of contract(s), which includes (1) identifying the contract(s) with the customer, (2) identifying the separate performance obligations in the contract, (3) determining the transaction price, (4) allocating the transaction price to the separate performance obligations, and (5) recognizing revenue as each performance obligation is satisfied. ASC 606 requires additional disclosure about the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from customer contracts, including qualitative and quantitative information about contracts with customers, significant judgments and changes in judgments and assets recognized from costs incurred to obtain or fulfill a contract.
Insurance Proceeds
On November 29, 2019, there was a fire in the Aqua Refining area of the TRIC facility. The Company recorded an insurance proceeds receivable balance of $19.9 during the fourth quarter of 2019, which was limited by GAAP accounting standards to the net book value of assets written off as a result of the fire. The insurance proceeds receivable balance has been reduced to zero as insurance payments have exceeded the total established insurance proceeds receivable amount. Any amounts received in excess of that total are reported as other income. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has received $23.4 million in insurance payments as a result of the fire damage. Subsequent to year end, the Company received an additional $0.1 million of insurance proceeds. The Company has also determined that it is probable to receive additional insurance payments.
Research and development
Research and development expenditures are expensed as incurred.
Income taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with the liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under the liability method, deferred assets and liabilities are recognized based upon anticipated future tax consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. The provision for income taxes is comprised of the current tax liability and the changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities. We established a valuation allowance to the extent that it is more likely than not that deferred tax assets will not be recoverable against future taxable income.
We recognize the effect of uncertain income tax positions only if those positions are more likely than not of being sustained. Recognized income tax positions are measured at the largest amount that is greater than 50% likely of being realized. Changes in recognition or measurement are reflected in the period in which the change in judgment occurs.
Stock-based compensation
We recognize compensation expense for stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718 “Compensation - Stock Compensation.” For employee stock-based awards, we calculate the fair value of the award on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes-Merton method for stock options; the expense is recognized over the service period for awards to vest.
The estimation of stock-based awards that will ultimately vest requires judgment and to the extent actual results or updated estimates differ from the original estimates, such amounts are recorded as a cumulative adjustment in the period estimates are revised. The Company considers many factors when estimating expected forfeitures, including types of awards, employee class and historical experience.
Recent accounting pronouncements
See discussion of recent accounting pronouncements in Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements located in Item 8 in this Annual Report.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flow in the future years (in thousands):
Note: Excludes a finance lease with a current liability of $6 and a non-current liability of $20.
Operating lease obligations
We lease our Alameda, California and McCarran, Nevada spaces under non-cancelable operating leases, expiring in 2022 and 2021, respectively. On February 4, 2019, we entered into a sublease agreement effective as of February 1, 2019 for the Alameda, California facility. The term of the sublease commenced on February 4, 2019, and ends on May 31, 2022. The above obligations do not include partially offsetting sublease income of approximately $0.7 million for the remainder of the Alameda lease agreement.
Finance lease obligation
We currently maintain one finance lease for equipment. Our finance lease is immaterial to our consolidated financial statements.
Long-term debt
Aqua Metals Reno, Inc. entered into a $10,000,000 loan with Green Bank on November 3, 2015. The term of the loan was twenty-one years. We paid the balance of the loan on December 10, 2020. The current balance consists of amounts due related to the Payment Protection Program (PPP) loans. See Note 11 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.