Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
Signet International Holdings, Inc. (the “Company”) was incorporated on February 2, 2005 in accordance with the Laws of the State of Delaware as 51142, Inc. The Company changed its corporate name to Signet International Holdings, Inc. in conjunction with the September 8, 2005 transaction discussed below.
On September 8, 2005, pursuant to a Stock Purchase Agreement and Share Exchange (Agreement) by and among Signet International Holdings, Inc. (Signet); Signet Entertainment Corporation (SIG) and the shareholders of SIG (Shareholders) (collectively SIG and the SIG shareholders shall be known as the “SIG Group”), Signet acquired 100.0% of the then issued and outstanding preferred and common stock of SIG for a total of 3,421,000 common shares and 5,000,000 preferred shares of Signet’s stock issued to the SIG Group. Pursuant to the agreement, SIG became a wholly owned subsidiary of Signet.
Signet Entertainment Corporation was incorporated on October 17, 2003 in accordance with the Laws of the State of Florida. SIG was formed to establish a television network “The Gaming and Entertainment Network”. To date, this effort has been incomplete. The Company has abandoned pursuant of any gaming or entertainment operations. The Company’s current principal business plan is to focus in developing advanced technologies, energy solutions and medical devices. By utilizing sub licensing arrangements for the intellectual property licenses, we acquire, our strategy is focused on identifying strategic partners that can develop and market products based on the underlying technologies. We do not claim to have expertise in the various intellectual properties we seek to acquire. Instead, our value is based on our ability to assess technologies and appropriate partners for the commercialization of products and process based on the underlying intellectual property. Research and development of the underly technologies is being performed at major universities in Florida. The development of a commercial products will be conducted by our strategic partners.
On February 28, 2018, the Company redomiciled in the state of Nevada.
Generally, the option fee ranges from $1,200 to $5,000. We have exercise two of our options related to the graphene technology and battery technology. On October 30, 2020, we have entered into exclusive licensing agreements with the licensor related to the graphene technology and battery technology as described in Note 6 in our consolidated financial statement for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Since all of the technologies we have options to license are trending, unique, and further advanced than any others we know of on the market today, we must maintain our edge and seek constant improvement to stay viable-and we are doing just that.
Because of our efforts, we have our path laid out before us. Last year´s strategy allowed us to take the proper steps to arrive at this juncture. We are now proudly holding ourselves out to the world as a viable and worthy consortium from which multinationals can acquire advanced, patented technology. Although our technologies may necessitate some retooling and possibly an avant-garde approach in implementing, we feel that in considering the alternative technologies presently available, ours is the superior choice.
We have completed these efforts to identify and locate a niche, function, and purpose for all our potential products. Inasmuch as our potential products are ‘green’ in nature and innovative in design, we feel these technologies can easily be integrated into daily life to the benefit of all. We all will see great progress and never to look back.
Although our business plan is highly dependent upon our usage of licensed intellectual property described herein, we have only secured 2 exclusive licenses through exercise of our options. Currently, the Company has non-exclusive options for licenses of various intellectual properties except for the two of our option agreements which are the graphene and battery technology. Five of our options may expire, and we cannot ensure that these options will be renewed. As they are non-exclusive, we also have no way to protect ourselves from other parties utilizing the underlying intellectual property before we exercise our option and move toward commercialization of the underlying technology. We further have not entered into formal negotiations on these five options regarding the terms of a formal licensing agreement, such as, but not limited to, royalty fees, minimum royalties, duration, exclusivity, funding requirements, or limitations on use. This limits our ability to determine the commercial viability of any given technology. However, we believe that we have had and continue to have good working relationships with the institutions owning the intellectual property such that our eventual use of the intellectual property will be formulated in a manner that ensures positive growth for the Company. On October 30, 2020, we have exercised our two options and entered into exclusive licensing agreements with the licensor related to the graphene technology and battery technology as described in Note 6 in our consolidated financial statement for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Plan of Operations
We have engaged a new scientist to help further develop out technologies and interact with the several universities with whom we have contracts. We hear from other universities on a regular basis that tells us we are welcome to the fraternity of research scientists, engineers, and inventors. We have increased efforts to create more awareness of our presence by engaging a social media specialist who will keep the public informed of all our progress and assist us with shareholders relations. Our team is growing and meeting our needs.
As a reporting company, we have engaged an SEC legal counsel to guide us through the labyrinth of compliance and the next steps to up-listing. We have also retained our patent counsel to advise and instruct us on strategy and enhancement of our patent rights, protecting us not only domestically but also worldwide.
Since all of our technologies are trending, unique, and further advanced than any others we know of on the market today, we must maintain our edge and seek constant improvement to stay viable-and we are doing just that.
Because of our efforts, we have our path laid out before us. Last year´s strategy allowed us to take the proper steps to arrive at this juncture. We are now proudly holding ourselves out to the world as a viable and worthy consortium from which multinationals can acquire advanced, patented technology. Although our technologies may necessitate some retooling and possibly an avant-garde approach in implementing, we feel that in considering the alternative technologies presently available, ours is the superior choice.
We have completed these efforts to identify and locate a niche, function, and purpose for all our products. Inasmuch as our products are ‘green’ in nature and innovative in design, we feel these technologies can easily be integrated into daily life to the benefit of all. We all will see great progress and never to look back.
We currently own exclusive licensing agreement rights to two of our technologies; graphene and battery technology. We have not developed any products based on said technology. Instead, we have options that provide us exclusive limited access to the intellectual properties through the option to license.
We have executed an Exclusive Distributor Agreement with Jarada, Inc. Ltd (“Jarada”) of Seoul Korea The Agreement appoints Jarada an exclusive South Korean territorial distribution rights to all of our Graphene products that will be developed and made available for worldwide commercialization. We shall pay Jarada 15% commission on all sales made by Jarada of our Graphene products. The term of this agreement is for two years from the date of execution and shall automatically renewed unless either party provides notice of termination.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide. We are monitoring this closely. Although we have had occasion to travel overseas for meetings, expos, and demonstrations, we experienced similar restrictions. The outcome of our business meeting is indeterminate. However, we continue to maintain a dialogue with our European counterparts. Our operations have not been affected by the COVID-19 outbreak to date, the ultimate duration and severity of the outbreak and its impact on the economic environment and our business is uncertain. As of the date of this report, our business remains open. At this time, we do not foresee any material changes to our operations from COVID-19. While we do not anticipate an impact on our operations, we cannot estimate the duration of the pandemic and potential impact on our business if our business must close. In addition, a severe or prolonged economic downturn could result in a variety of risks to our business, including weakened demand for our products and a decreased ability to raise additional capital when needed on acceptable terms, if at all. At this time, the Company is unable to estimate the impact of this event on its operations.
Results of Operations
For the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue:
The Company is in its development stage. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company did not have any revenue generating operations, nor did the Company have any related cost of goods sold.
Operating Expenses:
The Company’s operating losses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $354,777 and $114,025, respectively, an increase of $240,752 or 211%. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had total operating expenses of $354,777 primarily consisting of professional fees of $78,859, consulting fees of $208,029, public company expenses of $13,107, lease expense of $15,245, compensation expense of $16,072, research and development expenses of $6,000, travel and entertainment of $4,482, and other office expenses of $13,892. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company had total operating expenses of $114,025 primarily consisting of professional fees of $13,400, consulting fees of $41,735, public company expenses of $7,048, rent expense of $14,276, compensation expense of $13,150, research and development expenses of $6,500, travel and entertainment of $5,004, and other office expenses of $12,912. The increase in operating expenses is primarily attributable to increase in stock-based consulting fees of $166,294 and increase professional fees of $65,459 related to accounting and legal services rendered for our public company filings.
Net Loss:
The Company’s net losses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $354,777 and $114,750, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had total current assets of $123,875, which primarily consisted of cash of $123,493 and prepaid expenses of $382. As of December 31, 2019, the Company had total current assets of $148,293, which primarily consisted of cash of $106,661, prepaid expenses of $16,632 and subscription receivable of $25,000.
As of December 31, 2020, we had a working capital surplus of $92,781 as compared to a working capital deficit of $342,442 as of December 31, 2019. In 2020, the Company reduced total accrued salary by $460,952 to our Chief Executive Officer in connection with the issuance of 829,721 shares of common stock valued at $94,422 and $366,530 of contributed capital from the forgiveness of accrued salaries in January 2020 thereby eliminating the accrued salary due to officer and thereby reduced the working capital deficit.
The Company will have additional capital requirements during calendar year 2021. Currently, the Company does not have any revenue generating business operations, nor does the Company currently have the capital resources required to execute its business strategy. Therefore, the Company will attempt to raise additional capital through the sale of our securities.
The Company cannot assure that we will have sufficient capital to finance our growth and/or business operations or that such capital will be available on terms that are favorable to the Company or at all. The Company is currently incurring operating losses that are expected to continue for the foreseeable future. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received total proceeds of $161,028 from sale of common stock and collected $25,000 of subscription receivable which were used for working capital purposes. We have incurred legal, accounting, consulting, rent and office expense during our operations.
We anticipate generating losses and, therefore, may be unable to continue operations in the future. If we require additional capital, we would have to issue debt or equity or enter into a strategic arrangement with a third party.
Going Concern Consideration
As reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, the Company had a net loss and net cash used in operations of $354,777 and $169,196, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020 and had no revenues during the year ended December 31, 2020. Additionally, the Company had an accumulated deficit of $7,854,524 at December 31, 2020. These matters raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for twelve months from the issuance date of this report.
The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on the Company’s ability to implement its business plan, raise capital, and generate revenues. Currently, management is seeking capital to implement its business plan. Management believes that the actions presently being taken provide the opportunity for the Company to continue as a going concern. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
Cash Flows
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities:
Net cash used in operating activities was $169,196 and $109,620 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
● During the year ended December 31, 2020 cash was used primarily as follows:
○ net loss was $354,777;
○ a decrease in our prepaid expenses and other current asset of $16,250;
○ a decrease in our total accounts payable and accrued expenses of $306 and;
○ non-cash operating expense of stock issued for services of $169,493.
● During the year ended December 31, 2019 cash was used as follows:
○ net loss was $114,750;
○ an increase in our prepaid expenses of approximately $16,250;
○ an increase in our total accounts payable and accrued expenses of $2,340; and
○ non-cash operating expense of stock issued for services of $18,618 and deferred rent of $422.
Net Cash Provided by in Financing Activities:
Net cash provided by financing activities was $186,028 and $167,556 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
● During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received proceeds of $161,028 from sale of Company’s common stock and collected $25,000 from subscription receivable.
● During the year ended December 31, 2019, we received proceeds of $172,556 from sale of the Company’s common stock offset by purchase of treasury stock for $5,000.
We currently have no external sources of liquidity, such as arrangements with credit institutions or off-balance sheet arrangements that will have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition or immediate access to capital. We expect to require additional financing to fund our current operations for calendar year 2021. There is no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional financing on acceptable terms or at all.
If we are unable to raise the funds required to fund our operations, we will seek alternative financing through other means, such as borrowings from institutions or private individuals. There can be no assurance that we will be able to raise the capital we need for our operations from the sale of our securities. We have not located any sources for these funds and may not be able to do so in the future. We expect that we will seek additional financing in the future. However, we may not be able to obtain additional capital or generate sufficient revenues to fund our operations. If we are unsuccessful at raising sufficient funds, for whatever reason, to fund our operations, we may be forced to cease operations.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and consolidated results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Management believes the following critical accounting policies affect the significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, and the related disclosures at the date of the financial statements and during the reporting period. Actual results could materially differ from these estimates. Significant estimates include the valuation of equity-based instruments issued for other than cash, valuation of right-of-use assets and liabilities and the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets.
Fair value of financial instruments
The Company follows ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures” (“ASC 820”), for assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis. ASC 820 establishes a common definition for fair value to be applied to existing generally accepted accounting principles that require the use of fair value measurements, establishes a framework for measuring fair value and expands disclosure about such fair value measurements.
ASC 820 defines fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. Additionally, ASC 820 requires the use of valuation techniques that maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. These inputs are prioritized below:
Level 1: Observable inputs such as quoted market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities
Level 2: Observable market-based inputs or unobservable inputs that are corroborated by market data
Level 3: Unobservable inputs for which there is little or no market data, which require the use of the reporting entity’s own assumptions.
The Company analyzes all financial instruments with features of both liabilities and equity under the Financial Accounting Standard Board’s (“FASB”) accounting standard for such instruments. Under this standard, financial assets and liabilities are classified in their entirety based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for employee stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718-10, “Share-Based Payment,” which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all share-based payment awards made to non-employees for goods and services, and to employees and directors including employee stock options, restricted stock awards, and employee stock purchases based on estimated fair values,
Determining Fair Value Under ASC 718-10
The Company estimates the fair value of stock options granted using the Black-Scholes option-pricing formula. This fair value is then amortized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods of the awards. The Company’s determination of fair value using an option-pricing model is affected by the stock price as well as assumptions regarding the number of highly subjective variables.
The Company estimates volatility based upon the historical stock price of the Company and estimates the expected term for employee stock options using the simplified method for employees and directors and the contractual term for non-employees. The risk-free rate is determined based upon the prevailing rate of United States Treasury securities with similar maturities.
Leases
In February 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842). The updated guidance requires lessees to recognize lease assets and lease liabilities for most operating leases. In addition, the updated guidance requires that lessors separate lease and non-lease components in a contract in accordance with the new revenue guidance in ASC 606. This guidance is effective for interim and annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018. The Company adopted this guidance effective January 1, 2019.
On January 1, 2019, the Company adopted ASU No. 2016-02, applying the package of practical expedients to leases that commenced before the effective date whereby the Company elected to not reassess the following: (i) whether any expired or existing contracts contain leases and; (ii) initial direct costs for any existing leases. For contracts entered into on or after the effective date, at the inception of a contract the Company assessed whether the contract is, or contains, a lease. The Company’s assessment is based on: (1) whether the contract involves the use of a distinct identified asset, (2) whether we obtain the right to substantially all the economic benefit from the use of the asset throughout the period, and (3) whether it has the right to direct the use of the asset. The Company will allocate the consideration in the contract to each lease component based on its relative stand-alone price to determine the lease payments.
Operating lease ROU assets represents the right to use the leased asset for the lease term and operating lease liabilities are recognized based on the present value of future minimum lease payments over the lease term at commencement date. As most leases do not provide an implicit rate, the Company use an incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at the adoption date in determining the present value of future payments. Lease expense for minimum lease payments is amortized on a straight-line basis over the lease term and is included in general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Accounting standards which are not yet effective are not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s financial position or results of operations.
Cash Requirements
Our management does not believe that our current capital resources will be adequate to continue operating our company and maintaining our business strategy for much more than 12 months. At the date hereof, we have minimal cash at hand. We require additional capital to implement our business and fund our operations.
Since inception we have funded our operations primarily through equity financings and we expect that we will continue to fund our operations through the equity and debt financing, either alone or through strategic alliances. Additional funding may not be available on favorable terms, if at all. We intend to continue to fund our business by way of equity or debt financing until natural revenues can support the Company. If we raise additional capital through the issuance of equity or convertible debt securities, the percentage ownership of our company held by existing shareholders will be reduced and those shareholders may experience significant dilution. In addition, new securities may contain certain rights, preferences or privileges that are senior to those of our common stock. We cannot assure you that we will be able to raise the working capital as needed in the future on terms acceptable to us, if at all.
If we are unable to raise capital as needed, we are required to reduce the scope of our business development activities, which could harm our business plans, financial condition and operating results, or cease our operations entirely, in which case, you will lose all of your investment.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to our stockholders.
Contractual Obligations
Not required of smaller reporting companies.