ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains “forward-looking statements” that reflect our future plans, estimates, beliefs and expected performance. We caution that assumptions, expectations, projections, intentions, or beliefs about future events may, and often do, vary from actual results and the differences can be material. Some of the key factors that could cause actual results to vary from our expectations include changes in natural gas, NGLs, and oil prices, the timing of planned capital expenditures, our ability to fund our development programs, uncertainties in estimating proved reserves and forecasting production results, operational factors affecting the commencement or maintenance of producing wells, the condition of the capital markets generally, as well as our ability to access them, impacts of world health events, including the COVID-19 pandemic, and uncertainties regarding environmental regulations or litigation and other legal or regulatory developments affecting our business, as well as those factors discussed below, all of which are difficult to predict. In light of these risks, uncertainties and assumptions, the forward-looking events discussed may not occur. See “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Also, see the risk factors and other cautionary statements described under the heading “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” We do not undertake any obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements except as otherwise required by applicable law.
In this section, references to “Antero,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” and “our” refer to Antero Resources Corporation and its subsidiaries, unless otherwise indicated or the context otherwise requires.
Our Company
We are an independent oil and natural gas company engaged in the development, production, exploration and acquisition of natural gas, NGLs, and oil properties located in the Appalachian Basin. We focus on unconventional reservoirs, which can generally be characterized as fractured shale formations. Our management team has worked together for many years and has a successful track record of reserve and production growth as well as significant expertise in unconventional resource plays. Our strategy is to leverage our team’s experience delineating and developing natural gas resource plays to develop our reserves and production, primarily on our existing multi-year inventory of drilling locations.
We have assembled a portfolio of long-lived properties that are characterized by what we believe to be low geologic risk and repeatability. Our drilling opportunities are focused in the Appalachian Basin. As of December 31, 2020, we held approximately 515,000 net acres in the Appalachian Basin. In addition, we estimate that approximately 174,000 net acres of our leasehold may be prospective for the slightly shallower Upper Devonian Shale.
As of December 31, 2020, our estimated proved reserves were approximately 17.6 Tcfe, consisting of 10.0 Tcf of natural gas, 745 MMBbl of assumed recovered ethane, 491 MMBbl of C3+ NGLs, and 32 MMBbl of oil. This represents a 7% decrease in estimated proved reserves from December 31, 2019. These reserve estimates have been prepared by our internal reserve engineers and management and audited by our independent reserve engineers. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately 2,133 potential horizontal well locations on our existing leasehold acreage that were classified as proved, probable and possible.
We operate in the following industry segments: (i) the exploration, development, and production of natural gas, NGLs, and oil; (ii) marketing of excess firm transportation capacity; and (iii) midstream services through our equity method investment in Antero Midstream Corporation. As described below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, effective March 13, 2019, we no longer consolidate the results of Antero Midstream Partners. All of our operations are conducted in the United States.
Recent Developments and Highlights
COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic. Governments have tried to slow the spread of the virus by imposing social distancing guidelines, travel restrictions and stay-at-home orders, which have caused a significant decrease in activity in the global economy and the demand for oil and, to a lesser extent, natural gas and NGLs. Also, in March 2020, Saudi Arabia and Russia failed to agree to cut production of oil along with the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (“OPEC”), and Saudi Arabia significantly reduced the price at which it sells oil and announced plans to increase production, which contributed to a sharp drop in the price of oil. While OPEC, Russia and other allied producers reached an agreement in April 2020 to reduce production, oil prices have remained low. The imbalance between the supply of and demand for oil, as well as the uncertainty around the extent and timing of an economic recovery, have caused extreme market volatility and a substantial adverse
effect on commodity prices.
As a producer of natural gas, NGLs and oil, we are recognized as an essential business under various federal, state and local regulations related to the COVID-19 pandemic. We have continued to operate as permitted under these regulations while taking steps to protect the health and safety of our employees and contract workers. We have implemented protocols to reduce the risk of an outbreak within our field operations, and these protocols have not reduced production or efficiency in a significant manner. A substantial portion of our non-field level employees continue to operate in remote work from home arrangements, and we have been able to maintain a consistent level of effectiveness through these arrangements, including maintaining our day-to-day operations, our financial reporting systems and our internal control over financial reporting.
Our natural gas, NGLs and oil producing properties are located in the liquids-rich Appalachian Basin. Although the decline in oil prices has negatively impacted our oil revenue, oil sales represented approximately 3% of our total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020. While natural gas prices also declined during the first half of 2020, benchmark Henry Hub prices recovered during the third quarter and averaged $2.32/Mcf in the last half of 2020. Similarly, C3+ NGL prices also improved during the second half of 2020 as gasoline demand increased, supporting prices for normal butane (nC4), isobutane (iC4), and pentane (C5), all of which are used for gasoline. The COVID-19 pandemic reduced gasoline demand, which forced C5 prices below propane prices for much of April 2020 to under $0.40 per gallon, has since rebounded with benchmark C5 price in January 2021 in the range of $1.05 to $1.25 per gallon.
In addition, we have hedged through fixed price contracts the sale of 2.2 Bcf per day of natural gas at a weighted average price of $2.77 per MMBtu in 2021. Our hedges cover a substantial majority of our expected natural gas production in 2021. We also have fixed priced contracts for the sale of 19,000 barrels per day of ethane at a weighted average price of $0.20 per gallon and 3,000 barrels per day of oil at a weighted average price of $55.16 per barrel for 2021. All of our hedges are financial hedges and do not have physical delivery requirements. As such, any decreases in anticipated production, whether as a result of decreased development activity, shut-ins, or through transactions under our asset sale plan, will not impact our ability to realize the benefits of the hedges.
Our natural gas and NGLs are primarily used in manufacturing, power generation and heating rather than transportation. While we have seen a decrease in the overall demand for these products, demand for natural gas and NGLs has not declined as much as demand for oil, and there has not been as substantial an oversupply of natural gas and NGLs as there has been of oil. Furthermore, the decrease in demand for oil has significantly reduced the number of rigs drilling for oil in the continental U.S. and, as a result, estimates of future gas supply associated with oil production have declined. Additionally, the restart of economic activity in Asia and Europe, coupled with lower LPG production from refineries in the U.S., Europe, and Asia during the second quarter, provided support for international LPG prices relative to oil. Further, reductions in OPEC+ and North American oil production and the associated NGL volumes are expected to have a supportive effect on propane and butane prices into 2021.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we shipped 43% of our total C3+ NGL net production on Mariner East 2 for export and realized a $0.11 per gallon premium to Mont Belvieu pricing on these volumes at Marcus Hook, PA. We sold the remaining 57% of C3+ NGL net production at a $0.06 per gallon discount to Mont Belvieu pricing at Hopedale, OH. We expect to sell at least 48% of our C3+ NGL full-year production in 2021 at Marcus Hook for export at a premium to Mont Belvieu.
Condensate differentials to WTI were approximately $12/Bbl during the fourth quarter. Pre-hedge oil realizations were negatively impacted during the second quarter and beginning of the third quarter as Antero sold volumes at a material discount to WTI in order to keep from shutting in production volumes. This period of weak condensate demand driven by the pandemic coincided with an active well completion period for Antero that brought on large condensate volumes. The negative impact from wider oil differentials was more than offset by the benefit of maintaining full natural gas and NGL volumes through this period. Antero expects its full year 2021 realized oil price differential to be at the high end of the $9.00/Bbl to $11.00/Bbl range, as the differential normalized during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Our supply chain also has not experienced any significant interruptions. The lack of a market or available storage for any one NGL product or oil could result in our having to delay or discontinue well completions and commercial production or shut in production for other products because we cannot curtail the production of individual products in a meaningful way without reducing production of other products. Potential impacts of these constraints may include partial shut-in of production, although we are not able to determine the extent of shut-ins or for how long they may last. However, because some of our wells produce rich gas, which is processed, and some produce dry gas, which does not require processing, we can change the mix of products that we produce and wells that we complete to adjust our production to address takeaway capacity constraints for certain products. For example, we can shut-in rich gas wells and still produce from our dry gas wells if processing or storage capacity of NGL products becomes further limited or constrained. Also, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, we had developed a diverse set of buyers and destinations, as well as in-field and off-site storage capacity for our condensate volumes, and such capacity is still largely available to us.
In addition, as discussed in “-Capital Resources and Liquidity-2020 Capital Spending and 2021 Capital Budget” below, we announced a 21% reduction in our drilling and completion capital budget for 2021 compared to 2020. During the fourth quarter, our ongoing emphasis on completion efficiencies and drilling longer laterals resulted in material improvements in well costs. Well costs averaged approximately $680 per lateral foot during the fourth quarter, benefiting from these efficiency improvements and lateral lengths that averaged over 15,000 feet. Well costs were approximately $690 per foot when normalized for a 12,000 foot lateral length. We expect well costs to average $660 per foot during the first quarter of 2021, based on a 12,000 foot lateral. We continue to monitor our five-year drilling plan and will make further revisions as appropriate.
During the first quarter of 2020 and the two preceding quarters, we recognized various impairment charges related to the decline in commodity prices and the value of our investment in Antero Midstream Corporation. At this time, we do not anticipate any further impairment charges in our equity method investment in Antero Midstream Corporation because the value of our equity method investment has increased since the end of the first quarter of 2020. Additional impairment charges related to our assets may occur if we experience disruptions in production, additional or sustained declines in the forward commodity price strip from December 31, 2020, unresolved storage capacity restraints or other consequences caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
In October 2020, the borrowing base supporting our Credit Facility was subject to its semi-annual redetermination and was re-affirmed at $2.85 billion. Lender commitments remained unchanged at $2.64 billion, providing us with a consistent amount of available borrowings. Our next semi-annual borrowing base redetermination is in April 2021, which could impact our available borrowings and liquidity.
In addition, our borrowing capacity is directly impacted by the amount of financial assurance we are required to provide in the form of letters of credit to third parties, primarily pipeline capacity providers. The amount of financial assurance we must provide has not increased during the COVID-19 pandemic and, thus far, we have not experienced any losses due to counterparty risk. However, our ability to limit any additional financial assurance we are required to provide, as well as to protect ourselves from the counterparty risk of our financial hedges, may be limited in the future. Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have timely serviced our debt and other obligations, and we have not implemented or requested any concessions or materially modified the terms of any agreements.
The COVID-19 pandemic, commodity market volatility and resulting financial market instability are variables beyond our control and may adversely impact our generation of funds from operating cash flows, distributions from unconsolidated affiliates, available borrowings under our Credit Facility and our ability to access the capital markets.
Financing Highlights
Debt Repurchase Program
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased $1.4 billion principal amount of our senior notes through open market repurchases, tender offers and redemptions at a weighted average discount of 13%. We recognized a gain of $176 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 on the early extinguishment of the debt repurchased. As a result, our 5.375% senior notes due November 1, 2021 (the “2021 Notes”) were fully retired as of November 30, 2020. Additionally, we fully redeemed our 5.125% senior notes due December 1, 2022 (the “2022 Notes”) at par, plus accrued and unpaid interest in the first quarter of 2021. See Note 8-Long-Term Debt to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
Asset Sales Program
On June 15, 2020, we announced the consummation of a transaction with an affiliate of Sixth Street Partners, LLC (“Sixth Street”) relating to certain overriding royalty interests across our existing asset base (the “ORRIs”). In connection with the transaction, we contributed the ORRIs to a newly formed subsidiary, Martica Holdings LLC (“Martica”). At the initial closing, Sixth Street contributed $300 million in cash (subject to customary adjustments) and agreed to contribute up to an additional $102 million in cash if certain production thresholds attributable to the ORRIs are achieved in the third quarter of 2020 and first quarter of 2021. All cash contributed by Sixth Street was distributed to us. We met the production threshold related to the third quarter of 2020 and received a $51 million cash distribution during the year ended December 31, 2020. See Note 4-Transactions to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
On August 10, 2020, we completed a volumetric production payment transaction and received net proceeds of approximately $216 million (the "VPP"). In connection with the VPP, we entered into a purchase and sale agreement, together with a conveyance agreement and production and marketing agreement, with J.P. Morgan Ventures Energy Corporation ("JPM-VEC") to convey, effective July 1, 2020, an overriding royalty interest in dry gas producing properties in West Virginia (the "VPP Properties") equal to
136,589,000 MMBtu over the expected seven-year term of the VPP. See Note 4-Transactions to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
On February 17, 2021, we announced the formation of a drilling partnership with QL Capital Partners (“QL”), an affiliate of Quantum Energy Partners. Under the terms of the arrangement, QL will fund 20% of total development capital spending in 2021 and is expected to fund between 15% and 20% of total development capital spending on an annual basis from 2022 through 2024. All of the wells spud during each calendar year period will be a separate annual tranche. Capital costs in excess of, and cost savings below, a specified percentage of budgeted amounts for each annual tranche will be for our account.
For each tranche other than 2021, we will propose a capital budget and estimated internal rate of return (“IRR”) for all wells to be spud during the year and, subject to the mutual agreement of the parties that the estimated IRR for each tranche exceeds a specified return, QL will be obligated to participate in such tranche. For each annual tranche in which QL participates, QL will receive a proportionate working interest percentage in each well spud in such tranche. If we present a capital budget for an annual tranche with an estimated IRR equal to or exceeding a specified return that QL in good faith believes is less than such specified return and QL elects not to participate, we will not be obligated to offer QL the opportunity to participate in subsequent tranches. No earlier than December 31 following the expiration of each tranche year, we will calculate the tranche IRR for such tranche year and, if the tranche IRR exceeds certain specified returns, we will receive a carry in the form of a one-time payment from QL for such annual tranche.
Issuance of Convertible Senior Notes and Senior Notes
On August 21, 2020, we issued $250 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.25% senior unsecured convertible notes (the “2026 Convertible Notes”). On September 2, 2020, we issued an additional $37.5 million of the 2026 Convertible Notes. The initial conversion rate is 230.2026 shares of our common stock per $1,000 principal amount of 2026 Convertible Notes, subject to adjustment upon the occurrence of specified events. Please see “-Debt Agreements and Contractual Obligations-Senior Unsecured Notes” below and Note 8-Long-Term Debt to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
On January 4, 2021, we issued $500 million of 8.375% senior notes due July 15, 2026 (the “2026 Notes”) at par. On January 26, 2021, we issued $700 million of 7.625% senior notes due February 1, 2029 (the “2029 Notes”) at par. The 2026 Notes and 2029 Notes are unsecured and effectively subordinated to the Credit Facility to the extent of the value of the collateral securing the Credit Facility. The 2026 Notes and 2029 Notes rank pari passu to our other outstanding senior notes. The 2026 Notes and 2029 Notes are guaranteed on a full and unconditional and joint and several senior unsecured basis by our wholly owned subsidiaries and certain of our future restricted subsidiaries. Please see “-Debt Agreements and Contractual Obligations-Senior Unsecured Notes” below and Note 8-Long-Term Debt to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
Convertible Notes Equitization
On January 12, 2021, we completed a registered direct offering (the “Share Offering”) of an aggregate of 31.4 million shares of our common stock at a price of $6.35 per share to certain holders of our 2026 Convertible Notes. We used the proceeds from the Share Offering and approximately $63 million of borrowings under the Credit Facility to repurchase from such holders $150 million aggregate principal amount of the 2026 Convertible Notes in privately negotiated transactions (the “Convertible Note Repurchase,” and, collectively with the Share Offering, the “Equitization Transactions”). See Note 8-Long-Term Debt to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
Share Repurchase Program
Our board-approved share repurchase program expired on March 31, 2020. Prior to the program’s expiration, we repurchased and retired 28,193,237 common shares at a weighted average price per share of $1.54 for approximately $43 million during the first quarter of 2020.
Sources of Our Revenues
● Natural gas, NGL and oil sale revenues. Our revenues are primarily derived from the sale of natural gas and oil production, as well as the sale of NGLs that are extracted from our natural gas during processing. Our production is entirely from within the continental United States; however, some of our production revenues are attributable to customers who export our products. During 2020, our production revenues were comprised of approximately 59% from the sale of natural gas and 41% from the sale of NGLs and oil. Natural gas, NGLs, and oil prices are inherently volatile and are influenced by many factors
outside of our control. All of our production is derived from natural gas wells, some of which also produce NGLs which are extracted through processing, and oil.
● Commodity derivatives. To achieve more predictable cash flows and to reduce our exposure to downward price fluctuations, we utilize derivative instruments to hedge future sales prices on a significant portion of our production. We enter into primarily fixed price natural gas, NGLs, and oil swap contracts for natural gas in which we receive or pay the difference between a fixed price and the variable market price received, as well as basis swap contracts that hedge the difference between the New York Mercantile Exchange (“NYMEX”) index price and a local index price. At the end of each accounting period, we estimate the fair value of these swaps and, because we have not elected hedge accounting, we recognize changes in the fair value of these derivative instruments in earnings. We expect continued volatility in the prices we receive for our production and the fair value of our derivative instruments.
● Marketing revenues. Marketing revenues are primarily derived from activities to purchase and sell third-party natural gas and NGLs and to market excess firm transportation capacity to third parties.
● Gathering, compression, water handling and treatment revenues. Gathering, compression, water handling and treatment revenues are derived from our ownership interest in Antero Midstream Partners through March 12, 2019 and Antero Midstream thereafter.
Principal Components of Our Cost Structure
● Lease operating expenses. These are the operating costs incurred to maintain our production. Such costs include produced water hauling, water handling, water disposal, labor-related costs to monitor producing wells, maintenance, repairs, and workover expenses. Cost levels for these expenses can vary based on the volume of water produced, supply and demand for oilfield services, activity levels, and other factors.
● Gathering, compression, processing and transportation. These costs include the costs to purchase services from Antero Midstream and fees paid to other third parties who operate low- and high-pressure gathering systems that transport our gas. They also include costs to process and extract NGLs from our produced gas and to transport our natural gas, NGLs, and oil to market. We often enter into fixed price long-term contracts that secure transportation and processing capacity, which may include minimum volume commitments, the cost for which is included in these expenses to the extent that they are not associated with excess capacity. Costs associated with excess capacity are included in marketing expenses.
● Production and ad valorem taxes. Production and ad valorem taxes consist of severance and ad valorem taxes. Severance taxes are paid on produced natural gas and oil based on a percentage of sales prices (not hedged prices) or at fixed per-unit rates established by state authorities. Ad valorem taxes are paid based on the value of our reserves as well as the value of property and equipment.
● Marketing expenses. We purchase and sell third-party natural gas and NGLs and market our excess capacity under long-term contracts. Marketing costs include the cost of purchased third-party natural gas and NGLs. We also classify firm transportation costs related to capacity contracted for in advance of having sufficient production and infrastructure to fully utilize this excess capacity as marketing expenses, because we market this excess capacity to third parties. We enter into long-term firm transportation agreements for a significant portion of our current and expected future production in order to secure capacity on major pipelines.
● Exploration expense. These are primarily costs related to unsuccessful leasing efforts, as well as geological and geophysical costs, including seismic costs, and costs of unsuccessful exploratory dry holes.
● Impairment of oil and gas properties. These costs include impairment and costs associated with leases expirations, impairment of design and initial costs related to pads that are no longer planned to be placed into service, and impairment of proved properties due to lower future commodity prices. We charge impairment expense for expired or soon-to-be expired leases when we determine they are impaired based on factors such as remaining lease terms, reservoir performance, commodity price outlooks and future plans to develop the acreage. We also record impairment charges for proved properties on a geological reservoir basis when events or changes in circumstances indicate that a property’s carrying amount may not be recoverable.
● Depletion, depreciation, and amortization. Depletion, depreciation, and amortization (“DD&A”), includes the systematic expensing of the capitalized costs incurred to acquire, explore and develop natural gas, NGLs, and oil. As a successful efforts company, we capitalize all costs associated with our acquisition and development efforts and all successful exploration efforts, and allocate these costs using the units of production method. Depreciation is computed over an asset’s estimated useful life using the straight-line basis.
● General and administrative expense. These costs include overhead, including payroll and benefits for our staff, costs of maintaining our headquarters, costs of managing our production and development operations, audit and other professional fees, insurance, legal expenses, and other administrative expenses. General and administrative expense also includes noncash equity-based compensation expense. See Note 10-Equity-Based Compensation and Retention Awards to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
● Interest expense. We finance a portion of our capital expenditures, working capital requirements, and acquisitions with borrowings under the Credit Facility, which has a variable rate of interest based on LIBOR or the prime rate. As a result, we incur substantial interest expense that is affected by both fluctuations in interest rates and our financing decisions. As of December 31, 2020, we had a fixed interest rate of 5.125% on our 2022 Notes having a principal balance of $661 million, a fixed interest rate of 5.625% on our 2023 Notes having a principal balance of $574 million, a fixed interest rate of 5.00% on our 2025 Notes having a principal balance of $590 million, and a fixed interest rate of 4.25% on our 2026 Convertible Notes having a principal balance of $287.5 million. See Note 8-Long-Term Debt to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
● Income tax expense. We are subject to state and federal income taxes but are currently not in a cash tax paying position with respect to federal income taxes. The difference between our financial statement income tax expense and our federal income tax liability is primarily due to the differences in the tax and financial statement treatment of oil and gas properties, the effects of noncontrolling interests and the deferral of unsettled commodity derivative gains for tax purposes until they are settled. We do pay some state income or franchise taxes where state income or franchise taxes are determined on a basis other than income. We have recorded deferred income tax expense to the extent our deferred tax liabilities exceed our deferred tax assets. See Note 14-Income Taxes to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
Results of Operations
We have three operating segments: (1) the exploration, development and production of natural gas, NGLs, and oil; (2) marketing and utilization of excess firm transportation capacity gathering and processing; and (3) midstream services through our equity method investment in Antero Midstream Corporation. Revenues from Antero Midstream’s operations were primarily derived from intersegment transactions for services provided to our exploration and production operations by Antero Midstream Partners. All intersegment transactions were eliminated upon consolidation, including revenues from water handling and treatment services provided by Antero Midstream Partners, which we capitalized as proved property development costs. Through March 12, 2019, we included the results of Antero Midstream Partners in our consolidated financial statements. Effective March 13, 2019, we no longer consolidate the results of Antero Midstream Partners in our results; however, our segment disclosures include the segments of our unconsolidated affiliates, due to their significance to our operations. See Note 3-Deconsolidation of Antero Midstream Partners LP to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion on the simplification transactions and Note 18-Segment Information to the consolidated financial statements for disclosures on our reportable segments. Marketing revenues are primarily derived from activities to purchase and sell third-party natural gas and NGLs and to market and utilize excess firm transportation capacity.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The operating results of our reportable segments were as follows for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020 (in thousands):
(1) Includes the consolidated results of Antero Midstream Partners through March 12, 2019 and results of the Company’s equity method investment in Antero Midstream Corporation effective March 13, 2019.
Exploration and Production Segment Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth selected operating data of the exploration and production segment for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020:
(1) Production data excludes volumes related to the VPP.
(2) Average prices reflect the before and after effects of our settled commodity derivatives. Our calculation of such after effects includes gains on settlements of commodity derivatives (but does not include proceeds from the derivative monetizations in 2018 and 2020), which do not qualify for hedge accounting because we do not designate or document them as hedges for accounting purposes. Oil and NGLs production was converted at 6 Mcf per Bbl to calculate total Bcfe production and per Mcfe amounts. This ratio is an estimate of the equivalent energy content of the products and does not necessarily reflect their relative economic value.
(3) The average realized price for 2019 includes $54 million of the proceeds related to the South Jersey Litigation. See Note 16-Contingencies to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion on the South Jersey Litigation. Excluding the effect of the proceeds of the South Jersey Litigation settlement, the average realized price would have been $2.67 per Mcf.
Natural gas sales. Revenues from sales of natural gas decreased from $2.2 billion, which included litigation proceeds of $54 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1.8 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $437 million. Please see Note 16- Contingencies to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
Excluding litigation proceeds, higher natural gas production volumes during the year ended December 31, 2020 accounted for an approximate $143 million increase in year-over-year natural gas sales revenue (calculated as the change in year-to-year volumes times the prior year average price excluding the proceeds from the South Jersey Litigation), and decreases in our prices (excluding the effects of derivative settlements and proceeds from the South Jersey Litigation) accounted for an approximate $526 million decrease in year-over-year gas sales revenue (calculated as the change in the year-to-year average price excluding the proceeds from the South Jersey Litigation times current year production volumes).
NGLs sales. Revenues from sales of NGLs decreased from $1.22 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1.16 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $57 million, or 5%. Higher NGLs production volumes accounted for an approximate $277 million increase in year-over-year NGLs sales revenues (calculated as the change in year-to-year volumes times the prior year average price), and changes in our prices, excluding the effects of derivative settlements, accounted for an approximate $334 million decrease in year-over-year NGL sales revenues (calculated as the change in the year-to-year average price times current year production volumes).
Oil sales. Revenues from production of oil decreased from $178 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $112 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $66 million. Increased oil production volumes accounted for a $38 million increase in year-over-year oil sales revenues (calculated as the change in year-to-year volumes times the prior year average price), and changes in our prices, excluding the effects of derivative settlements, accounted for an approximate $104 million decrease in year-over-year oil sales revenues (calculated as the change in the year-to-year average price times current year production volumes).
Commodity derivative fair value gains (losses). To achieve more predictable cash flows, and to reduce our exposure to price fluctuations, we enter into fixed for variable price swap contracts, basis swap contracts and collar contracts when management believes that favorable future sales prices for our production can be secured. Because we do not designate these derivatives as accounting hedges, they do not receive hedge accounting treatment. Consequently, all mark-to-market gains or losses, as well as cash receipts or payments on settled derivative instruments, are recognized in our statements of operations. For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, our commodity hedges resulted in derivative fair value gains of $464 million and $80 million, respectively. The commodity derivative fair value gains included $325 million and $795 million of cash proceeds on gains on settled derivatives for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively. Commodity derivative fair value gains (losses) for the year ended December 31, 2020 also include cash proceeds of $9 million related to derivatives that were monetized prior to their contractual settlement dates.
Commodity derivative fair value gains or losses vary based on future commodity prices and have no cash flow impact until the derivative contracts are settled or monetized prior to settlement. Derivative asset or liability positions at the end of any accounting period may reverse to the extent future commodity prices increase or decrease from their levels at the end of the accounting period, or as gains or losses are realized through settlement. We expect continued volatility in commodity prices and the related fair value of our derivative instruments in the future.
Amortization of deferred revenue, VPP. The year ended December 31, 2020 includes amortization of $15 million of deferred revenues associated with the VPP, which relate to the production volumes delivered under the terms of the agreement during such period at approximately $1.61 per MMBtu. See Note 4-Transactions to the consolidated financial statements for more information on this transaction.
Other income. Other income remained relatively consistent at $4 million and $3 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively.
Lease operating expense. Lease operating expense for the exploration and production segment decreased from $146 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $99 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $47 million or 32%. On a per unit basis, lease operating expenses decreased from $0.13 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $0.08 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to lower water handling costs resulting from improved operating efficiencies, including the reuse of produced and flowback water in completion operations.
Gathering, compression, processing, and transportation expense. Gathering, compression, processing, and transportation expense increased from $2.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $2.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. This is primarily a result of the 11% increase in production. Gathering and compression costs decreased from $0.70 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $0.64 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to lower fuel costs as a result of decreased natural gas prices and $48 million in incentive fee rebates from Antero Midstream Corporation. Processing costs increased from $0.66 per Mcfe to $0.69 per Mcfe for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively, primarily due to increased NGL production in our production mix. Processing costs, however, decreased per NGL barrel year-over-year. Transportation costs increased from $0.56 per Mcfe to $0.60 per Mcfe for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively, primarily due to increased rates on the Rockies Express pipeline, which were effective October 2019 and demand charges for Mountaineer Xpress pipeline.
Production and ad valorem tax expense. Total production and ad valorem taxes decreased from $125 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $107 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $18 million or 15%, primarily due to lower commodity prices between periods. On a per Mcfe basis, production and ad valorem taxes decreased from $0.11 per Mcfe for
the year ended December 31, 2019 to $0.08 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2020. Production and ad valorem taxes as a percentage of natural gas revenues remained at 6% in each of the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020.
Exploration expense. Exploration expense representing expenses incurred for unsuccessful lease acquisition efforts remained relatively flat at $1 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020.
Impairment of oil and gas properties. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized an $881 million impairment to write-down our Utica Shale proved properties to fair value because the carrying value of such properties exceeded the estimated undiscounted cash flows based on future strip commodity prices as of September 30, 2019. We also recorded $419 million and $224 million of impairments for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively, related to expiring leases and the design and initial costs related to pads we no longer plan to place into service.
Depletion, depreciation, and amortization expense. DD&A expense decreased from $893 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $862 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 for the exploration and production segment, a decrease of $31 million or 4%. DD&A per Mcfe decreased from $0.76 per Mcfe during the year ended December 31, 2019 to $0.66 per Mcfe during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to a reduction in the cost basis of producing properties as a result of the impairments discussed above as well as due to increases in proved reserves between periods.
General and administrative expense. General and administrative expense (excluding equity-based compensation expense) decreased from $139 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $111 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $28 million or 20%, primarily due to decreases in employee related expenses in the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of ongoing cost savings initiatives including lower headcount between periods. We had 547 employees as of December 31, 2019 and 522 employees as of December 31, 2020. On a per unit basis, general and administrative expense excluding equity-based compensation decreased by 33%, from $0.12 per Mcfe during the year ended December 31, 2019 to $0.08 per Mcfe during the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of higher production volumes and lower overall costs between periods.
Equity-based compensation expense. Noncash equity-based compensation expense increased from $21 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $23 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $2 million or 8%, primarily due to new awards granted to officers and employees in 2020 partially offset by equity award forfeitures during 2020. When an equity award is forfeited, expense previously recognized for the award is reversed. See Note 10-Equity-Based Compensation and Retention Awards to the consolidated financial statements for more information on equity-based compensation awards.
Contract termination and rig stacking. We incurred contract termination and rig stacking costs of $14 million during each of the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020. Contract termination and rig stacking costs represent fees incurred upon the delay or cancellation of drilling and completion contracts with third-party contractors in order to align our drilling and completion activity level with our capital budget.
Marketing Segment Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Marketing. Where feasible, we purchase and sell third-party natural gas and NGLs and market our excess firm transportation capacity, or engage third parties to conduct these activities on our behalf, in order to optimize the revenues from these transportation agreements. We have entered into long-term firm transportation agreements for a significant portion of our current and expected future production in order to secure guaranteed capacity to favorable markets.
Our net marketing expense decreased from $258 million, or $0.22 per Mcfe, for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $159 million, or $0.12 per Mcfe, for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was driven by higher marketing volumes and the mitigation of some of our excess firm transportation expense.
Marketing revenues increased from $292 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $311 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $19 million, or 6%, primarily due to increased marketing volumes.
Marketing expenses decreased from $550 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $469 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $81 million, or 15%. Marketing expenses include firm transportation costs related to current excess firm capacity as well as the cost of third-party purchased gas and NGLs. Firm transportation costs included in the expenses above were $250 million and $146 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively.
Antero Midstream Corporation Segment Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
During the period from January 1, 2019 through March 12, 2019, we included the results of Antero Midstream Partners in our consolidated financial statements. Effective March 13, 2019, we no longer consolidate the results of Antero Midstream Partners in our results. See Note 3-Deconsolidation of Antero Midstream Partners LP to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion on the Transactions. We now account for our interest in Antero Midstream Corporation as an equity method investment.
Antero Midstream Corporation. Revenue from the Antero Midstream Corporation segment increased from $793 million, which included amortization of customer relationships of $57 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $901 million, which included amortization of customer relationships of $71 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $108 million, or 14%. The increase in operating revenue was primarily due to an increase in gathering and compression volumes partially offset by a decrease in fresh water delivery volumes for the year ended December 31, 2020. Total operating expenses related to the segment decreased from $1.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to a decrease in total impairments of $88 million period over period.
In addition, Antero Midstream Partners had equity in earnings of unconsolidated affiliates of $51 million and $86 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively.
Discussion of Items Not Allocated to Segments for the Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Water earnout. In conjunction with the acquisition of the water handling and treatment assets, Antero Midstream agreed to pay us (a) $125 million in cash if Antero Midstream delivered 176 million barrels or more of fresh water during the period between January 1, 2017 and December 31, 2019 and (b) an additional $125 million in cash if Antero Midstream delivered 219 million barrels or more of fresh water during the period between January 1, 2018 and December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2019, Antero Midstream had delivered more than the 176 million barrels, which entitled us to $125 million pursuant to clause (a) above, and, as a result, we recognized other income associated with the settlement on the water earnout. The cash proceeds were received in January 2020. As of December 31, 2020, Antero Midstream did not deliver more than 219 million barrels, and, as a result, no additional proceeds were earned with respect to the water earnout.
Impairment of equity method investment. In 2019 and 2020, we determined that events and circumstances indicated that the carrying value of our investment in Antero Midstream Corporation had experienced an other-than-temporary decline and we recorded impairments of $468 million and $611 million, respectively. The fair value of the equity method investment in Antero Midstream Corporation was based on the quoted market share price of Antero Midstream Corporation as of December 31, 2019 and March 31, 2020, respectively.
Interest expense. Our interest expense exclusive of interest expense related to Antero Midstream Partners’ indebtedness decreased from $228 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $200 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $28 million, or 12%, primarily due to the reduction in debt as a result of our debt repurchases of unsecured senior notes at prices below their stated value, partially offset by interest that accrued on the newly issued 2026 Convertible Notes and higher borrowings on our Credit Facility between periods. Interest expense includes approximately $11 million and $12 million of non-cash amortization of debt issuance costs and debt discounts and premiums for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively.
Income tax benefit. Income tax benefit increased from $74 million, with an effective tax rate of 20%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $397 million, with an effective tax rate of 24%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to an increased book loss year over year. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our overall effective tax rate was different than the statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the effects of state income taxes, the dividends received deduction and non-deductible equity-based compensation expenses. See Note 14-Income Taxes to our consolidated financial statements more for information regarding our income tax provision for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020.
As of December 31, 2019 and 2020, we had U.S. federal and state NOL carryforwards of approximately $2.3 billion and $2.0 billion, respectively. Many of these NOLs expire at various dates between 2032 and 2040 while others have no expiration date. Potential future legislation or the imposition of new or increased taxes may have a significant effect on our future taxable position.
The impact of any such change would be recorded in the period in which such interpretation is received or legislation is enacted.
Year Ended December 31, 2018 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Refer to “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations -Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 for a discussion of the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2018 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Capital Resources and Liquidity
Overview
Our primary sources of liquidity have been through net cash provided by operating activities including proceeds from derivatives, borrowings under the Credit Facility, issuances of debt and equity securities, distributions/dividends from unconsolidated affiliates and proceeds from our asset sale program. Our primary use of cash has been for the exploration, development, and acquisition of oil and natural gas properties. As we develop our reserves, we continually monitor what capital resources, including equity and debt financings, are available to meet our future financial obligations, planned capital expenditure activities, and liquidity requirements. Our future success in growing our proved reserves and production will be highly dependent on net cash provided by operating activities and the capital resources available to us.
The Credit Facility has a borrowing base of $2.85 billion and current lender commitments of $2.64 billion. The borrowing base is redetermined semi-annually based on certain factors including our reserves, natural gas, NGLs, and oil commodity prices, and the value of our hedge portfolio. The next redetermination of the borrowing base is scheduled to occur in April 2021. For a discussion of the risks of a decrease in the borrowing base under the Credit Facility, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors-The borrowing base under the Credit Facility may be reduced if commodity prices decline, which could hinder or prevent us from meeting our future capital needs. We may also be required to post additional collateral as financial assurance of our performance under certain contractual arrangements, which could adversely impact available liquidity under our Credit Facility.”
Our commodity hedge position provides us with additional liquidity because it provides us with the relative certainty of receiving a significant portion of our future expected revenues from operations despite potential declines in the price of natural gas. Our ability to make significant additional acquisitions for cash would require us to utilize borrowings on the Credit Facility or obtain additional equity or debt financing, which we may not be able to obtain on terms acceptable to us, or at all. The Credit Facility is funded by a syndicate of 25 banks. We believe that the participants in the syndicate have the capability to fund up to their current commitment. If one or more banks should not be able to do so, we may not have the full availability of the Credit Facility.
2020 Capital Spending and 2021 Capital Budget
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our total consolidated capital expenditures were approximately $785 million, including drilling and completion expenditures of $735 million, leasehold additions of $48 million, and other capital expenditures of $2 million. Our net capital budget for 2021 is $635 million. Our budget includes $590 million for drilling and completions and $45 million for leasehold expenditures. We do not budget for acquisitions. During 2021, we plan to operate an average of three drilling rigs and two completion crews and we plan to complete 65 to 70 horizontal wells in the Appalachian Basin in 2021. We periodically review our capital expenditures and adjust our budget and its allocation based on liquidity, drilling results, leasehold acquisition opportunities, and commodity prices.
Our capital budget may be adjusted as business conditions warrant as the amount, timing and allocation of capital expenditures is largely discretionary and within our control. If natural gas, NGLs, and oil prices decline, or costs increase, to levels that do not generate an acceptable level of corporate returns, we may defer a significant portion of our budgeted capital expenditures until later periods to achieve the desired balance between sources and uses of liquidity, and to prioritize capital projects that we believe have the highest expected returns and potential to generate near-term cash flows.
Based on strip prices as of December 31, 2020, we believe that net cash provided from operating activities, available borrowings under the Credit Facility and capital market transactions will be sufficient to meet our cash requirements, including normal operating needs, debt service obligations, capital expenditures, and commitments and contingencies for at least the next 12 months. For more information on our outstanding indebtedness, see “-Debt Agreements and Contractual Obligations.”
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019 and 2020:
Our consolidated cash flow statements for the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2019 include the cash flows related to Antero Midstream Partners for periods prior to March 13, 2019. Effective March 13, 2019, the Company's cash flows include only the operating, investing and financing activities related to Antero and therefore, the cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2019 may not be representative of our expected future cash flows. See Note 3-Deconsolidation of Antero Midstream Partners LP to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Operating Activities. Net cash provided by operating activities was $1.1 billion and $736 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively. Cash flow from operations decreased primarily due to decreases in commodity prices both before and after the effects of settled commodity derivatives and increases in gathering, compression, processing, and transportation costs.
Our net operating cash flows are sensitive to many variables, the most significant of which is the volatility of natural gas, NGLs, and oil prices, as well as volatility in the cash flows attributable to settlement of our commodity derivatives. Prices for natural gas, NGLs, and oil are primarily determined by prevailing market conditions. Regional and worldwide economic activity, weather, infrastructure capacity to reach markets, storage capacity and other variables influence the market conditions for these products. For example, the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak has reduced global demand for natural gas, NGLs, and oil. These factors are beyond our control and are difficult to predict. For additional information on the impact of changing prices on our financial position, see “