Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section of this Form 10-K entitled “Risk Factors.”
Overview
We are a clinical-stage oncology company developing transformative treatments designed to halt the progression of life-threatening diseases.
Our lead product candidate, AVB-500, is an ultrahigh-affinity, decoy protein that targets the GAS6-AXL signaling pathway. By capturing serum GAS6, AVB-500 starves the AXL pathway of its signal, potentially halting the biological programming that promotes disease progression. AXL receptor signaling plays an important role in multiple types of malignancies by promoting metastasis, cancer cell survival, resistance to treatments, and immune suppression.
Our current development program benefits from the availability of a proprietary serum-based biomarker that has accelerated AVB-500 drug development by allowing us to select a pharmacologically active dose and may potentially identify the cancer patients that have the best chance of responding to AVB-500.
In our completed Phase 1 clinical trial in healthy volunteers with our clinical lead product candidate, AVB-500, we have demonstrated proof of mechanism for AVB-500 in neutralizing GAS6. Importantly, AVB-500 had a favorable safety profile preclinically and in the first in human trial and Phase 1b clinical trial in cancer patients.
In December 2018, we initiated our Phase 1b clinical trial of AVB-500 combined with standard of care therapies in patients with platinum-resistant ovarian cancer or PROC, for which we reported results in July 2020. In August 2018, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or FDA designated as a Fast Track development program the investigation of our lead development candidate, AVB-500, for platinum-resistant recurrent ovarian cancer. We initiated a pivotal Phase 3 trial of AVB-500 in PROC during the first quarter 2021.
In January 2020, we announced that the FDA has cleared our Investigational New Drug or IND application for investigation of AVB-500, in the treatment of our second oncology indication, Clear Cell Renal Cell Carcinoma or ccRCC. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we initiated our Phase 1b/2 trial of AVB-500 in ccRCC and we dosed our first patient in the trial during the first quarter of 2021.
In April 2020, we entered into a license and collaboration agreement with WuXi Biologics (Hong Kong) Limited, the objective of which is to identify and develop novel high-affinity bispecific antibodies against CCN2, also known as connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), implicated in cancer and fibrosis and identified from a similar target discovery screen that identified the significance of the AXL/GAS6 pathway in cancer. The goal is to generate a best-in-class therapeutic targeting desmoplasia and tumor growth in the clinic in 2023.
On November 6, 2020, we entered into a collaboration and license agreement with 3D Medicines Inc. or 3D Medicines, whereby we granted 3D Medicines an exclusive license to develop and commercialize products that contain AVB-500 as the sole drug substance, for the diagnosis, treatment or prevention of human oncological diseases, in mainland China, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macau.
With the global spread of the ongoing novel coronavirus or COVID-19 pandemic, we have implemented business continuity plans designed to address and mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our employees and our business. While we are experiencing limited financial impacts at this time, given the global economic slowdown, the overall disruption of global healthcare systems and the other risks and uncertainties associated with the pandemic, our business, financial condition, results of operations and growth prospects could be materially adversely affected. As we advance our clinical programs, we are in close contact with our clinical research organizations and clinical sites and are assessing the impact of COVID-19 on our planned studies and current timelines and costs. While we currently do not anticipate any interruptions in our operations due to COVID-19 if the COVID-19 pandemic continues and persists for an extended period of time, we could experience significant disruptions to our clinical development timeline, which would adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations and growth prospects.
Important Note
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations includes a discussion of our operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
References in this report to “we,” “us,” “our” and similar first-person expressions refer to Aravive, Inc. (formerly known as Versartis, Inc.) and its subsidiaries, including Private Aravive. References to “Versartis, Inc.” or “Private Aravive” refer to those respective companies prior to the completion of their merger in October 2018.
Recent Developments
In November 2020, we entered into a collaboration and license agreement with 3D Medicines, whereby we granted 3D Medicines an exclusive license to develop and commercialize products that contain AVB-500 as the sole drug substance, for the diagnosis, treatment or prevention of human oncological diseases, in mainland China, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macau.
On February 12, 2021, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”), with Eshelman Ventures relating to the issuance and sale (the “Offering”) of 2,875,000 shares of our common stock at a price per share of $7.29. The Offering closed on February 18, 2021 and we received aggregate gross proceeds from the Offering of approximately $21.0 million.
Financial overview
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from commercial sales of any of our product candidates. However, for the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated $5.7 million from our collaboration agreement with 3D Medicines collaboration agreement and we generated grant revenue of $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from our CPRIT Grant.
In the future, we may generate revenue from a variety of sources, including product sales if we develop products which are approved for sale, license fees, milestones, research and development and royalty payments in connection with strategic collaborations or government contracts, or licenses of our intellectual property.
Research and development expenses
We recognize both internal and external research and development expenses as incurred. Our external research and development expenses consist primarily of:
•
the cost of acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial and other materials, including expenses incurred under agreements with contract manufacturing organizations;
•
expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, investigative sites, and consultants that conduct our clinical trials;
•
other costs associated with development activities, including additional studies;
Internal research and development costs consist primarily of salaries and related fringe benefit costs for our employees (such as workers’ compensation and health insurance premiums), stock-based compensation charges and travel costs.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of personnel-related costs, professional fees for legal, consulting, audit and tax services, rent and other general operating expenses not included in research and development.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net is primarily comprised of sublease income for our 1020 Marsh property lease and gains and losses on foreign currency transactions related to third party contracts with foreign-based contract manufacturing organizations.
Results of operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our net loss during the periods indicated (in thousands, except percentages):
(1)
Not meaningful.
Grant revenue
Aravive Biologics had a grant with CPRIT. Grant revenue was $4.8 million in 2019 and was derived solely from the CPRIT Grant for the research and development of AVB-500. Recognition of Grant revenue was completed as of the end of the second quarter of 2019 as we have recognized the full amount related to the contract.
In November 2020, we entered into a collaboration and license agreement with 3D Medicines. Collaboration revenue was $5.7 million in 2020 and $6.3 million of deferred revenue as of December 31, 2020, to be recognized in a future period.
Research and development expense
Research and development expense increased by $4.8 million, or 37%, to $17.6 million in 2020 from $12.8 million for the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily due to the timing of our clinical trial expenses and an increase in our compensation expense as we further built out research and development team for our upcoming clinical trials. The initiation of our Phase 3 trial of AVB-500 in PROC is a significant driver to the increase in expense in 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019. There were also increased manufacturing activities during 2020 due to the initiation of the Phase 3 PROC trial.
General and administrative expense
General and administrative expense decreased by $0.6 million, or 5%, to $13.1 million in 2020 from $13.7 million for the same period in 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by a lower stock-based compensation expense along with reduced accounting and consulting fees.
Loss on impairment of long-lived assets
We incurred non-cash charges for impairment of our long-lived assets of $5.8 million for 2020. We measured the impairment of the asset group using a discounted cash flow analysis of the estimated future sublease payments to be received from an expected sublessee as we currently plan to market the 1020 Marsh Road location for subletting.
Other income (expense), net
Other income, decreased by $2.5 million, or 101%, to $14 thousand other expense net in 2020 from $2.5 million of other income for the same period in 2019. The decrease relates to full calendar year of sublease income recorded in 2019 as compared to seven months of sublease income recorded in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception and through December 31, 2020, we have financed our operations through private placements of our equity securities, public offerings of our common stock, debt financing, CPRIT grant proceeds, sales of common stock through our at-the-market facility as well as upfront payments received from license agreements. At December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $500.7 million and working capital of $52.2 million, primarily as a result of research and development and general and administrative expenses. At December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $60.5 million, a majority of which is invested in money market funds at several highly rated financial institutions. In March 2020, we received approximately $1.6 million of additional funding from our CPRIT Grant. In November 2020, we received $12 million in upfront payments from 3D Medicines pursuant to our collaboration and license agreement with them. On February 18, 2021, we received approximately $21 million from the purchase by Eshelman Ventures of 2,875,000 shares of our common stock.
In September 2020, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC which was declared effective by the SEC on November 20, 2020, or the Form S-3. On September 4, 2020, and pursuant to the Form S-3, we entered into an equity distribution agreement or the Equity Distribution Agreement, with Piper Sandler & Co., or Piper Sandler, and Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., or Cantor Fitzgerald, to sell shares of our common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, from time to time, through an “at the market offering” program having an aggregate offering price of up to $60,000,000 through which Piper Sandler and Cantor Fitzgerald will act as sales agents, or the Sales Agents. During the three-month period ended December 31, 2020, we sold 377,400 shares for proceeds net of discounts and offering costs of $2.4 million under the Equity Distribution Agreement. In January and February 2021, we sold 197,949 shares for proceeds net of discounts and offering costs of $1.6 million under the Equity Distribution Agreement.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $60.5 million, which does not include approximately $21 million received subsequent to year end from the investment made by Eshelman Ventures. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to sustain operations for at least the next 12 months from the issuance of these financial statements as we continue the development of AVB-500. We will need to obtain additional financing to advance our clinical development program to later stages of development and fund operations for the foreseeable future and we will continue to seek funds through equity or debt financings, collaborative or other arrangements with corporate sources, or through other sources of financing.
We will need to obtain additional financing to pursue our clinical development programs, build out our pipeline and fund operations for the foreseeable future and we will continue to seek funds through equity or debt financings, collaborative or other arrangements with corporate sources, or through other sources of financing. Although management has been successful in raising capital in the past, there can be no assurance that we will be successful or that any needed financing will be available in the future at terms acceptable to us. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed could have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategies. We anticipate that we will need to raise substantial additional capital, the requirements of which will depend on many factors, including:
•
the rate of progress and cost of our clinical studies;
•
the timing of, and costs involved in, seeking and obtaining approvals from the FDA and other regulatory authorities;
•
the cost of preparing to manufacture on a larger scale;
•
the costs of commercialization activities if any future product candidate is approved, including product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution;
•
the degree and rate of market acceptance of any products launched by us or future partners;
•
the costs of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
•
our ability to enter into additional collaboration, licensing, commercialization or other arrangements and the terms and timing of such arrangements; and
•
the emergence of competing technologies or other adverse market developments.
If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, reduce, or terminate some or all of our development programs and clinical trials. We may also be required to sell or license to others technologies or clinical product candidates or programs that we would prefer to develop and commercialize ourselves.
Cash flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for each of the periods presented below:
Cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $12.2 million and $17.1 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which was primarily due to the use of funds in our operations related to the development of AVB-500, our product candidate. Cash used in operating activities in 2020 decreased compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to primarily the receipt of $12 million from 3D Medicines in November 2020. Cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was mostly related to operational expenses slightly offset by receipt of $1.6 million from the CPRIT Grant.
Cash provided by investing activities
Net cash from investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was zero.
Cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $7.6 million and $25.3 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Financing activities related to the year ended December 31, 2020 includes a private placement offering with proceeds of $5.0 million in April 2020 along with at the market offering proceeds of $2.3 million. Financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 related to proceeds received from issuance of our common stock in a public offering which was completed in December of 2019.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
Since our inception, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
JOBS Act accounting election
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act, permits an “emerging growth company” to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we chose to “opt out” of this provision and, as a result, we complied with new or revised accounting standards as required when they were adopted. As of December 31, 2019, we are no longer an emerging growth company.
Critical Accounting Policies, Significant Judgments and Use of Estimates
The Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our critical accounting policies and estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable in the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Grant Revenue
Revenues from the CPRIT Grant are recognized when qualifying costs are incurred and there is reasonable assurance that the conditions of the award have been met for collection. Proceeds received prior to the costs being incurred or the conditions of the award being met are recognized as deferred revenue until the services are performed and the conditions of the award are met. As of December 31, 2019, we had an unbilled receivable from CPRIT of $1.6 million, which is reflected in prepaid expenses and other current assets on the accompanying consolidated balance sheet. This receivable was collected in March 2020.
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue for 2020 has been generated through our collaboration and license agreement which is within the scope of ASC 606. Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps:
(i) identify the contract(s) with a customer;
(ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract;
(iii) determine the transaction price;
(iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
(v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that the entity will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations, and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
Our collaboration and license agreement contain multiple elements including (i) intellectual property licenses and (ii) research and development services. Consideration received under these arrangements may include upfront payments, research and development funding, cost reimbursements, milestone payments, payments for product sales and royalty payments. In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under the agreement, we implement the five-step model noted above. As part of the accounting for the arrangement, we must develop assumptions that require judgment to determine whether the individual promises should be accounted for as separate performance obligations or as a combined performance obligation, and to determine the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract. A deliverable represents a separate performance obligation if both of the following criteria are met: (i) the customer can benefit from the good or service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer, and (ii) the entity’s promise to transfer the good or service to the customer is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract. We use key assumptions to determine the stand-alone selling price, which may include forecasted revenues, development timelines, estimated costs to be incurred, discount rates, and probabilities of technical and regulatory success.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development expense includes payroll and personnel expenses; consulting costs; external contract research and development expenses; and allocated overhead, including rent and utilities, and relate to both company-sponsored programs as well as costs incurred pursuant to reimbursement arrangements. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services that will be used or rendered for future research and development activities are deferred and capitalized and recognized as an expense as the goods are delivered or the related services are performed.
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing contracts and purchase orders, reviewing the terms of our license agreements, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf, and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each consolidated balance sheet date in our consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees to:
•
contract manufacturers in connection with the production of clinical trial materials;
•
contract research organizations and other service providers in connection with clinical studies;
•
investigative sites in connection with clinical studies;
•
vendors in connection with preclinical development activities; and
•
professional service fees for consulting and related services.
We base our expenses related to clinical studies on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and contract research organizations that conduct and manage clinical studies on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract, and may result in uneven payment flows and expense recognition. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual accordingly. Our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in our reporting changes in estimates in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences from our estimates to the amount actually incurred. However, due to the nature of these estimates, we cannot assure you that we will not make changes to our estimates in the future as we become aware of additional information about the status or conduct of our clinical studies or other research activity.
Right-of-Use Lease Accounting
The most significant estimates used by management in accounting for right-of-use leases and the impact of these estimates are as follows:
•
Lease term - We estimate our lease term and lease obligation based upon our signed commitment to make the lease payments arising from our leases. We consider any lease extensions and if we determine those extensions are reasonably certain that we will exercise that option those extensions, if any, are included in the lease term.
•
Incremental borrowing rate - Our leases do not provide an implicit rate, we use an estimated incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at the lease inception in determining the present value of lease payments.
Stock-based Compensation Expense
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, stock-based compensation expense was $2.0 million and $3.4 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $2.9 million of total unrecognized compensation expense, which we expect to recognize over a weighted-average period of approximately 2.7 years. The intrinsic value of all outstanding stock options as of December 31, 2020 was approximately $5.9 million, of which all related to vested options. We expect to continue to grant equity incentive awards in the future as we seek to retain our existing employees.
Stock-based compensation costs related to stock options granted to employees are measured at the date of grant and to the options assumed in connection with the Merger are measured at the date of the Merger based on the estimated fair value of the award, net of estimated forfeitures. We estimate the grant date fair value, and the resulting stock-based compensation expense, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The grant date fair value of stock-based awards is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the award. Stock options we grant to employees generally vest over four years.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of highly subjective assumptions to estimate the fair value of stock-based awards. If we had made different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense, net loss and net loss per share of common stock could have been significantly different. These assumptions include:
•
Expected volatility: The expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of our common stock over the most recent period commensurate with the estimated expected term of our stock options.
•
Expected term: We do not believe we are able to rely on our historical exercise and post-vesting termination activity to provide accurate data for estimating the expected term for use in estimating the fair value-based measurement of our options. Therefore, we have opted to use the “simplified method” for estimating the expected term of options.
•
Risk-free rate: The risk-free interest rate is based on the yields of U.S. Treasury securities with maturities similar to the expected time to liquidity.
•
Expected dividend yield: We have never declared or paid any cash dividends and do not presently plan to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future. Consequently, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
See Note 9 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for information concerning certain of the specific assumptions used in applying the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of employee stock options. In addition to the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, we must also estimate a forfeiture rate to calculate the stock-based compensation expense for our awards. We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the expected volatility, expected terms, and forfeiture rates utilized for our stock-based compensation expense calculations on a prospective basis.
Income Taxes
We file U.S. federal income tax returns, Texas, California and other various state tax returns. To date, we have not been audited by the Internal Revenue Service or any state income tax authority; however, all tax years remain open for examination by federal and state tax authorities. We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial reporting and the tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. We assess the likelihood that the resulting deferred tax assets will be realized. A valuation allowance is provided when it is deemed more likely than not that some portion or all of a deferred tax asset will not be realized.
As of December 31, 2020, our total gross deferred tax assets were $15.7 million. Due to our lack of earnings history and uncertainties surrounding our ability to generate future taxable income, the net deferred tax assets have been fully offset by a valuation allowance. The deferred tax assets were primarily comprised of federal and state tax net operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Utilization of net operating losses and tax credit carryforwards may be limited by the “ownership change” rules, as defined in Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code (any such limitation, a “Section 382 limitation”). Similar rules may apply under state tax laws. We have performed an analysis to determine whether an “ownership change” occurred from inception up to the Aravive Biologics acquisition date. Based on this analysis during 2018, management determined that both Versartis, Inc. and Aravive Biologics did experience ownership changes, which resulted in a significant impairment of the net operating losses and credit carryforwards. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, no additional ownership changes were noted.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recently issued accounting pronouncements that we have adopted or are currently evaluating are described in detail within “Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” and “Note 6-Leases” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in the Annual Report on Form 10K.