Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Business Summary
ARC Document Solutions, Inc. (“ARC Document Solutions,” “ARC,” “we,” “us,” or “our”) provides a wide variety of document distribution and graphic production services to facilitate communication for professionals in the design, marketing, commercial real estate, education, construction and related fields.
Our customers need us to manage the special production needs, volume, complexity and workflow of their documents. We help them reduce their costs and increase their efficiency by improving their access and control over documents, and we offer a wide variety of ways to access, distribute, collaborate on, and store documents.
Each of our service offerings is enabled through a suite of supporting proprietary technology and a wide variety of value-added services. We have categorized our service and product offerings to report distinct sales recognized from:
Construction Document and Information Management (CDIM), which consists of professional services to manage and distribute documents and information related to construction projects and related project-based businesses outside of the architectural, engineering and construction (AEC) industry. Our reconfiguration of the Company's sales and marketing functions in late-2019, as well as customer needs driven by the COVID-19 pandemic, have led to the significant expansion of the non-AEC segment of our CDIM business, primarily through the provision of color graphics and signage. CDIM sales also include software services such as SKYSITE®, our cloud-based project communication application, as well as providing document and information management services that are often technology-enabled. The bulk of our current revenue from CDIM comes from large-format and small-format printing services we provide in both black and white and in color.
Managed Print Services (MPS), which consists of placement, management, and optimization of print and imaging equipment in our customers' offices, job sites, and other facilities. MPS relieves our customers of the burden of owning and managing print devices and print networks, and shifts their costs to a “per-use” basis. MPS is supported by our proprietary technology, Abacus, which allows our customers to capture, control, manage, print, and account for their documents. MPS sales represent recurring, contracted revenue in which we are paid a single cost per unit of material used, often referred to as a “click charge.” MPS sales are driven by the ongoing print needs of our customers at their facilities. Because the recent pandemic has forced a large number of our clients to direct their employees to work from home, MPS volume and sales have declined over the past year.
Archiving and Information Management (AIM), which consists of software and professional services to facilitate the capture, management, access and retrieval of documents and information that have been produced in the past. AIM includes our SKYSITE software application to organize, search and retrieve documents, as well as the provision of services that include the capture and conversion of hardcopy and electronic documents, and their cloud-based storage and maintenance. A growing portion of our sales are being driven by our ability to handle protected health information (PHI) as our regional scanning centers are HIPAA-compliant. AIM sales are driven by the need to leverage past intellectual property for present or future use, facilitate cost savings and efficiency improvements over current hardcopy and digital storage methods, as well as comply with regulatory and records retention requirements. Remote access to digital documents driven by work-from-home conditions created by the recent pandemic have also contributed to recent sales in this area of our business.
Equipment and Supplies, which consists of reselling printing, imaging, and related equipment to customers primarily to architectural, engineering and construction firms.
We have expanded our business beyond the services we traditionally provided to the architectural, engineering, construction, and building owner/operator (AEC/O) industry in the past and are currently focused on growing MPS, AIM and CDIM, as we believe the mix of services demanded by the AEC/O industry continues to shift toward document management at customer locations and in the cloud, and away from its historical emphasis on large-format construction drawings produced “offsite” in our service centers.
We deliver our services via the cloud, through a nationwide network of service centers, regionally-based technical specialists, locally-based sales executives, and a national/regional sales force known as Global Solutions.
Based on our analysis of our operating results, we estimate that sales to the AEC/O industry accounted for approximately 69% of our net sales for 2020, with the remaining 31% consisting of sales to businesses outside of the AEC/O industry.
Costs and Expenses
Our cost of sales consists primarily of materials (paper, toner and other consumables), labor, and “indirect costs” which consist primarily of equipment expenses related to our MPS contracts and our service center facilities. Facilities and equipment expenses include maintenance, repairs, rents, insurance, and depreciation. Paper is the largest component of our material cost; however, paper pricing typically does not significantly affect our operating margins due, in part, to our efforts to pass increased costs on to our customers. We closely monitor material cost as a percentage of net sales to measure volume and waste. We also track labor utilization, or net sales per employee, to measure productivity and determine staffing levels.
We maintain low levels of inventory. Historically, our capital expenditure requirements have varied due to the cost and availability of finance lease lines of credit. Our relationships with credit providers have provided attractive lease rates over the past two years, and as a result, we chose to lease rather than purchase equipment in a significant portion of our engagements.
Research and development costs consist mainly of the salaries, leased building space, and computer equipment that comprises our data storage and development centers in San Ramon, California and Kolkata, India. Such costs are primarily recorded to cost of sales.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The global spread of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains and created significant volatility and disruption of financial markets. The impact of this pandemic has created significant prolonged uncertainty in the global economy and has negatively affected our business, employees, suppliers, and customers. Despite a strong start to the year thanks to a reconfiguration of our sales and marketing functions in late -2019, the decline in demand for our products and services that began in late March 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, negatively impacted our sales and profitability during 2020. The duration of these trends and the magnitude of such impacts cannot be precisely estimated at this time, as they are affected by a number of factors, many of which are outside management’s control, including those presented in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual Report. To adapt to the uncertainty and shifting demands brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic, we began to transform our business during the second quarter of 2020 into a smaller but stronger company, offering a range of products beyond the construction vertical and our historical print segments, and reconfiguring our operations and cost structure to fit the needs of our customers in the current market. We have repositioned the Company based on the belief that there is potential for new growth and similar, if not better margins, barring any unforeseen changes that may arise due to the COVID-19 pandemic or otherwise.
Sustained adverse impacts to us, as well as to certain of our suppliers, dealers or customers may also affect our future valuation of certain assets and therefore may increase the likelihood of an impairment charge, write-off, or reserve associated with such assets, including goodwill, intangible assets, property and equipment, inventories, accounts receivable, tax assets, and other assets.
We believe that we have taken appropriate measures to mitigate the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic as it relates to the health and safety of our employees and customers. As the situation continues to persist, we will continue to analyze additional mitigation measures that may be needed to preserve the health and safety of our workforce and our customers, and the ongoing continuity of our business operations. Those measures might include temporarily suspending operations at select service centers, modifying workspaces, continuing social distancing protocols, incorporating additional personal protective equipment and/or incorporating health screening policies at our facilities, or such other industry best practices needed to comply with applicable government orders and to continue to maintain a healthy and safe environment for our employees during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Given the ongoing economic uncertainty resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, we have taken actions to improve our current liquidity position, including reducing working capital, suspending share repurchases and dividend payouts for a portion of 2020, postponing capital expenditures, reducing operating costs, initiating workforce reductions and salary reductions, and substantially reducing discretionary spending.
We are the largest document services provider to industries that build and maintain our country's infrastructure and thus were considered an essential business and permitted to remain open in most markets during 2020. We also serve the housing, healthcare, and technology industries, and we were able to keep almost all of our 148 service centers open, though at reduced volumes, in order to fulfill our customers' needs. However, there is uncertainty around the extent and duration of interruptions to our business related to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the pandemic's overall impact on the U.S. economy, on our clients' ongoing business operations, and on our results of operations and financial condition. While our management team is actively monitoring the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, and may take further actions altering our business operations that we determine are in the best interests of our employees and clients or as required by federal, state, or local authorities, the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the results of our operations, financial condition, or liquidity for the future cannot be estimated at this point. The following discussions are subject to the future effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our ongoing business operations.
Results of Operations
(1)Column does not foot due to rounding.
(2)See "Non-GAAP Financial Measures" following "Results of Operations" for more information related to our Non-GAAP disclosures.
The following table provides information on the percentages of certain items of selected financial data as a percentage of net sales for the periods indicated:
(1)Column does not foot due to rounding.
(2)See "Non-GAAP Financial Measures" following "Results of Operations" for more information related to our Non-GAAP disclosures.
Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net Sales
Net sales in 2020 decreased 24.3%, compared to 2019. The decrease in net sales was due to the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on sales from all our service offerings.
CDIM. Sales of CDIM services in 2020 decreased $30.0 million, or 14.6%, compared to 2019. The decrease in sales of CDIM services was due to the COVID-19 pandemic. CDIM services represented 61% and 54% of total net sales for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The impact of the pandemic on CDIM was not as pronounced as other parts of our business due to the expansion of products and services beyond the construction vertical and our historical print segments that resulted from the reconfiguration of our sales and marketing functions in late-2019, as well as demand for COVID-19-related and other color signage.
MPS. Sales of MPS services in 2020 decreased $44.0 million or 35.7%. The decline in MPS sales was driven primarily by office employees in the U.S. and Canada who followed directives to work from home, significantly reducing the volume of printing done in our customers' offices. MPS engagements on construction job sites continued to operate, and many customers have required minimums that helped mitigate the drop in print volumes. We have experienced modest improvement in net sales sequentially after April 2020 when work-from-home orders started to lift in most states. Revenues from MPS services sales represented approximately 27% and 32% of total net sales for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The number of MPS locations have remained relatively flat year-over-year at approximately 10,750 as of December 31, 2020.
AIM. Year-over-year sales of AIM services decreased by $1.8 million, or 12.7%, in 2020, compared to 2019. The decrease in AIM was primarily driven by the lack of office activity resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, which caused a reduction in scanning opportunities. We continue to drive an expansion of our addressable market for AIM services by targeting building
owners and facilities managers that require on-demand access to legacy documents to operate their assets efficiently. We believe over time, with the expansion of our addressable market and the desire of our customers to have digital access to documents wherever they work, that our AIM services will grow in the future.
Equipment and Supplies. Equipment and Supplies sales decreased by $17.2 million, or 43.5%, in 2020, compared to 2019, primarily driven by the slowdown in China related to the COVID-19 pandemic, which decreased sales from UNIS Document Solutions Co. LTD ("UDS"), our Chinese joint venture. Equipment and Supplies sales represented approximately 8% of total net sales for 2020 and approximately 10% for 2019. Equipment and Supplies sales derived from UDS, were $7.7 million in 2020, as compared to $19.6 million in 2019. Traditionally, our customers in China have exhibited a preference for owning print and imaging related equipment opposed to using equipment through onsite services arrangements. We do not anticipate growth in Equipment and Supplies sales due to the softening of the Chinese market as well as our focus on growing MPS sales and converting sales contracts to MPS agreements.
Gross Profit
Gross profit decreased to $92.9 million in 2020, compared to $125.2 million in 2019. Gross margin decreased to 32.1% in 2020, compared to 32.7% in 2019, on a net sales decrease of $92.9 million.
Despite the 24.3% drop in net sales due to the COVID-19 pandemic, gross margin during 2020 decreased by just 60 basis points. Gross margins were aided by the drop in low margin Equipment and Supplies sales and cost saving activities in connection with the restructuring plan we initiated in the third quarter of 2019, as well as cost savings initiated in response to the current COVID-19 pandemic. During the second quarter of 2020 we reconfigured our operating structure and costs to serve new customer needs and to reflect the reduction in our revenues as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased by $28.2 million or 26.3% in 2020 compared to 2019. The reduction was due to cost saving activities in connection with the restructuring plan we initiated in the third quarter of 2019, as well as cost savings initiated in response to the current COVID-19 pandemic including headcount reductions, suspension of most business travel, reduced consulting expenses, and reduced bonuses and commissions.
Amortization of Intangibles
Amortization of intangibles of $1.5 million in 2020 decreased compared to 2019, primarily due to the completed amortization of certain customer relationships related to historical acquisitions.
Interest Expense, Net
Net interest expense totaled $3.9 million in 2020, compared to $5.2 million in 2019. The decrease in 2020 compared to 2019 was due to our continued pay down of our long-term debt, decrease in LIBOR, and decrease in bank debt interest spread due to the improvement in our leverage ratio.
Income Taxes
We recorded an income tax provision of $2.7 million in relation to a pretax income of $8.5 million for 2020, which resulted in an effective income tax rate of 32.2%. Our effective income tax rate for 2020 was primarily impacted by certain stock-based compensation, a change in valuation allowances against certain deferred tax assets and non-deductible expenses. Excluding the impact of valuation allowances, Internal Revenue Code Section 162(m), and other discrete tax items, our effective income tax rate for the consolidated company would have been 30.0% and our effective income tax rate attributable to ARC Document Solutions, Inc. would have been 28.8%.
We recorded an income tax provision of $5.7 million in relation to a pretax income of $8.6 million for 2019, which resulted in an effective income tax rate of 66.8%. Excluding the impact of valuation allowances, Internal Revenue Code Section 162(m), and other discrete tax items, our effective income tax rate would have been 31.9%.
Noncontrolling Interest
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interest represents 35% of the income of our Chinese joint venture with UDS and its subsidiaries, which together comprise our Chinese joint-venture operations.
Net Income Attributable to ARC
Net income attributable to ARC was $6.2 million in 2020, as compared to $3.0 million in 2019. The increase in net income attributable to ARC in 2020 compared to the prior year is driven by the decrease in income taxes as 2019 had a significant tax expense related to nonqualified stock options that expired in 2019.
EBITDA
EBITDA margin increased to 14.9% in 2020 from 12.0% in 2019. Excluding the effect of stock-based compensation, restructuring expense, and the loss on extinguishment and modification of debt, adjusted EBITDA margin increased to 15.5% in 2020 from 12.9% in 2019. The increase in adjusted EBITDA in 2020 was primarily due to the significant decline in selling, general and administrative expenses, as noted above.
Impact of Inflation
We do not believe inflation has had a significant effect on our operations. Price increases for raw materials, such as paper and fuel charges, typically have been, and we expect will continue to be, passed on to customers in the ordinary course of business.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures.
EBITDA and related ratios presented in this report are supplemental measures of our performance that are not required by or presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). These measures are not measurements of our financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered as alternatives to net income, income from operations, or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP or as an alternative to cash flows from operating, investing or financing activities as a measure of our liquidity.
EBITDA represents net income before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. EBITDA margin is a non-GAAP measure calculated by dividing EBITDA by net sales.
We have presented EBITDA and related ratios because we consider them important supplemental measures of our performance and liquidity. We believe investors may also find these measures meaningful, given how our management makes use of them. The following is a discussion of our use of these measures.
We use EBITDA to measure and compare the performance of our operating segments. Our operating segments’ financial performance includes all of the operating activities except debt and taxation which are managed at the corporate level for U.S. operating segments. We use EBITDA to compare the performance of our divisions and to measure performance for determining consolidated-level compensation. In addition, we use EBITDA to evaluate potential acquisitions and potential capital expenditures.
EBITDA and related ratios have limitations as analytical tools, and should not be considered in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are as follows:
•They do not reflect our cash expenditures, or future requirements for capital expenditures and contractual commitments;
•They do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•They do not reflect the significant interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary, to service interest or principal payments on our debt;
•Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements; and
•Other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate these measures differently than we do, limiting their usefulness as comparative measures.
Because of these limitations, EBITDA and related ratios should not be considered as measures of discretionary cash available to us to invest in business growth or to reduce our indebtedness. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using EBITDA and related ratios only as supplements.
Our presentation of adjusted net income and adjusted EBITDA is an attempt to provide meaningful comparisons to our historical performance for our existing and future investors. The unprecedented changes in our end markets over the past several years have required us to take measures that are unique in our history and specific to individual circumstances. Comparisons inclusive of these actions make normal financial and other performance patterns difficult to discern under a strict GAAP presentation. Each non-GAAP presentation, however, is explained in detail in the reconciliation tables below.
Specifically, we have presented adjusted net income attributable to ARC and adjusted earnings per share attributable to ARC shareholders for 2020 and 2019 to reflect the exclusion of loss on extinguishment and modification of debt, restructuring expense, changes in the valuation allowances related to certain deferred tax assets and other discrete tax items. This presentation facilitates a meaningful comparison of our operating results for 2020 and 2019. We believe these changes were the result of items which are not indicative of our actual operating performance.
We have presented adjusted EBITDA for 2020 and 2019 to exclude loss on extinguishment and modification of debt, restructuring expense, and stock-based compensation expense. The adjustment of EBITDA for these items is consistent with the definition of adjusted EBITDA in our Credit Agreement; therefore, we believe this information is useful to investors in assessing our financial performance.
The following is a reconciliation of cash flows provided by operating activities to EBITDA:
The following is a reconciliation of net income attributable to ARC Document Solutions, Inc. shareholders to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA:
The following is a reconciliation of net income margin attributable to ARC to EBITDA margin and Adjusted EBITDA margin:
(1)Column does not foot due to rounding.
The following is a reconciliation of net income attributable to ARC Document Solutions, Inc. shareholders to Adjusted net income and Adjusted earnings per share attributable to ARC Document Solutions, Inc. shareholders:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of cash have been cash flows from operations and borrowings under our debt and lease agreements. Our recent historical uses of cash have been for ongoing operations, payment of principal and interest on outstanding debt obligations, capital expenditures and stock repurchases.
We continually assess our capital allocation strategy, including decisions relating to dividends, stock repurchases, capital expenditures, and debt pay-downs. In December 2019 and February of 2020, our board of directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.01 per share that was paid in February and May of 2020, respectively. We then suspended dividends and stock repurchases due to uncertainties caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. In December 2020, we recommenced our dividend program. We expect to continue to pay quarterly cash dividends at or above the level approved in December 2020. The timing, declaration and payment of future dividends, however, falls within the discretion of the Company’s Board of Directors and will depend upon many factors, including our financial condition and earnings, the capital requirements of our business, restrictions imposed by applicable law and any other factors the board of directors deems relevant from time to time.
Our Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase program that authorized us to purchase up to $15.0 million of the Company's outstanding common stock through March 31, 2023. Purchases may be made from time to time in the open market at prevailing market prices or in privately negotiated transactions. During the year ended December 31, 2020 we repurchased 2.6 million in common stock for a total purchase price of $3.2 million. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we repurchased 1.3 million in common stock for a total purchase price of $1.9 million.
Total cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 was $55.0 million. Of this amount, $17.0 million was held in foreign countries, with $14.9 million held in China. Repatriation of some of our cash and cash equivalents in foreign countries could be subject to delay for local country approvals and could have potential adverse tax consequences. As a result of holding cash and cash equivalents outside of the U.S., our financial flexibility may be reduced.
Supplemental information pertaining to our historical sources and uses of cash is presented as follows and should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows and notes thereto included elsewhere in this report.
Operating Activities
Cash flows from operations are primarily driven by sales and net profit generated from these sales, excluding non-cash charges.
The increase in cash flows from operations in 2020 was primarily a result of the sustained profitability in 2020, despite the COVID-19 pandemic, and active management of operating assets and liabilities. Days sales outstanding (“DSO”) was 51 days as of December 31, 2020 and 50 days as of December 31, 2019. We reduced inventory by more than $4.0 million during 2020. We are closely managing cash collections which have remained consistent since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was primarily related to capital expenditures. We incurred capital expenditures totaling $6.4 million and $12.9 million, in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in capital expenditures from 2019 to 2020 is driven primarily by a concerted effort to reduce and closely manage our use of cash during the COVID-19 pandemic.
As we continue to foster our relationships with credit providers and obtain attractive lease rates, we have increasingly chosen to lease rather than purchase equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash of $24.0 million used in financing activities in 2020 primarily relates to payments on our revolver debt agreement, finance leases and share repurchases. As part of our cash management initiatives during the COVID-19 pandemic, we successfully negotiated a deferment of approximately $4.4 million of equipment capital lease payments during 2020 that will primarily be added to the back end of each individual equipment lease end date.
Our cash position, working capital, and debt obligations as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 are shown below and should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Balance Sheets and notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report.
The increase of $12.5 million in working capital in 2020 was primarily driven by the increase in cash of approximately $26.0 million over 2019, partially offset by the $15.0 million decrease in accounts receivable. To manage our working capital, we chiefly focus on our DSO and monitor the aging of our accounts receivable, as receivables are the most significant element of our working capital.
We believe that our current cash and cash equivalents balance of $55.0 million, availability under our revolving credit facility, availability under our equipment lease lines, and cash flows provided by operations should be adequate to cover the next twelve months of working capital needs, debt requirements consisting of scheduled principal and interest payments, and planned capital expenditures, to the extent such items are known or are reasonably determinable based on current business and market conditions. See “Debt Obligations” section for further information related to our revolving credit facility.
As the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and our operations evolves, we will continue to assess our liquidity needs. The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains and created significant volatility and disruption of financial markets. An extended period of global supply chain and economic
disruption could materially affect our business, results of operations, ability to meet debt covenants, access to sources of liquidity and financial condition. Given the economic uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have taken actions to improve our current liquidity position by reducing working capital, suspending share repurchases and dividend payouts for a portion of 2020, postponing capital expenditures, reducing operating costs, initiating workforce reductions and salary reductions, and substantially reducing discretionary spending. Additionally, we have actively deferred equipment lease payments with certain lessors and deferred facility rent payments with some landlords. We have seen the benefits of these actions as evidenced by the increase of our U.S. cash balance as of December 31, 2020, of approximately $24 million.
We generate the majority of our revenue from sales of services and products to the AEC/O industry. As a result, our operating results and financial condition can be significantly affected by economic factors that influence the AEC/O industry, including the COVID-19 pandemic which has already reduced non-residential construction spending. Additionally, a general economic downturn may adversely affect the ability of our customers and suppliers to obtain financing for significant operations and purchases, and to perform their obligations under their agreements with us. We believe that credit constraints in the financial markets could result in a decrease in, or cancellation of, existing business, could limit new business, and could negatively affect our ability to collect our accounts receivable on a timely basis.
We have not been actively seeking growth through acquisition, nor do we intend to in the near future.
Debt Obligations
Credit Agreement
On December 17, 2019, we entered into an amendment (the "2019 Amendment") to our Credit Agreement, dated as of November 20, 2014 ("Credit Agreement") with Wells Fargo Bank.
The 2019 Amendment increased the maximum aggregate principal amount of Revolving Loans under the Credit Agreement from $65 million to $80 million. Proceeds of a portion of the Revolving Loans drawn under the Credit Agreement were used to fully repay the $49.5 million term loan that was then outstanding under the Credit Agreement (the "Term Loan").
The 2019 Amendment also modified certain tests we are required to meet in order to pay dividends, repurchase stock and make other restricted payments. In order to make such payments which are permitted subject to certain customary conditions set forth in the Credit Agreement, the amount of all such payments will be limited to $15 million during any twelve-month period. Per the 2019 Amendment, when calculating the fixed charge coverage ratio we may now exclude up to $10 million of such restricted payments that would otherwise constitute fixed charges in any twelve month period.
As of December 31, 2020, our borrowing availability under the Revolving Loan commitment was $22.8 million, after deducting outstanding letters of credit of $2.2 million and an outstanding Revolving Loan balance of $55.0 million.
Loans borrowed under the Credit Agreement bear interest, in the case of LIBOR rate loans, at a per annum rate equal to the applicable LIBOR rate, plus a margin ranging from 1.25% to 1.75%, based on our Total Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement). Loans borrowed under the Credit Agreement that are not LIBOR rate loans bear interest at a per annum rate equal to (i) the greatest of (A) the Federal Funds Rate plus 0.50%, (B) the one month LIBOR rate plus 1.00% per annum, and (C) the rate of interest announced, from time to time, by Wells Fargo Bank, National Association as its “prime rate,” plus (ii) a margin ranging from 0.25% to 0.75%, based on our Total Leverage Ratio. We pay certain recurring fees with respect to the Credit Agreement, including administration fees to the administrative agent.
Subject to certain exceptions, including in certain circumstances, reinvestment rights, the loans extended under the Credit Agreement are subject to customary mandatory prepayment provisions with respect to: the net proceeds from certain asset sales; the net proceeds from certain issuances or incurrences of debt (other than debt permitted to be incurred under the terms of the Credit Agreement); the net proceeds from certain issuances of equity securities; and net proceeds of certain insurance recoveries and condemnation events.
The Credit Agreement contains customary representations and warranties, subject to limitations and exceptions, and customary covenants restricting the ability (subject to various exceptions) of us and our subsidiaries to: incur additional indebtedness (including guarantee obligations); incur liens; sell certain property or assets; engage in mergers or other fundamental changes; consummate acquisitions; make investments; pay dividends, other distributions or repurchase equity interest of us or our subsidiaries; change the nature of their business; prepay or amend certain indebtedness; engage in certain transactions with affiliates; amend our organizational documents; or enter into certain restrictive agreements. In addition, the Credit Agreement contains financial covenants which requires us to maintain (i) at all times, a Total Leverage Ratio in an amount not to exceed 2.75 to 1.00; and (ii) a Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement), as of the last day of each fiscal quarter, an amount not less than 1.15 to 1.00. We were in compliance with our covenants during the year ended December 31, 2020, and after considering a variety of potential effects the COVID-19 pandemic could have on our consolidated sales, as well as the actions we have already taken and other options available to us, we currently believe we will
be in compliance with our covenants for the remainder of the term of the Credit Agreement. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, however, and the speed of economic recovery in the markets we serve is highly uncertain. If conditions change in the future due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic or for other reasons and we expect to be out of compliance as a result, we will likely seek waivers from the lenders prior to any covenant violation. Any covenant waiver may lead to increased costs, increased interest rates, additional restrictive covenants and other available lender protections that would be applicable. There can be no assurance that we would be able to obtain any such waivers in a timely manner, or on acceptable terms, or at all. If we were not able to obtain covenant violation waivers or repay our debt facilities, this would lead to an event of default and potential acceleration of amounts due under all of our outstanding debt. As a result, the failure to obtain covenant violation waivers or repay our debt obligations when they become due would have a material adverse effect on us. Refer to Part I, Item IA. Risk Factors, for more information.
The Credit Agreement contains customary events of default, including with respect to: nonpayment of principal, interest, fees or other amounts; failure to perform or observe covenants; material inaccuracy of a representation or warranty when made; cross-default to other material indebtedness; bankruptcy, insolvency and dissolution events; inability to pay debts; monetary judgment defaults; actual or asserted invalidity or impairment of any definitive loan documentation, repudiation of guaranties or subordination terms; certain ERISA related events; or a change of control.
The obligations of our subsidiary that is the borrower under the Credit Agreement are guaranteed by us and each of our other United States subsidiaries. The Credit Agreement and any interest rate protection and other hedging arrangements provided by any lender party to the Credit Agreement or any affiliate of such a lender are secured on a first priority basis by a perfected security interest in substantially all of the borrower’s, ours and each guarantor’s assets (subject to certain exceptions).
Credit Agreement
The following table sets forth the outstanding balance, borrowing capacity and applicable interest rate under Credit Agreement.
(1) Revolving Loan available borrowing capacity, net of $2.2 million of outstanding standby letters of credit as of December 31, 2020.
Finance Leases
As of December 31, 2020, we had $42.2 million of finance lease obligations outstanding, with a weighted average interest rate of 4.9% and maturities between 2020 and 2026.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance-sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our management prepares financial statements in conformity with GAAP. When we prepare these consolidated financial statements, we are required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to accounts receivable, inventories, deferred tax assets, goodwill and intangible assets, long-lived assets and leases. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for our judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management's judgments and estimates.
Goodwill Impairment
In accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, we assess goodwill for impairment annually as of September 30, and more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired. At September 30, 2020, the Company performed its assessment and determined that goodwill was not impaired.
Goodwill impairment testing is performed at the reporting unit level. Goodwill is assigned to reporting units at the date the goodwill is initially recorded. Once goodwill has been assigned to reporting units, it no longer retains its association with a particular acquisition, and all of the activities within a reporting unit, whether acquired or internally generated, are available to support the value of the goodwill.
In 2017, we elected to early-adopt ASU 2017-04 which simplifies subsequent goodwill measurement by eliminating step two from the goodwill impairment test.
We determine the fair value of our reporting units using an income approach. Under the income approach, we determined fair value based on estimated discounted future cash flows of each reporting unit. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit is judgmental in nature and requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including revenue growth rates and EBITDA margins, discount rates and future market conditions, among others. The level of judgement and estimation is inherently higher in the current environment considering the uncertainty created by the COVID-19 pandemic. We have evaluated numerous factors disrupting our business and made significant assumptions which include the severity and duration of our business disruption, the timing and degree of economic recovery and ultimately, the combined effect of these assumptions on our future operating results and cash flows.
The results of the latest annual goodwill impairment test, as of September 30, 2020, were as follows:
Based upon a sensitivity analysis, a reduction of approximately 50 basis points of projected EBITDA in 2020 and beyond, assuming all other assumptions remain constant, would result in no further impairment of goodwill.
Based upon a separate sensitivity analysis, a 50 basis point increase to the weighted average cost of capital would result in no further impairment of goodwill.
Given the uncertainty regarding the ultimate financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the proceeding economic recovery, and the changing document and printing needs of our customers and the uncertainties regarding the effect on our business, there can be no assurance that the estimates and assumptions made for purposes of our goodwill impairment testing in 2020 will prove to be accurate predictions of the future. If our assumptions, including forecasted EBITDA of certain reporting units, are not achieved, or our assumptions change regarding disruptions caused by the pandemic, and the impact on the recovery from COVID-19 change, then we may be required to record goodwill impairment charges in future periods, whether in connection with our next annual impairment testing in the third quarter of 2020, or on an interim basis, if any such change constitutes a triggering event (as defined under ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other) outside of the quarter when we regularly perform our annual goodwill impairment test. It is not possible at this time to determine if any such future impairment charge would result or, if it does, whether such charge would be material.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration that we are expected to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. We applied practical expedients related to unsatisfied performance obligations for (i) contracts with an original expected length of one year or less and (ii) contracts for which the Company recognizes revenue at the amount to which it has the right to invoice for services performed.
CDIM consists of professional services and software services to (i) reproduce and distribute large-format and small-format documents in either black & white or color (“Ordered Prints”) and (ii) specialized graphic color printing. Substantially, all the Company’s revenue from CDIM comes from professional services to reproduce Ordered Prints. Sales of Ordered Prints are initiated through a customer order or quote and are governed by established terms and conditions agreed upon at the onset of the customer relationship. Revenue is recognized when the performance obligation under the terms of a contract with a customer are satisfied; generally, this occurs with the transfer of control of the re-produced Ordered Prints. Transfer of control occurs at a specific point-in-time, when the Ordered Prints are delivered to the customer’s site or handed to the customer for walk in orders. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring goods or providing services. Taxes collected concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue.
MPS consists of placement, management, and optimization of print and imaging equipment in the customers' offices, job sites, and other facilities. MPS relieves the Company’s customers of the burden of purchasing print equipment and related supplies and maintaining print devices and print networks, and shifts their costs to a “per-use” basis. MPS is supported by our hosted proprietary technology, Abacus®, which allows our customers to capture, control, manage, print, and account for their documents. Under its MPS contracts, the Company is paid a fixed rate per unit for each print produced (per-use), often referred to as a “click charge”. MPS sales are driven by the ongoing print needs of the Company’s customers at their facilities. Upon the issuance of ASC 842, Leases, the Company concluded that certain of its MPS arrangements, which had previously been accounted for as service revenue under ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, are accounted for as operating leases under ASC 842. The pattern of revenue recognition for the Company's MPS revenue has remained substantially unchanged following the adoption of ASC 842. See Note 7, Leasing, for additional information.
AIM, combines software and professional services to facilitate the capture, management, access and retrieval of documents and information that have been produced in the past. AIM includes our hosted SKYSITE software to organize, search and retrieve documents, as well as the provision of services that include the capture and conversion of hardcopy and electronic documents into digital files (“Scanned Documents”), and their cloud-based storage and maintenance. Sales of AIM professional services, which represent substantially all revenue for AIM, are initiated through a customer order or proposal and are governed by established terms and conditions agreed upon at the onset of the customer relationship. Revenue is recognized when the performance obligation under the terms of a contract with a customer are satisfied; generally, this occurs with the transfer of control of the digital files. Transfer of control occurs at a specific point-in-time, when the Scanned Documents are delivered to the customer either through SKYSITE or through electronic media. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring goods or providing services. Taxes collected concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue.
Equipment and Supplies sales consist of reselling printing, imaging, and related equipment (“Goods”) to customers primarily in architectural, engineering and construction firms. Sales of Equipment and Supplies are initiated through a customer order and are governed by established terms and conditions agreed upon at the onset of the customer relationship. Revenue is recognized when the performance obligations under the terms of a contract with a customer are satisfied; generally, this occurs with the transfer of control of the Goods. Transfer of control occurs at a specific point-in-time, when the Goods are delivered to the customer’s site. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring goods or providing services. Taxes collected concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue. We have experienced minimal customer returns or refunds and does not offer a warranty on equipment that it is reselling.
Leases
We recognize lease assets and corresponding lease liabilities for all operating and finance leases on our Consolidated Balance Sheets, excluding short-term leases (leases with terms of 12 months or less) as described under ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842). Some of our long-term operating lease agreements include options to extend, which are also factored into the recognition of their respective assets and liabilities when appropriate based on management’s assessment of the probability that the options will be exercised. Lease payments are discounted using the rate implicit in the lease, or, if not readily determinable, a third-party secured incremental borrowing rate based on information available at lease commencement. Additionally, certain of our lease agreements include escalating rents over the lease terms which, under Topic 842, results in rent being expensed on a straight-line basis over the life of the lease that commences on the date we have the right to control the property. Finance leases were not impacted by the adoption of ASC 842, as finance lease liabilities and the corresponding ROU assets were already recorded in the balance sheet under the previous guidance, ASC 840. For additional information about the impact of the adoption of ASC 842, see Note 7, Leasing.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect temporary differences between the amount of assets and liabilities for financial and tax reporting purposes. Such amounts are adjusted, as appropriate, to reflect changes in tax rates expected to be in effect
when the temporary differences reverse. A valuation allowance is recorded to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. Changes in tax laws or accounting standards and methods may affect recorded deferred taxes in future periods.
When establishing a valuation allowance, we consider future sources of taxable income such as future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards and tax planning strategies. A tax planning strategy is an action that: is prudent and feasible; an enterprise ordinarily might not take, but would take to prevent an operating loss or tax credit carryforward from expiring unused; and would result in realization of deferred tax assets. In the event we determine that its deferred tax assets, more likely than not, will not be realized in the future, the valuation adjustment to the deferred tax assets will be charged to earnings in the period in which we make such a determination. We have a $2.1 million valuation allowance against certain deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020.
In future quarters we will continue to evaluate our historical results for the preceding twelve quarters and our future projections to determine whether we will generate sufficient taxable income to utilize our deferred tax assets, and whether a valuation allowance is required.
We calculate our current and deferred tax provision based on estimates and assumptions that could differ from the actual results reflected in income tax returns filed in subsequent years. Adjustments based on filed returns are recorded when identified.
Income taxes have not been provided on certain undistributed earnings of foreign subsidiaries because such earnings are considered to be permanently reinvested.
The amount of taxable income or loss we report to the various tax jurisdictions is subject to ongoing audits by federal, state and foreign tax authorities. We estimate of the potential outcome of any uncertain tax issue is subject to management’s assessment of relevant risks, facts, and circumstances existing at that time. We use a more-likely-than-not threshold for financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We record a liability for the difference between the benefit recognized and measured and tax position taken or expected to be taken on its tax return. To the extent that our assessment of such tax positions changes, the change in estimate is recorded in the period in which the determination is made. We report tax-related interest and penalties as a component of income tax expense.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our Consolidated Financial Statements for disclosure on recently adopted accounting pronouncements and those not yet adopted.