ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
ArcBest Corporation™ (together with its subsidiaries, the “Company,” “we,” “us,” and “our”) provides a comprehensive suite of freight transportation and integrated logistics services to deliver innovative solutions. Our operations are conducted through our three reportable operating segments:
● Asset-Based, which consists of ABF Freight System, Inc. and certain other subsidiaries (“ABF Freight”);
● ArcBest, our asset-light logistics operation; and
● FleetNet.
The ArcBest and FleetNet reportable segments combined represent our Asset-Light operations. See additional segment descriptions in Part I, Item 1 (Business) and in Note M to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. References to the Company, including “we,” “us,” and “our,” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are primarily to the Company and its subsidiaries on a consolidated basis.
ORGANIZATION OF INFORMATION
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is provided to assist readers in understanding our financial performance during the periods presented and significant trends which may impact our future performance. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. MD&A includes forward-looking statements that are subject to risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from the statements made in this section due to a number of factors that are discussed in Part I (Forward-Looking Statements) and Part I, Item 1A (Risk Factors) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. MD&A is comprised of the following:
● COVID-19 discusses the impact of the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) pandemic on our business, our response to the pandemic, and changes in economic measures which may influence our operating results;
● Results of Operations includes:
● an overview of consolidated results with 2020 compared to 2019, and a consolidated Adjusted Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and Amortization (“Adjusted EBITDA”) schedule;
● a financial summary and analysis of our Asset-Based segment results of 2020 compared to 2019, including a discussion of key actions and events that impacted the results;
● a financial summary and analysis of the results of our Asset-Light operations for 2020 compared to 2019, including a discussion of key actions and events that impacted the results; and
● a discussion of other matters impacting operating results, including effects of inflation, current economic conditions, environmental and legal matters, and information technology and cybersecurity.
● Liquidity and Capital Resources provides an analysis of key elements of the cash flow statements, borrowing capacity, and contractual cash obligations, including a discussion of financing arrangements and financial commitments.
● Income Taxes provides an analysis of the effective tax rates and deferred tax balances, including deferred tax asset valuation allowances.
● Critical Accounting Policies discusses those accounting policies that are important to understanding certain material judgments and assumptions incorporated in the reported financial results.
● Recent Accounting Pronouncements discusses accounting standards that are not yet effective for our financial statements but are expected to have a material effect on our future results of operations or financial condition.
The Consolidated Results section of Results of Operations generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in the Consolidated Results section within Results of Operations of MD&A in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
COVID-19
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic. Efforts to control the spread of COVID-19 led governments and other authorities to impose restrictions which resulted in business closures and disrupted global supply chains. In the United States, most states placed restrictions on business operations and issued stay-at-home orders for residents beginning in late March and early April. Although many of these restrictions were eased or lifted throughout the country during May and June, COVID-19 continues to spread and business operations remain challenged. Although unemployment rates have improved since the 14.7% high reached in April 2020, recovery in the unemployment rate has slowed, and the January 2021 unemployment rate was 6.3%, versus 3.5% for the same period of 2020. On June 8, 2020, the National Bureau of Economic Research declared that a recession began in the United States in February 2020. The U.S. real gross domestic product (the “real GDP”) decreased at an annual rate of 31.4% in the second quarter of 2020. This sharp decline in real GDP represents the lowest quarter since the U.S. government began tracking this measure in 1947 and illustrates the difficulty of the economic environment during second quarter 2020. However, real GDP increased at an annual rate of 33.4% in third quarter 2020 and, according to the second estimate released by the Bureau of Economic Analysis on February 25, 2021, real GDP increased at an annual rate of 4.1% in fourth quarter 2020. We are encouraged by the record growth in real GDP in the second half of 2020 and other recent economic measures, including the Institute for Supply Management (ISM) Purchasing Managers’ Index (“PMI”) and the Industrial Production Index issued by the Federal Reserve. The Industrial Production Index, while still below 2019 levels, increased at an annual rate of 39.8% for third quarter 2020, recovering more than half of its February to April 2020 decline, and increased at an annual rate of 8.4% for fourth quarter 2020. PMI, which is a leading indicator for economic activity in the freight transportation and logistics industry, was 60.7% for December 2020, reflecting economic expansion in the manufacturing sector in December and the eighth consecutive month of growth in the overall economy, compared to 47.2% in December 2019. PMI was 58.7% for January 2021, compared to 50.9% for the same prior-year period, and is expected to expand through 2021. Manufacturing and trade inventory levels remain low and within a range we consider optimal for freight demand; although there can be no assurance that the economic environment, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, will be favorable for our freight services in future periods.
Business Impact
The COVID-19 pandemic and the measures taken to prevent its spread began to impact our business during late March 2020. The negative impact on demand for our services accelerated as the COVID-19 pandemic continued to disrupt businesses and the economy during the second quarter of 2020. Consolidated revenues declined 1.6% in 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on demand for our services during the second quarter of 2020. Significant declines in our shipment and tonnage levels during second quarter 2020 drove the full-year decreases in our Asset-Based daily tonnage levels of 0.4% and decreases in our ArcBest segment shipments per day of 4.9% in 2020, compared to 2019. Tonnage and shipment levels began to improve in third quarter 2020 and increased year-over-year in each month of fourth quarter 2020 on a per-day basis, reflecting the positive impact of an improving marketplace. Following a year-over-year decrease of 18.7% in our quarterly consolidated revenues in second quarter 2020, third quarter 2020 increased 0.9% and fourth quarter increased 13.8%, compared to the same prior-year period, respectively. The extent of the continued effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and customers’ operations and, consequently, our business results depends on future developments.
Our consolidated net income totaled $71.1 million, or $2.69 per diluted share, in 2020, compared to $40.0 million, or $1.51 per diluted share, in 2019, which was impacted by a noncash impairment charge of $19.8 million (after-tax), or $0.75 per diluted share, recognized in the fourth quarter of 2019 related to a portion of the goodwill, customer relationship intangible assets, and revenue equipment associated with the acquisition of truckload and dedicated businesses within the ArcBest segment. Year-over-year improvement in our net income and earnings per share was achieved during this challenging business environment because of the dedication of our employees and prudent business decisions to manage resources and costs to business levels.
Quarter-to-date 2021 Business Update
The revenue improvements we experienced in fourth quarter 2020 continued quarter-to-date through late-February 2021. Compared to the same prior-year period, Asset-Based billed revenue increased approximately 7% on a per-day basis, primarily due to yield improvement, and revenue per day for our ArcBest segment (ArcBest Asset-Light operations, excluding FleetNet) increased approximately 50%, primarily due to higher shipment levels and an increase in revenue per shipment. Our quarter-to-date 2021 results are further discussed in the business updates within the Asset-Based Segment Results and Asset-Light Results sections.
Business Response
Business Continuity & Our Employees and Customers
We are continuing the business continuity processes we implemented in March 2020 which focused on maintaining customer service levels while emphasizing the health, welfare, and safety of our employees and our customers. The measures we implemented to safeguard our employees and customers, which are in alignment with guidelines established by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, include employee communication on COVID-19 symptom awareness, proper hand washing, social distancing, mask wearing, and glove removal; increased cleaning and disinfecting measures; temperature screenings; providing masks and gloves to employees; reduced nonessential travel and in-person meetings, including meetings with customers; remote work arrangements for many personnel; installation of glass dividers between workstations; health screening questionnaires for personnel working onsite; health screening procedures for critical customer visitors; and promotion of social distancing to every extent possible, including between employees and with customers.
Financial Stability
As previously announced, in anticipation of lower business levels and the potential for cash flow disruption, we took actions in late March and early April 2020 to preserve cash and lower costs to mitigate the operating and financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
On March 26, 2020, we drew down the $180.0 million remaining available borrowing capacity under the initial maximum credit amount of our revolving credit facility and borrowed $45.0 million under our accounts receivable securitization program. These borrowings were a proactive measure to supplement our already strong cash and short-term investments position and preserve financial flexibility in consideration of general economic and financial market uncertainty resulting from the COVID-19 outbreak. Due to improvement in our consolidated net cash position, stabilized customer account payment trends, and improved business levels, we repaid these borrowings during third quarter 2020. Additionally, we repaid the remaining outstanding balance of $40.0 million under our accounts receivable securitization program in third quarter 2020. Our consolidated cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments totaled $369.4 million at December 31, 2020. These amounts, net of debt, increased to a $85.1 million net cash position at December 31, 2020, compared to a $5.0 million net debt position at December 31, 2019, primarily reflecting positive earnings.
We lowered our planned capital expenditures for 2020 by approximately 30%, including a reduction in revenue equipment purchases of $18.0 million. Total net capital expenditures, including equipment financed, for 2020 was $91.7 million, including $63.1 million of revenue equipment. For 2021, our total net capital expenditures, including amounts financed, are estimated to range from $150.0 million to $160.0 million, including revenue equipment of $100.0 million, primarily for our Asset-Based operations.
In April 2020, we implemented cost reduction actions which included a 15% reduction in the salaries of officers and nonunion employees and similar compensation adjustments for hourly nonunion employees; a 15% reduction in fees paid to members and committee chairpersons of our Board of Directors; implementation of a hiring freeze; suspension of the employer match on our nonunion 401(k) plan; and reduction of advertising, training, travel, and other costs to better align with current business levels. The compensation reductions lowered consolidated operating expenses by approximately $15 million in second quarter 2020, versus second quarter 2019. As a result of the positive sequential trends in our business levels through July 2020, we reversed the compensation cost reductions beginning in the third quarter of 2020, including officer and nonunion employee salaries, the employer match on our nonunion 401(k) plan, and fees for our Board of Directors. We provided one-time discretionary payments in fourth quarter 2020 to nonunion exempt personnel for the previously discussed 15% wage reduction incurred during the second quarter of 2020 and provided a bonus to nonunion hourly employees whose hours were reduced during the same time period. The expense related to these payments totaled approximately $11 million.
Throughout the second and third quarters of 2020, we utilized real-time, technology-enabled data to make operational changes in our Asset-Based network, including workforce reductions to better align resources with business levels. We are continually evaluating these operational changes and adjusting to current and anticipated business levels. These operational changes contributed to our positive financial results for 2020. As tonnage levels have increased, certain operational resources have been added back to the Asset-Based network, and they will continue to be carefully managed to business levels. Expenses for which we made cost reductions in 2020, including advertising, training, and travel, as well as customer and personnel related events which were suspended during the year, are expected to return. We also expect
our nonunion healthcare costs to increase from 2020 expense levels, which were lower than the prior year due to a reduction in average costs per claim, reflecting the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on the timing and availability of medical care. Our efforts to manage our operational costs may not directly correspond to significant changes in business levels and there can be no assurance that the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will not have an adverse effect on our operating results in future periods.
Accounting Estimates
In accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), we use projected financial information to determine certain accounting estimates and the values of certain assets included in our consolidated financial statements. As of December 31, 2020, we evaluated our goodwill, intangible assets, operating assets, and deferred tax assets for indicators of impairment and challenged our accounting estimates considering the current economic conditions. Certain of these assessments are discussed in the paragraphs below. Given the uncertainties regarding the economic environment and the future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, there can be no assurance that our estimates and assumptions made for purposes of impairment evaluations and accounting estimates will prove to be accurate.
Goodwill and Intangible Asset Impairment Consideration
As further described in the Critical Accounting Policies section of MD&A, we performed our annual impairment evaluation of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets as of October 1, 2020, and determined that there were no impairments of the recorded balances. While future impacts of COVID-19 and the economic environment are difficult to forecast, we expect to generate future cash flows which would continue to support the fair value in excess of carrying value for our reporting units and indefinite-life intangible assets.
As of December 31, 2020, we believe the values of the goodwill and intangible assets reported in our consolidated financial statements, which totaled $143.3 million, continue to be appropriate; however, we will continually monitor performance measures and events for any significant changes in impairment indicators. Significant declines in business levels or other changes in cash flow assumptions, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, or other factors that negatively impact the fair value of the operations of our reporting units could result in future impairment and a resulting noncash write-off of a significant portion of the goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets of our ArcBest segment, which would have an adverse effect on our financial condition and operating results.
Allowances on Accounts Receivable
As further described in the Critical Accounting Policies section of MD&A, we estimate our allowance for credit losses on accounts receivable based on historical trends, factors surrounding the credit risk of specific customers, and forecasts of future economic conditions. We continually update the data we use to ensure that these estimates reflect the most recent trends, factors, forecasts, and other information available; however, actual write-offs or adjustments could differ from our allowance estimates due to a number of factors, including changes in the overall economic environment or factors and risks surrounding a particular customer, both of which had a higher degree of uncertainty during 2020 due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Consolidated Results
(1) Includes a one-time charge of $37.9 million (pre-tax), or $28.2 million (after-tax) and $1.05 per diluted share, in 2018 related to the multiemployer pension fund withdrawal liability resulting from the transition agreement ABF Freight entered into with the New England Pension Fund. See Multiemployer Plans within Note I to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2) Includes a noncash impairment charge of $26.5 million (pre-tax), or $19.8 million (after-tax) and $0.75 per diluted share, in 2019 related to a portion of the goodwill, customer relationship intangible assets, and revenue equipment associated with the acquisition of truckload and dedicated businesses within the ArcBest segment, as further discussed in the Asset-Light Results section.
(3) Includes after-tax nonunion defined benefit pension expense, including settlement expense, of $7.7 million and $0.29 per diluted share in 2019, and $13.5 million and $0.51 per diluted share in 2018. Pension settlement expense was higher in 2018 due to lump sum distributions as we advanced toward termination of the nonunion defined benefit pension plan. Pension settlement expense for 2019 relates to lump sum and other distributions to settle the plan benefit obligation and a pension termination expense. Termination of the nonunion pension plan was completed in 2019. See Note I to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(4) The tax benefits and credits and other changes in the effective tax rates which impacted consolidated net income and earnings per share are further described within this Consolidated Results section and in the Income Taxes section of MD&A. As a result of recognizing the tax effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, which was signed into law on December 22, 2017 and reduced the U.S. federal corporate tax rate from 35% to 21% effective January 1, 2018, consolidated net income and earnings per share were impacted by a tax benefit of $3.8 million, or $0.14 per diluted share, in 2018. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act is further discussed in Note E to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our consolidated revenues, which totaled $2.9 billion for 2020, decreased 1.6% compared to 2019, primarily due to lower Asset-Based tonnage and ArcBest segment shipment levels resulting from the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on demand for our services during the second quarter of 2020. The impact of the significant decline in second quarter tonnage and shipment levels to our 2020 revenues was partially offset by improved business levels during the second half of the year, primarily in the fourth quarter as customer shipping patterns recovered and we experienced increased demand for our logistics solutions. The year-over-year decrease in consolidated revenues for 2020 reflects a 2.5% decrease in our Asset-Based revenues, partially offset by a 3.6% increase in revenues of our Asset-Light operations (representing the combined operations of our ArcBest and FleetNet segments). The higher elimination of revenues reported in the “Other and eliminations” line of consolidated revenues in 2020, compared to 2019, includes the impact of increased intersegment business levels among our operating segments, reflecting continued integration of our logistics services.
On a per-day basis, Asset-Based revenues decreased 3.0% in 2020, compared to 2019, reflecting a 2.4% decline in billed revenue per hundredweight, including fuel surcharges, and a 0.4% decrease in tonnage per day. The decline in our Asset-Based tonnage per day for 2020, compared to 2019, reflects a decrease in shipment levels, partially offset by a higher weight per shipment. The number of workdays was greater by one and one-half days in 2020, versus 2019. The increase in revenues of our Asset-Light operations for 2020, compared to 2019, was primarily due to an increase in revenue per shipment associated with higher market pricing in a tighter truckload capacity environment, partially offset by a decline in shipments per day (excluding managed transportation shipments). The Asset-Light revenue increase in the ArcBest segment was partially offset by decline in revenue for the FleetNet segment on lower service event volume. Our Asset-Light operations, on a combined basis, generated 32% and 31% of total revenues before other revenues and intercompany eliminations for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Consolidated operating income increased $34.5 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The year-over-year changes in consolidated operating income, net income, and per share amounts for 2020 and 2019 reflect the operating results of our operating segments and the items described below which are meaningful to the analysis of our consolidated operating results.
Operating results for 2019 were impacted by a noncash impairment charge of $26.5 million (pre-tax), or $19.8 million (after-tax) and $0.75 per diluted share, recognized in the fourth quarter of 2019 related to a portion of the goodwill, customer relationship intangible assets, and revenue equipment associated with the acquisition of truckload and dedicated businesses within the ArcBest segment, as further discussed in the Asset-Light Results section.
Innovative technology costs related to a freight handling pilot test program at ABF Freight impacted consolidated results by $22.6 million (pre-tax), or $17.3 million (after-tax) and $0.66 per diluted share, for 2020, compared to $15.7 million (pre-tax), or $12.0 million (after-tax) and $0.45 per diluted share, for 2019. In 2019, the Asset-Based segment also incurred conversion costs to comply with the electronic logging device (“ELD”) mandate of $2.7 million (pre-tax), or $2.0 million (after-tax) and $0.08 per diluted share, with no comparable costs recognized during 2020. These matters are further discussed in the Asset-Based Segment Results section.
The year-over-year pre-tax comparisons of consolidated operating results were impacted by costs for certain nonunion performance-based incentive plans, including long-term incentive plans impacted by shareholder returns relative to peers, which increased $17.5 million in 2020, compared to 2019. The increase in these fringe benefit costs were partially offset by lower nonunion healthcare costs, which decreased $5.5 million in 2020, compared to 2019, due to a reduction in average costs per claim, reflecting the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on the timing and availability of medical care.
The loss reported in the “Other and eliminations” line of consolidated operating income, which totaled $13.6 million for 2020, compared to $22.9 million for 2019, includes expenses related to investments to develop and design various technology and innovations, as well as expenses related to shared services for the delivery of comprehensive transportation and logistics services to our customers. The $9.3 million decrease in the loss reported in “Other and eliminations” for 2020, compared to 2019, reflects lower technology costs and reduced travel, marketing, and customer event operating expenses primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect the loss reported in “Other and eliminations” for first quarter and full-year 2021 to approximate $6 million and $24 million, respectively, which would be more consistent with 2019 levels.
In addition to the above items, consolidated net income and earnings per share were impacted by income from changes in the cash surrender value of variable life insurance policies, which is reported below the operating income line in the consolidated statements of operations. A portion of our variable life insurance policies have investments, through separate accounts, in equity and fixed income securities and, therefore, are subject to market volatility. Changes in the cash surrender value of life insurance policies contributed $2.3 million to consolidated net income and $0.09 to diluted earnings per share in 2020, versus $3.7 million and $0.14 per diluted share in 2019.
Consolidated after-tax pension expense, including settlement and termination expense, recognized for the nonunion defined benefit pension plan totaled $8.0 million, or $0.30 per diluted share, for 2019, with no comparable expense for 2020 as termination of the plan was completed as of December 31, 2019. These pension expenses for 2019 and termination of the nonunion defined benefit pension plan are detailed in Note I to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Consolidated net income and earnings per share were impacted by $2.1 million, or $0.08 per diluted share, in 2020 and $1.4 million, or $0.05 per diluted share, in 2019 for a research and development tax credit. Consolidated net income and earnings per share for 2019 were also impacted by $2.3 million, or $0.09 per diluted share, for an alternative fuel tax credit related to the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, which was recognized upon the December 2019 retroactive reinstatement of the alternative fuel tax credit. The tax benefits and credits, as well as other changes in the effective tax rates, which impacted the year-over-year comparisons of consolidated net income and earnings per share for 2020 and 2019 are further described within the Income Taxes section of MD&A and in Note E to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Consolidated Adjusted Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and Amortization (“Adjusted EBITDA”)
We report our financial results in accordance with GAAP. However, management believes that certain non-GAAP performance measures and ratios, such as Adjusted EBITDA, utilized for internal analysis provide analysts, investors, and others the same information that we use internally for purposes of assessing our core operating performance and provides meaningful comparisons between current and prior period results, as well as important information regarding performance trends. Accordingly, using these measures improves comparability in analyzing our performance because it removes the impact of items from operating results that, in management's opinion, do not reflect our core operating performance. Management uses Adjusted EBITDA as a key measure of performance and for business planning. The measure is particularly meaningful for analysis of our operating performance, because it excludes amortization of acquired intangibles and software of the Asset-Light businesses, which are significant expenses resulting from strategic decisions rather than core daily operations. Additionally, Adjusted EBITDA is a primary component of the financial covenants contained in our Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (see Note G to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K). Other companies may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently; therefore, our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. Non-GAAP financial measures should be viewed in addition to, and not as an alternative for, our reported results. Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as a better measurement than operating income, operating cash flow, net income, or earnings per share, as determined under GAAP.
(1) Includes pre-tax settlement expense related to the nonunion defined benefit pension plan of $4.2 million and $12.9 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively, and pre-tax settlement expense related to the supplemental benefit plan of $0.1 million and $0.4 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. For 2019, also includes a $4.0 million noncash pension termination expense related to an amount which was stranded in accumulated other comprehensive income until the pension benefit obligation was settled upon plan termination. Pension settlement expense was higher in 2018 due to lump sum distributions as we advanced toward termination of the nonunion defined benefit pension plan, which was completed in 2019. See Note I to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2) The noncash impairment charge recognized in 2019 relates to a portion of the goodwill, customer relationship intangible assets, and revenue equipment associated with the acquisition of truckload and dedicated businesses within the ArcBest segment, as further discussed in the Asset-Light Results section.
(3) ABF Freight recorded a one-time charge in 2018 for the multiemployer pension fund withdrawal liability resulting from the transition agreement it entered into with the New England Pension Fund. See Multiemployer Plans within Note I to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(4) Restructuring charges relate to the realignment of our organizational structure.
Asset-Based Operations
Asset-Based Segment Overview
The Asset-Based segment consists of ABF Freight System, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of ArcBest Corporation, and certain other subsidiaries. Our Asset-Based segment operates a less-than-truckload (“LTL”) network across North America to provide freight transportation services. Our customers trust the LTL solutions ABF Freight has provided for nearly a century and rely on us to solve their transportation challenges. We are strategically investing in our Asset-Based operations to utilize technology to improve freight handling processes and provide better experiences for our customers.
See Note M to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of the Asset-Based segment and additional segment information, including revenues, operating expenses, and operating income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018. This Asset-Based Operations section of Results of Operations generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in the Asset-Based Operations section within Results of Operations of MD&A in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Our Asset-Based operations are affected by general economic conditions, as well as a number of other factors that are more fully described in Item 1 (Business) and in Item 1A (Risk Factors) of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The key indicators necessary to understand the operating results of our Asset-Based segment are outlined below. These key indicators are used by management to evaluate segment operating performance and measure the effectiveness of strategic initiatives in the results of our Asset-Based segment. We quantify certain key indicators using key operating statistics which are important measures in analyzing segment operating results from period to period. These statistics are defined within the key indicators below and referred to throughout the discussion of results of our Asset-Based segment:
● Overall customer demand for Asset-Based transportation services, including the impact of economic factors.
● Volume of transportation services provided and processed through our network, which influences operating leverage as the level of tonnage and number of shipments vary, primarily measured by:
Pounds or Tonnage - total weight of shipments processed during the period in U.S. pounds or U.S. tons.
Pounds per day or Tonnage per day (average daily shipment weight) - pounds or tonnage divided by the number of workdays in the period.
Shipments per day - total number of shipments moving through the Asset-Based freight network during the period divided by the number of workdays in the period.
Pounds per shipment (weight per shipment) - total pounds divided by the number of shipments during the period.
Average length of haul (miles) - total miles driven divided by the total number of shipments during the period.
● Prices obtained for services, including fuel surcharges, primarily measured by:
Billed revenue per hundredweight, including fuel surcharges (yield) - revenue per every 100 pounds of shipment weight, including surcharges related to fuel, systematically calculated as shipments are processed in the Asset-Based freight network. Revenue for undelivered freight is deferred for financial statement purposes in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. Billed revenue used for calculating revenue per hundredweight measurements is not adjusted for the portion of revenue deferred for financial statement purposes.
● Ability to manage cost structure, primarily in the area of salaries, wages, and benefits (“labor”), with the total cost structure primarily measured by:
Operating ratio - the percent of operating expenses to revenue levels.
We also quantify certain key operating statistics which are used by management to evaluate productivity of operations within the Asset-Based freight network and to measure the effectiveness of strategic initiatives to manage the segment’s cost structure from period to period. These measures are defined below and further discussed in the Asset-Based Operating Expenses section within Asset-Based Segment Results:
● Shipments per DSY hour - total shipments divided by dock, street, and yard (“DSY”) hours to measure labor efficiency in the segment’s local operations.
● Pounds per mile - total pounds divided by total miles driven during the period used to measure labor efficiency of linehaul operations, although this metric is influenced by other factors including freight density, loading efficiency, average length of haul, and the degree to which purchased transportation (including rail service) is used.
Other companies within our industry may present different key performance indicators or operating statistics, or they may calculate their measures differently; therefore, our key performance indicators or operating statistics may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. Key performance indicators or operating statistics should be viewed in addition to, and not as an alternative for, our reported results. Our key performance indicators or operating statistics should not be construed as better measurements of our results than operating income, operating cash flow, net income, or earnings per share, as determined under GAAP.
As of December 2020, approximately 82% of the Asset-Based segment’s employees were covered under the ABF National Master Freight Agreement (the “2018 ABF NMFA”), the collective bargaining agreement with the International Brotherhood of Teamsters (the “IBT”), which was implemented on July 29, 2018, effective retroactive to April 1, 2018, and will remain in effect through June 30, 2023. Under the 2018 ABF NMFA, the contractual wage and benefits costs, including the ratification bonuses and vacation restoration, are estimated to increase approximately 2.0% on a compounded annual basis through the end of the agreement. Profit-sharing bonuses based on the Asset-Based segment’s annual GAAP operating ratios for any full calendar year under the contract represent an additional increase in costs under the 2018 ABF NMFA. A profit-sharing bonus was earned by contractual employees under the 2018 ABF NMFA, which totaled $5.0 million and $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, upon the Asset-Based segment achieving an annual GAAP operating ratio of 95.3% in 2020 and 95.2% in 2019.
The major economic provisions of the 2018 ABF NMFA include:
● restoration of one week of vacation that was previously reduced in the prior collective bargaining agreement, which begins accruing on anniversary dates on or after April 1, 2018, with the new vacation eligibility schedule being the same as the applicable 2008 to 2013 supplemental agreements;
● wage increases in each year of the contract, beginning July 1, 2018;
● ratification bonuses for qualifying employees;
● contributions to multiemployer pension plans at current rates for each fund;
● continuation of existing health coverage and annual multiemployer health and welfare contribution rate increases in accordance with the contract;
● changes to purchased transportation provisions with certain protections for road drivers as specified in the contract; and
● profit-sharing bonuses based upon the Asset-Based segment’s achievement of annual operating ratios of 96.0% or below for a full calendar year under the contract period.
Tonnage
The level of freight tonnage managed by the Asset-Based segment is directly affected by industrial production and manufacturing, distribution, residential and commercial construction, consumer spending, primarily in the North American economy, and capacity in the trucking industry. Operating results are affected by economic cycles, customers’ business cycles, and changes in customers’ business practices. The Asset-Based segment actively competes for freight business based primarily on price, service, and availability of flexible shipping options to customers. ArcBest seeks to offer value through identifying specific customer needs, then providing operational flexibility and seamless access to the services of our Asset-Based segment and our Asset-Light operations in order to respond with customized solutions.
Pricing
The industry pricing environment, another key factor impacting our Asset-Based results, influences the ability to obtain appropriate margins and price increases on customer accounts. Generally, freight is rated by a class system, which is established by the National Motor Freight Traffic Association, Inc. Light, bulky freight typically has a higher class and is priced at a higher revenue per hundredweight than dense, heavy freight. Changes in the rated class and packaging of the freight, along with changes in other freight profile factors such as average shipment size, average length of haul, freight density, and customer and geographic mix, can affect the average billed revenue per hundredweight measure.
Approximately one fourth of our Asset-Based business is subject to base LTL tariffs, which are affected by general rate increases, combined with individually negotiated discounts. Rates on the other three fourths of our Asset-Based business, including business priced in the spot market, are subject to individual pricing arrangements that are negotiated at various times throughout the year. The majority of the business that is subject to negotiated pricing arrangements is associated with larger customer accounts with annually negotiated pricing arrangements, and the remaining business is priced on an individual shipment basis considering each shipment’s unique profile, value provided to the customer, and current market conditions. Since pricing is established individually by account, the Asset-Based segment focuses on individual account profitability rather than a single measure of billed revenue per hundredweight when considering customer account or market evaluations. This is due to the difficulty of quantifying, with sufficient accuracy, the impact of changes in freight profile characteristics, which is necessary in estimating true price changes.
In December 2019, we began allowing shippers without negotiated published rates to instantly access competitive LTL rates for their shipping needs with capacity available in the ABF Freight network at the time of the shipment. The market has been receptive to the pricing option for transactional LTL shipments and this program has been beneficial in optimizing our business levels during 2020 by improving capacity utilization in the Asset-Based network.
We use a space-based pricing approach for shipments subject to LTL tariffs to align our pricing with freight profile trends in the industry, including bulkier shipments across the supply chain, the acceleration in e-commerce, and the unique requirements of many shipping and logistics solutions. Space-based pricing involves the use of freight dimensions (length, width, and height) to determine applicable cubic minimum charges (“CMC”) that supplement weight-based metrics when appropriate. Traditional LTL pricing is generally weight-based, while our linehaul costs are generally space-based (i.e., costs are impacted by the volume of space required for each shipment). We believe space-based pricing better aligns our pricing mechanisms with the metrics which affect our resources and, therefore, our costs to provide logistics services. We seek to provide logistics solutions to our customers’ businesses and the unique shipment characteristics of their various products and commodities, and we believe that we are particularly experienced in handling complicated freight. The CMC is an additional pricing mechanism to better capture the value we provide in transporting these shipments.
Fuel
The transportation industry is dependent upon the availability of adequate fuel supplies. The Asset-Based segment assesses a fuel surcharge based on the index of national on-highway average diesel fuel prices published weekly by the U.S. Department of Energy. To better align fuel surcharges to fuel- and energy-related expenses and provide more stability to account profitability as fuel prices change, we may, from time to time, revise our standard fuel surcharge program which impacts approximately one third of Asset-Based shipments and primarily affects noncontractual customers. While fuel surcharge revenue generally more than offsets the increase in direct diesel fuel costs when applied, the total impact of energy prices on other nonfuel-related expenses is difficult to ascertain. Management cannot predict, with reasonable certainty, future fuel price fluctuations, the impact of energy prices on other cost elements, recoverability of fuel costs through fuel surcharges, and the effect of fuel surcharges on the overall rate structure or the total price that the segment will receive from its customers. While the fuel surcharge is one of several components in the overall rate structure, the actual rate paid by customers is governed by market forces and the overall value of services provided to the customer.
During periods of changing diesel fuel prices, the fuel surcharge and associated direct diesel fuel costs also vary by different degrees. Depending upon the rates of these changes and the impact on costs in other fuel- and energy-related areas, operating margins could be impacted. Fuel prices have fluctuated significantly in recent years. Whether fuel prices fluctuate or remain constant, operating results may be adversely affected if competitive pressures limit our ability to recover fuel surcharges. Throughout 2020, the fuel surcharge mechanism generally continued to have market acceptance among customers; however, certain nonstandard pricing arrangements have limited the amount of fuel surcharge recovered. The negative impact on operating margins of capped fuel surcharge revenue during periods of increasing fuel costs is more evident when fuel prices remain above the maximum levels recovered through the fuel surcharge mechanism on certain accounts. In periods of declining fuel prices, fuel surcharge percentages also decrease, which negatively impacts
the total billed revenue per hundredweight measure and, consequently, revenues, and the revenue decline may be disproportionate to our fuel costs. Asset-Based revenues for 2020 compared to 2019 were negatively impacted by lower fuel surcharge revenue due to a decline in the nominal fuel surcharge rate, while total fuel costs were also lower. The segment’s operating results will continue to be impacted by further changes in fuel prices and the related fuel surcharges.
Labor Costs
Our Asset-Based labor costs, including retirement and healthcare benefits for contractual employees that are provided by a number of multiemployer plans (see Note I to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K), are impacted by contractual obligations under the 2018 ABF NMFA and other related supplemental agreements. Total salaries, wages, and benefits, amounted to 52.4% and 53.6% of revenues for 2020 and 2019, respectively. Changes in salaries, wages, and benefits expense as a percentage of revenues are discussed in the following Asset-Based Segment Results section.
ABF Freight operates in a highly competitive industry which consists predominantly of nonunion motor carriers. Nonunion competitors have a lower fringe benefit cost structure and less stringent labor work rules, and certain carriers also have lower wage rates for their freight-handling and driving personnel. Wage and benefit concessions granted to certain union competitors also allow for a lower cost structure. ABF Freight has continued to address with the IBT the effect of the segment’s wage and benefit cost structure on its operating results. Lower cost increases throughout the 2018 ABF NMFA contract period and increased flexibility in labor work rules are important factors in bringing ABF Freight’s labor cost structure closer in line with that of its competitors. However, under its current labor agreement, ABF Freight continues to pay some of the highest benefit contribution rates in the industry. The terms of the 2018 ABF NMFA are expected to allow the Asset-Based segment to maintain low-cost inflation in the current tight labor market while providing some of the best wages and benefits in the industry to our employees.
On February 11, 2020, the Ways and Means Committee approved the Butch Lewis Emergency Pension Plan Relief Act of 2021 (the “Pension Relief Act”) included as Subtitle H of the Concurrent Resolution on the Budget for Fiscal Year 2021. The legislative package will be sent to the House of Representatives and then to the Senate for approval. The Pension Relief Act includes various provisions to improve funding for multiemployer pension plans, including financial assistance provided through the PBGC to qualifying underfunded plans to secure pension benefits for plan participants. Stabilization of the multiemployer pension plans under the Pension Relief Act would protect the pension benefits of our contractual employees and further enhance our total union employee pay and benefit package. Without the funding to be provided by the Pension Relief Act, many of the multiemployer pension funds to which we contribute could become insolvent in the near future; however, we would continue to be obligated to make contributions to those funds under the terms of the 2018 ABF NMFA. While we cannot determine the contributions that will be required under future collective bargaining agreements for ABF Freight’s contractual employees, we believe our future contribution rates to multiemployer pension plans may be less likely to increase as a result of the provisions of the Pension Relief Act. There can be no assurances that the Pension Relief Act will be signed into law, either in its current form or in any other form.
ABF Freight’s benefit contributions for its contractual employees include contributions to multiemployer plans, a portion of which are used to fund benefits for individuals who were never employed by ABF Freight. ABF Freight’s multiemployer pension contributions totaled $142.2 million and $153.7 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. Information provided by a large multiemployer pension plan to which ABF Freight contributes indicates that approximately 50% of the plan’s benefit payments are made to retirees of companies that are no longer contributing employers to that plan. As previously outlined, the 2018 ABF NMFA provides for ABF Freight’s contributions to multiemployer pension plans to remain at the rates that were paid under the prior labor agreement with the IBT, while wage rates and health and welfare contribution rates for most plans will increase annually in accordance with the terms of the 2018 ABF NMFA. The contractual wage rate increased 1.6% and 1.4% effective July 1, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The average health, welfare, and pension benefit contribution rate increased approximately 2.2% and 2.0% effective primarily on August 1, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Asset-Based Segment Results
The following table sets forth a summary of operating expenses and operating income as a percentage of revenue for the Asset-Based segment:
(1) ABF Freight recorded a one-time $37.9 million pre-tax charge in second quarter 2018 for the multiemployer pension fund withdrawal liability resulting from the transition agreement it entered into with the New England Pension Fund. See Multiemployer Plans within Note I to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2) Represents costs associated with the previously announced freight handling pilot test program at ABF Freight.
The following table provides a comparison of key operating statistics for the Asset-Based segment, as previously defined in the Asset-Based Segment Overview:
(1) Workdays represent the number of operating days during the period after adjusting for holidays and weekends.
Asset-Based Revenues
Asset-Based segment revenues totaled $2,092.0 million and $2,144.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The number of workdays was greater by one and one-half days in 2020, versus the prior year. Billed revenue (as described in the Asset-Based Segment Overview) decreased 2.7% on a per-day basis in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily reflecting a 2.4% decrease in total billed revenue per hundredweight, including fuel surcharges, and a 0.4% decrease in tonnage per day. Asset-Based revenues for 2020 were negatively impacted by reduced demand for the segment’s services in the second quarter of the year as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The 2.4% decrease in total billed revenue per hundredweight for 2020, compared to 2019, was due to lower fuel surcharge revenues and changes in freight mix and shipment profile, reflecting heavier-weighted transactional shipments and the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the freight environment. The Asset-Based segment’s average nominal fuel surcharge rate for 2020 decreased approximately 290 basis points from 2019 levels. Excluding the impact of transactional shipments and fuel surcharges, the percentage increase in billed revenue per hundredweight on our traditional LTL-rated freight was in the mid-single digits for 2020, compared to 2019. Prices on accounts subject to deferred pricing agreements and annually negotiated contracts that were renewed during 2020 increased an average of 3.5%, compared to the prior year. The Asset-Based segment implemented nominal general rate increases on its LTL base rate tariffs of 5.9% effective on both February 24, 2020 and February 4, 2019, although the rate changes vary by lane and shipment characteristics.
The 0.4% decrease in tonnage per day for 2020, compared to 2019, reflects a decrease in shipments per day of 4.1%, partially offset by a 3.9% increase in weight per shipment. The shipment decline in 2020 was impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic which disrupted customers’ shipping patterns beginning in late-March 2020 and reduced demand throughout second quarter 2020, before returning to more comparative year-over-year levels in third quarter 2020 and further improving in fourth quarter 2020. Lower shipment levels for 2020 primarily reflect a decline in traditional, published LTL-rated shipments. These decreases were partially offset by the positive impacts of technology-driven initiatives implemented in the latter part of 2019 designed to fill available Asset-Based equipment capacity with transactional LTL-rated shipments. These larger-sized LTL-rated shipments contributed to a 5.4% increase in LTL-rated weight per shipment for 2020, compared to 2019.
Asset-Based Operating Income
The Asset-Based segment generated operating income of $98.9 million in 2020, compared to $102.1 million in 2019, with an operating ratio of 95.3% and 95.2%, respectively. The 0.1 percentage point increase in the Asset-Based segment’s operating ratio for 2020, compared to 2019, primarily reflects the decrease in revenues, partially offset by the operational changes in the Asset-Based network implemented in April 2020, as previously discussed in our Business Response within the COVID-19 section of MD&A, and the positive impact of freight mix changes related to an increase in transactional LTL-rated shipments, which positively impacted capacity utilization in the Asset-Based network.
ArcBest Technologies, Inc., our wholly-owned subsidiary which is focused on the advancement of supply chain execution technologies, began a pilot test program (the “pilot”) in early 2019 to improve freight handling at ABF Freight. The pilot is in the early stages in a limited number of locations. While ArcBest believes the pilot has potential to provide safer and improved freight-handling, a number of factors will be involved in determining proof of concept and there can be no assurances that pilot testing will be successful or expand beyond current testing locations. Innovative technology costs related to the pilot impacted operating results of the Asset-Based segment by $22.5 million and $13.7 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. We anticipate innovative technology costs associated with the pilot to impact our Asset-Based operating expenses by approximately $6.0 million in first quarter 2021, compared to $4.5 million in first quarter 2020.
The segment’s operating ratio was also impacted by changes in operating expenses as discussed in the following paragraphs.
Asset-Based Operating Expenses
Labor costs, which are reported in operating expenses as salaries, wages, and benefits, amounted to 52.4% and 53.6% of Asset-Based segment revenues for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The improvements in salaries, wages, and benefits as a percentage of revenue were partially offset by the effect of lower revenues, as a portion of operating costs are fixed in nature and increase as a percent of revenue with decreases in revenue levels. Salaries, wages, and benefits decreased $53.1 million for 2020, compared to 2019. The lower labor costs primarily reflect wage and workforce reductions in response to the negative impact of COVID-19 on business levels and the impact of managing labor hours to lower shipment levels. Labor costs also benefited from operational changes in our Asset-Based network (previously discussed in our Business Response within the COVID-19 section of MD&A). These decreases in labor costs were partially offset by the year-over-year increases in contractual wage and benefit contribution rates under the 2018 ABF NMFA, as previously discussed in the Labor Costs section of the Asset-Based Segment Overview, and higher expenses for certain nonunion performance-based incentive plans, including long-term incentive plans impacted by shareholder returns relative to peers.
Although the Asset-Based segment manages costs with shipment levels, portions of salaries, wages, and benefits are fixed in nature and the adjustments which would otherwise be necessary to align the labor cost structure throughout the system to corresponding tonnage levels are limited as the segment strives to maintain customer service. Shipments per DSY hour improved 3.7% and pounds per mile increased 1.9% for 2020, compared to 2019, reflecting efforts to manage costs with shipment levels and the application of data-enabled technologies. A higher number of heavier transactional LTL-rated shipments during 2020 contributed to improved operational metrics in the Asset-Based network, compared to 2019, as these transactional shipments typically require less handling and utilize available trailer space that would otherwise be moving empty. Productivity measures also benefited from the effect of customers expanding appointment windows and the effect of less congested roadways as a result of restrictions on business operations and stay-at-home orders for residents in many states particularly during the second quarter of 2020.
Fuel, supplies, and expenses as a percentage of revenue decreased 2.0 percentage points in 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to lower fuel costs as the Asset-Based segment’s average fuel price per gallon (excluding taxes) decreased approximately 32% during 2020, compared to 2019. Fewer miles driven as a result of the decline in business levels in second quarter 2020 and higher utilization of purchased transportation during the second half of 2020, as further described below, also contributed to the year-over-year decreases in fuel, supplies, and expenses.
Depreciation and amortization expense as a percentage of revenue increased 0.3 percentage points in 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to higher costs of new revenue equipment purchases and additional per unit costs related to electronic logging device (“ELD”) and other safety equipment enhancements. The year-over-year comparison of depreciation and amortization expense was impacted by impairment charges recognized in 2019 related to equipment replacement and other one-time costs totaling $2.7 million to comply with the ELD mandate which became effective in December 2019. The increase in depreciation and amortization as a percentage of revenue in 2020, compared to 2019, was also influenced by the effect of lower revenues, as a portion of these costs are fixed in nature and increase as a percent of revenue with decreases in business levels.
Rents and purchased transportation as a percentage of revenue increased 1.7 percentage points in 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to increases in the utilization of rail, local delivery agents, and linehaul purchased transportation necessary to serve our customers’ needs as freight demand increased inconsistently across the Asset-Based system during the second half of 2020. Rail miles increased approximately 21% in 2020, compared to 2019.
Shared services as a percentage of revenue increased 0.5 percentage points in 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to higher expense accruals for certain performance-based incentive plans, including long-term incentive plans impacted by shareholder returns relative to peers. The increase in shared services as a percentage of revenue was influenced by the effect of lower revenues, as shared service cost allocations were impacted by lower business levels during 2020, primarily due to the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on demand for freight transportation services during the second quarter of 2020.
Innovative technology costs as a percentage of revenue increased 0.5 percentage points for 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to increased activity for the previously discussed freight handling pilot test program at ABF Freight.
Asset-Based Segment - First Quarter-to-date 2021
As an update to preliminary figures reported in our Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on February 2, 2021, January 2021 billed revenue per day increased 10.7% and tonnage per day increased 6.6%, compared to January 2020. Asset-Based billed revenues quarter-to-date through late-February 2021 increased approximately 7% above the same period of 2020 on a per-day basis, primarily reflecting an increase in total billed revenue per hundredweight, including fuel surcharges, of approximately 7% and flat tonnage levels. Although revenue per day was above the prior year quarter-to-date, severe winter weather in February 2021, relative to the same period last year, reduced tonnage and revenue totals compared to January trends and resulted in some additional costs. The increase in total billed revenue per hundredweight reflects a rational pricing environment, lower fuel surcharges, and freight mix changes, compared to the prior-year period. Asset-Based revenues quarter-to-date through late-February 2021, compared to the same period of 2020, were negatively impacted by lower fuel surcharge revenue due to an approximate 150 basis point decline in the nominal fuel surcharge rate, while total fuel costs were also lower.
The Asset-Based segment implemented nominal general rate increases on its LTL-rated base rate tariffs of 5.95% effective January 25, 2021, although the rate changes vary by lane and shipment characteristics. The general rate increase affects approximately one fourth of our Asset-Based business. In January 2021, the Asset-Based segment sold an unutilized
property that will result in a gain of approximately $8.5 million for first quarter 2021, compared to a gain on the sale of property and equipment of $2.2 million in first quarter 2020. The first quarter of 2021 will have 63 working days compared to 64 days in first quarter 2020.
Tonnage levels are historically seasonally lower during January and February while March provides a disproportionately higher amount of the first quarter’s business. The first quarter of each year generally has the highest operating ratio of the year, although other factors, including the state of the economy, may influence quarterly comparisons. Current economic conditions and the Asset-Based segment’s pricing approach, as previously discussed in the Pricing section of the Asset-Based Segment Overview within Results of Operations, will continue to impact the segment’s tonnage levels and the prices it receives for its services and, as such, there can be no assurance that our Asset-Based segment will maintain or achieve improvements in its current operating results. Our efforts to manage operational costs in the Asset-Based network may not directly correspond to significant changes in business levels and there can be no assurance that the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will not have an adverse effect on our operating results in future periods. The marketplace pricing environment has been positive and rational in support of our efforts to secure needed price increases; however, the competitive environment could limit the Asset-Based segment from securing adequate increases in base LTL freight rates and could limit the amount of fuel surcharge revenue recovered in future periods.
Asset-Light Operations
Asset-Light Overview
The ArcBest and FleetNet reportable segments, combined, represent our Asset-Light operations. Our Asset-Light operations are a key component of our strategy to offer customers a single source of integrated logistics solutions, designed to satisfy the complex supply chain and unique shipping requirements customers encounter. We are focused on growing and making strategic investments in the development of our Asset-Light operations that enhance the efficient delivery of our services. Throughout our operations, we are seeking opportunities to expand our revenues by deepening customer relationships and securing new customers. In recent years, we have experienced significant growth in shipment levels and revenues of managed transportation solutions due, in part, to our strategic efforts to cross-sell our service offerings. We expect to benefit from these and other strategic initiatives as we continue to deliver innovative solutions to customers.
See Note M to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for descriptions of the ArcBest and FleetNet segments and additional segment information, including revenues, operating expenses, and operating income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018. This Asset-Light Operations section of Results of Operations generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in the Asset-Light Operations section within Results of Operations of MD&A in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Our Asset-Light operations are affected by general economic conditions, as well as several other competitive factors that are more fully described in Part I, Item 1 (Business) and in Part I, Item 1A (Risk Factors) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The key indicators necessary to understand our Asset-Light operating results are outlined below. These key indicators are used by management to evaluate segment operating performance and measure the effectiveness of strategic initiatives in the results of our Asset-Light segments. We quantify certain key indicators using key operating statistics which are important measures in analyzing segment operating results from period to period. These statistics are defined within the key indicators below and referred to throughout the discussion of results of our Asset-Light operations:
● Customer demand for logistics and premium transportation services combined with economic factors which influence the number of shipments or service events used to measure changes in business levels, primarily measured by:
Shipments per day - total shipments (excluding managed transportation solutions as discussed below) divided by the number of working days during the period, compared to the same prior-year period, for the ArcBest segment.
Service events - roadside, preventative maintenance, or total service events during the period, compared to the same prior-year period, for the FleetNet segment.
● Prices obtained for services, primarily measured by:
Revenue per shipment or event - total segment revenue divided by total segment shipments or events during the period (excluding managed transportation solutions for the ArcBest segment as discussed below), compared to the same prior-year period.
● Availability of market capacity and cost of purchased transportation to fulfill customer shipments of the ArcBest segment, with a measure of purchased transportation cost expressed as:
Purchased transportation costs as a percentage of revenue - the expense incurred for third-party transportation providers to haul or deliver freight during the period, divided by segment revenues for the period, expressed as a percentage.
● Management of operating costs, primarily in the area of purchased transportation, with the total cost structure primarily measured by:
Operating ratio - the percent of operating expenses to revenue levels.
Presentation and discussion of the key operating statistics of revenue per shipment and shipments per day for the ArcBest segment exclude statistical data of the managed transportation solutions transactions. Growth in managed transportation solutions has increased the number of shipments for these services to approximately one half of the ArcBest segment’s total shipments, while the business represents less than 20% of segment revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020. Due to the nature of our managed transportation solutions which typically involve a larger number of shipments at a significantly lower revenue per shipment level than the segment’s other service offerings, inclusion of the managed transportation solutions data would result in key operating statistics which are not representative of the operating results of the segment as a whole. As such, the key operating statistics management uses to evaluate performance of the ArcBest segment exclude managed transportation services transactions.
Other companies within our industry may present different key performance indicators or they may calculate their key performance indicators differently; therefore, our key performance indicators may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. Key performance indicators should be viewed in addition to, and not as an alternative for, our reported results. Our key performance indicators should not be construed as better measurements of our results than operating income, operating cash flow, net income, or earnings per share, as determined under GAAP.
Asset-Light Results
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the combined revenues of our Asset-Light operations totaled $984.2 million and $950.1 million, respectively, accounting for approximately 32% and 31% of our total revenues before other revenues and intercompany eliminations in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our Asset-Light results for 2020, compared to 2019, reflect stronger demand for the services of our ArcBest segment in the second half of the year which was positively impacted by tighter truckload capacity in the markets we serve, partially offset by the impact of reduced demand for our Asset-Light services during 2020, primarily in the second quarter of the year, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
ArcBest Segment
The following table sets forth a summary of operating expenses and operating income as a percentage of revenue for the ArcBest segment:
(1) Asset impairment in 2019 represents the noncash charge to a portion of the segment’s goodwill, customer relationship intangible assets, and revenue equipment, further discussed below.
(2) Gain recognized in 2018 relates to the sale of the ArcBest segment’s military moving businesses in December 2017.
A comparison of key operating statistics for the ArcBest segment, as previously defined in the Asset-Light Overview section, is presented in the following table:
ArcBest segment revenues totaled $779.1 million and $738.4 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The 5.5% increase in 2020 revenues, compared to 2019, primarily reflects a 4.9% increase in revenue per shipment associated with higher market prices resulting from tighter truckload capacity and continued demand for our managed transportation solutions, partially offset by a 4.9% decline in shipments per day (excluding managed transportation shipments). The impact of a softer economic environment during the first quarter of 2020 and the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on customer demand, including closure of certain customers’ operations for a period of time, during the second quarter of 2020 contributed to the lower shipments for the year. The second half of 2020 experienced an increase in revenues, compared to 2019, impacted by strong demand, primarily for our expedite, truckload, and managed transportation services, as a result of improvements in customer business levels.
Third-party capacity, particularly for truckload services, has been relatively volatile in recent years. More available truckload capacity, combined with a softer economic environment throughout 2019 and the first quarter of 2020, resulted in a market-driven reduction in pricing for many services of the ArcBest segment. The negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on demand for transportation and logistics services during the second quarter of 2020 resulted in a further decline in market pricing. Market pricing improved in the second half of 2020, compared to the same period of 2019, due to the impact of capacity constraints in the industry. Significant changes in market capacity, such as those experienced during 2020, impact the cost of sourcing such capacity which may not correspond to the timing of revisions to customer pricing and our revenue per shipment.
Operating income totaled $9.7 million for 2020, compared to an operating loss of $20.2 million for 2019, primarily due to higher revenues in 2020 and the impact of a $26.5 million (pre-tax) impairment charge in 2019. The ArcBest segment recorded this noncash impairment charge in the fourth quarter of 2019 related to the impairment of certain goodwill, customer relationship intangible assets, and revenue equipment associated with the acquisition of truckload and dedicated businesses within the segment. The impairment resulted primarily from underperformance of the truckload and dedicated businesses within the ArcBest segment, driven by economic conditions and the effect of excess truckload market capacity on margins during 2019.
Increased customer shipping levels combined with limited equipment availability in the logistics marketplace positively impacted demand for premium ground expedite services in the second half of 2020 and contributed to the segment’s operating improvement for 2020, compared to 2019. The segment’s purchased transportation costs increased by 1.3 percentage points as a percentage of revenue for 2020, compared to 2019. Due to changes in market conditions and freight mix, the prices paid for purchased transportation increased by a higher percentage than the prices we secured from customers, resulting in margin compression during 2020, compared to 2019. Operating results of the ArcBest segment benefited from lower shared services costs due to lower business levels. Although the ArcBest segment manages costs with shipment levels, portions of operating expenses are fixed in nature and cost reductions can be limited as the segment strives to enhance capacity sources and maintain customer service.
ArcBest Segment - First Quarter-to-date 2021
Revenues of our ArcBest segment (ArcBest Asset-Light operations, excluding FleetNet) increased approximately 50% on a per-day basis through late-February 2021, compared to the same prior-year period, reflecting increases in shipments per day and revenue per shipment as the segment continued to benefit from stronger demand and higher market prices resulting from tighter truckload capacity. The first quarter-to-date revenue comparison for 2021 to the same prior-year period was also positively impacted by continued demand for managed transportation solutions. Purchased transportation expense represented approximately 84% of revenues quarter-to-date in both periods. Current economic conditions will continue to impact business levels and purchased transportation costs of our ArcBest segment and, as such, there can be no assurance that the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will not have an adverse effect on the operating results of our ArcBest segment in future periods.
FleetNet Segment
FleetNet revenues totaled $205.0 million and $211.7 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The 3.2% decrease in revenues in 2020, compared to 2019, was driven by lower service event volumes, primarily reflecting a reduction in miles driven by customers as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
FleetNet’s operating income was $3.4 million and $4.8 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The year-over-year decrease in operating income was impacted by the effect of lower revenues, as a portion of operating costs are fixed in nature and increase as a percent of revenue with decreases in revenue.
Asset-Light Adjusted Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and Amortization (“Adjusted EBITDA”)
We report our financial results in accordance with GAAP. However, management believes that certain non-GAAP performance measures and ratios, such as Adjusted EBITDA, utilized for internal analysis provide analysts, investors, and others the same information that we use internally for purposes of assessing our core operating performance and provides meaningful comparisons between current and prior period results, as well as important information regarding performance trends. The use of certain non-GAAP measures improves comparability in analyzing our performance because it removes the impact of items from operating results that, in management's opinion, do not reflect our core operating performance. Management uses Adjusted EBITDA as a key measure of performance and for business planning. The measure is particularly meaningful for analysis of our Asset-Light businesses, because it excludes amortization of acquired intangibles and software, which are significant expenses resulting from strategic decisions rather than core daily operations. Management also believes Adjusted EBITDA to be relevant and useful information, as EBITDA is a standard measure commonly reported and widely used by analysts, investors, and others to measure financial performance of asset-light businesses and the ability to service debt obligations. Other companies may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently; therefore, our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. Non-GAAP financial measures should be viewed in addition to, and not as an alternative for, our reported results. Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as a better measurement than operating income, operating cash flow, net income, or earnings per share, as determined under GAAP.
Asset-Light Adjusted EBITDA
(1) The calculation of Adjusted EBITDA as presented in this table begins with operating income (loss), as other income (costs), income taxes, and net income are reported at the consolidated level and not included in the operating segment financial information evaluated by management to make operating decisions. Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA is reconciled to consolidated net income in the Consolidated Results section of Results of Operations.
(2) For the ArcBest segment, includes amortization of acquired intangibles of $3.7 million, $4.2 million, and $4.3 million in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, and amortization of acquired software of $1.0 million and $2.1 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(3) Asset impairment in 2019 represents the previously discussed noncash charge related to a portion of the segment’s goodwill, customer relationship intangible assets, and revenue equipment.
(4) Restructuring costs relate to the realignment of our corporate structure (see Note N to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K).
Current Economic Conditions
Given the current economic conditions and the uncertainties regarding the potential continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, there can be no assurance that our estimates and assumptions regarding the pricing environment and economic conditions, which are made for purposes of impairment tests related to operating assets and deferred tax assets, will prove to be accurate. Extended periods of economic disruption and resulting declines in industrial production and manufacturing and consumer spending could negatively impact demand for our services and have an adverse effect on our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows. Significant declines in our business levels or other changes in cash flow assumptions or other factors that negatively impact the fair value of the operations of our reporting units could result in impairment and a resulting noncash write-off of a significant portion of the goodwill and intangible assets of our ArcBest segment, which would have an adverse effect on our financial condition and operating results.
Effects of Inflation
Along with changes in the economic environment, there can be no assurances of the potential impact of inflationary conditions on our business. Generally, inflationary increases in labor and fuel costs as they relate to our Asset-Based operations have historically been mostly offset through price increases and fuel surcharges. In periods of increasing fuel prices, the effect of higher associated fuel surcharges on the overall price to the customer influences our ability to obtain increases in base freight rates. In addition, certain nonstandard arrangements with some of our customers have limited the amount of fuel surcharge recovered. The timing and extent of base price increases on our Asset-Based revenues may not correspond with contractual increases in wage rates and other inflationary increases in cost elements and, as a result, could adversely impact our operating results.
Generally, inflationary increases in labor and operating costs regarding our Asset-Light operations have historically been offset through price increases. The pricing environment, however, generally becomes more competitive during economic downturns, which may, as it has in the past, affect the ability to obtain price increases from customers both during and following such periods.
Partly as a result of inflationary pressures, our revenue equipment (tractors and trailers) has been and will very likely continue to be replaced at higher per unit costs, which could result in higher depreciation charges on a per-unit basis. We consider these costs in setting our pricing policies, although the overall freight rate structure is governed by market forces based on value provided to the customer. The Asset-Based segment’s ability to fully offset inflationary and contractual cost increases can be challenging during periods of recessionary and uncertain economic conditions.
In addition to general effects of inflation, the motor carrier freight transportation industry faces rising costs related to compliance with government regulations on safety, equipment design and maintenance, driver utilization, emissions, and fuel economy.
Environmental and Legal Matters
We are subject to federal, state, and local environmental laws and regulations relating to, among other things: emissions control, transportation or handling of hazardous materials, underground and aboveground storage tanks, stormwater pollution prevention, contingency planning for spills of petroleum products, and disposal of waste oil. We may transport or arrange for the transportation of hazardous materials and explosives, and we operate in industrial areas where truck service centers and other industrial activities are located and where groundwater or other forms of environmental contamination could occur. See Note O to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of the environmental matters to which we are subject.
We are involved in various legal actions, the majority of which arise in the ordinary course of business. We maintain liability insurance against certain risks arising out of the normal course of our business, subject to certain self-insured retention limits. We routinely establish and review the adequacy of reserves for estimated legal, environmental, and self-insurance exposures. While management believes that amounts accrued in the consolidated financial statements are adequate, estimates of these liabilities may change as circumstances develop. Considering amounts recorded, routine legal matters are not expected to have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows. See Note O to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of the legal matters in which we are currently involved.
Information Technology and Cybersecurity
We depend on the proper functioning, availability, and security of our information systems, including communications, data processing, financial, and operating systems, as well as proprietary software programs that are integral to the efficient operation of our business. Any significant failure or other disruption in our critical information systems, including cybersecurity attacks and other cyber incidents that impact the availability, reliability, speed, accuracy, or other proper functioning of these systems or that result in proprietary information or sensitive or confidential data, including personal information of customers, employees and others, being compromised could have a significant impact on our operations. Any new or enhanced technology that we may develop and implement may also be subject to cybersecurity attacks and may be more prone to related incidents. We also utilize certain software applications provided by third parties; provide underlying data to third parties; grant access to certain of our systems to third parties who provide certain outsourced administrative functions or other services; and increasingly store and transmit data with our customers and third parties by means of connected information technology systems, any of which may increase the risk of a cybersecurity incident. Although we strive to carefully select our third-party vendors, we do not control their actions and any problems caused by or impacting these third parties, including cyber attacks and security breaches at a vendor, could result in claims, litigation, losses, and/or liabilities and materially adversely affect our ability to provide service to our customers and otherwise conduct our business.
Our information technology systems are protected through physical and software safeguards as well as backup systems considered appropriate by management. However, these systems are vulnerable to interruption by adverse weather conditions or natural disasters, power loss, telecommunications failures, terrorist attacks, internet failures, computer viruses, and other events beyond our control. It is not practicable to protect against the possibility of these events or cybersecurity attacks and other cyber events in every potential circumstance that may arise. To mitigate the potential for such occurrences at our primary data center, we have implemented various systems, including redundant telecommunication facilities; replication of critical data to an offsite location; a fire suppression system to protect our on-site data center; and electrical power protection and generation facilities. We also have a catastrophic disaster recovery plan and alternate processing capability available for our critical data processes in the event of a catastrophe that renders one of our data centers unusable. In response to the health and safety risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic and in an effort to mitigate the spread of COVID-19, we have transitioned a significant portion of our office personnel to remote work arrangements, which may increase our exposure to cybersecurity risks, including an increased demand for information technology resources, an increased risk of phishing, and an increased risk of other cybersecurity attacks. We continue to implement physical and cybersecurity measures in an attempt to safeguard our systems in order to serve our operational needs in a remote working environment and to provide uninterrupted service to our customers.
Our property and cyber insurance would offset losses up to certain coverage limits in the event of a catastrophe or certain cyber incidents, including certain business interruption events related to these incidents; however, losses arising from a catastrophe or significant cyber incident would likely exceed our insurance coverage and could have a material adverse impact on our results of operations and financial condition. We do not have insurance coverage specific to losses resulting from a pandemic. A significant disruption in our information technology systems or a significant cybersecurity incident, including denial of service, system failure, security breach, intentional or inadvertent acts by employees or vendors with access to our systems or data, disruption by malware, or other damage, could interrupt or delay our operations, damage our reputation, cause a loss of customers, cause errors or delays in financial reporting, expose us to a risk of loss or litigation, and/or cause us to incur significant time and expense to remedy such an event.
We have experienced incidents involving attempted denial of service attacks, malware attacks, and other events intended to disrupt information systems, wrongfully obtain valuable information, or cause other types of malicious events that could have resulted in harm to our business. To our knowledge, the various protections we have employed have been effective to date in identifying these types of events at a point when the impact on our business could be minimized. We must continuously monitor and develop our information technology networks and infrastructure to prevent, detect, address, and mitigate the risk of unauthorized access, misuse, computer viruses, and other events that could have a security impact. We have made and continue to make significant financial investments in technologies and processes to mitigate these risks. We also provide employee awareness training around phishing, malware, and other cyber risks. Despite our efforts, due to the increasing sophistication of cyber criminals and the development of new techniques for attack, we may be unable to anticipate or promptly detect, or implement adequate protective or remedial measures against, the activities of perpetrators of cyber attacks. Management is not aware of any cybersecurity incident that has had a material effect on our operations, although there can be no assurances that a cyber incident that could have a material impact to our operations could not occur.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our primary sources of liquidity are unrestricted cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments, cash generated by operations, and borrowing capacity under our revolving credit facility or accounts receivable securitization program.
This Liquidity and Capital Resources section of MD&A generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of MD&A in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Cash Flow and Short-Term Investments
Components of cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments were as follows:
(1) Cash equivalents consist of money market funds, variable rate demand notes and, at December 31, 2018, U.S. Treasury securities with maturity dates of 90 days or less from the date of purchase.
(2) Short-term investments consist of certificates of deposit and U.S. Treasury securities.
(3) Cash, variable rate demand notes, and certificates of deposit are recorded at cost plus accrued interest, which approximates fair value. Money market funds are recorded at fair value based on quoted prices. U.S. Treasury securities are recorded at amortized cost plus accrued interest. At December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments of $156.4 million, $66.2 million, and $94.7 million, respectively, were neither FDIC insured nor direct obligations of the U.S. government.
2020 Compared to 2019
Cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments increased $50.9 million from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. During 2020, cash provided by operations was used to repay $101.1 million of long-term debt (net of borrowings on our financing arrangements of $225.0 million); fund $29.9 million of capital expenditures, net of proceeds from asset sales (and an additional $61.8 million of certain Asset-Based revenue equipment was financed with notes payable); fund $14.2 million of internally developed software; pay dividends of $8.2 million on common stock; and purchase $6.6 million of treasury stock.
Our cash provided by operating activities during 2020 was $206.0 million, a $35.6 million increase compared to $170.4 million of cash provided by operating activities during 2019. Net income increased by $31.1 million in 2020, compared to 2019. In 2019, cash provided by operating activities included a $26.5 million (pre-tax) noncash impairment charge previously discussed in the ArcBest Segment within the Asset-Light Results section of Results of Operations. Excluding the increase in net income and the 2019 impairment charge, cash provided by operating activities increased by $31.0 million for 2020, compared 2019, primarily due to changes in operating assets and liabilities. Due to the improvement in business levels in the fourth quarter of 2020, accounts receivable increased for 2020, compared to a decrease in accounts receivable for 2019. Accounts payable and accrued expenses increased, compared to the prior year, due to increased business activity in late 2020 and the impact of higher accruals in the 2020 period for certain performance-based incentive plans. Cash contributions of $7.7 million were made to the nonunion defined benefit pension plan during 2019 to fund benefit and expense distributions in excess of plan assets that occurred during the plan termination, which was completed in 2019.
Financing Arrangements
We have a revolving credit facility (the “Credit Facility”) under our Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) that has an initial maximum credit amount of $250.0 million, of which $70.0 million was outstanding as of December 31, 2019. We have the option to request additional revolving commitments or incremental term loans
thereunder of up to $125.0 million, subject to certain additional conditions as provided in the Credit Agreement. Our accounts receivable securitization program allows for cash proceeds of $125.0 million to be provided under the program and has an accordion feature allowing us to request additional borrowings up to $25.0 million, subject to certain conditions. As of December 31, 2019, we had $40.0 million outstanding under our accounts receivable securitization program.
In March 2020, we drew down the $180.0 million remaining available borrowing capacity under the initial maximum credit amount of our Credit Facility and borrowed an additional $45.0 million under our accounts receivable securitization program. These borrowings were a proactive measure to increase our cash position and preserve financial flexibility in consideration of general economic and financial market uncertainty and the potential for cash flow disruption resulting from the COVID-19 outbreak. We experienced stabilization of customer account payment trends during second quarter 2020, positive Adjusted EBITDA in the second and third quarters of 2020, and improvements in business levels in third quarter 2020. Based on these factors and our projections of operating results and cash flows from operations for the remainder of 2020, we repaid the $180.0 million drawdown on our Credit Facility and the $85.0 million of borrowings outstanding under our accounts receivable securitization program during the third quarter of 2020.
On May 4, 2020, we extended the term of our $50.0 million notional amount interest rate swap agreement from June 30, 2022 to October 1, 2024. We will receive floating-rate interest amounts based on one-month LIBOR in exchange for fixed-rate interest payments of 0.43% beginning on June 30, 2022 throughout the remaining term of the agreement. From June 30, 2022 to October 1, 2024, the extended interest rate swap agreement will effectively convert $50.0 million of borrowings under our Credit Facility from variable-rate interest to fixed-rate interest with a per annum rate of 1.56% based on the margin of our Credit Facility as of December 31, 2020.
Our financing arrangements are discussed further in Note G to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Contractual Obligations
The following table provides our aggregate annual contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1) See Note G to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further description of this obligation.
(2) The Credit Facility matures on October 1, 2024 with interest payments paid monthly and principal due at maturity. Future payments due under the Credit Facility are calculated using variable interest rates based on the LIBOR swap curve, plus the anticipated applicable margin.
(3) Amounts represent fixed interest payments net of estimated income from the interest rate swap based on the LIBOR swap curve.
(4) Amounts represent future payments due under notes payable obligations, which relate primarily to revenue equipment and certain other equipment.
(5) While we own the majority of our larger service centers, distribution centers, and administrative offices, we lease certain facilities and equipment. The future minimum rental commitments are presented exclusive of executory costs such as insurance, maintenance, and taxes.
(6) Amounts represent future payments due under the New England Pension Fund transition agreement. See Multiemployer Plans within Note I to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for discussion of ABF Freight’s entry into this agreement.
(7) We sponsor an insured postretirement health benefit plan that provides supplemental medical benefits and dental and vision care to certain executive officers. Amounts represent estimated projected payments, net of retiree premiums, related to postretirement health benefits for the next 10 years. These projected amounts are subject to change based upon increases and other changes in premiums and medical costs and continuation of the plan for current participants. The accumulated benefit obligation of the postretirement health benefit plan accrued in the consolidated balance sheet totaled $18.8 million as of December 31, 2020.
(8) We have deferred salary agreements with certain of our employees. The projected deferred salary agreement distributions are subject to change based upon assumptions for projected salaries and retirements, deaths, disabilities, or early retirement of current employees. Liabilities for deferred salary agreements accrued in the consolidated balance sheet totaled $1.8 million as of December 31, 2020.
(9) We have an unfunded supplemental benefit plan (“SBP”) for the purpose of supplementing benefits under the former nonunion defined benefit pension plan for certain executive officers. The amounts and dates of distributions in future periods are dependent upon actual retirement dates of eligible officers and other events and factors. The accumulated benefit obligation of the SBP accrued in the consolidated balance sheet totaled $0.4 million as of December 31, 2020.
(10) We maintain a Voluntary Savings Plan (“VSP”), a nonqualified deferred compensation plan for the benefit of certain executives. As of December 31, 2020, VSP related assets totaling $3.0 million were included in other assets with a corresponding amount recorded in other liabilities. Elective distributions anticipated under this plan are presented. Future distributions are subject to change for retirement, death, disability, or timing of distribution elections by plan participants.
(11) Purchase obligations include authorizations to purchase and binding agreements with vendors relating to facility improvements, certain equipment, software, service contracts, and other items for which amounts were not accrued in the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020.
ABF Freight contributes to multiemployer health, welfare, and pension plans based generally on the time worked by their contractual employees, as specified in the collective bargaining agreement and other supporting supplemental agreements (see Multiemployer Plans within Note I to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K).
Capital Expenditures
The following table sets forth our historical capital expenditures for the periods indicated below:
(1) As previously discussed in our Business Response within the COVID-19 section of MD&A, our actions during 2020 to preserve cash and lower costs to mitigate the financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business included a reduction of our 2020 capital expenditure plan by approximately 30%, including a reduction in revenue equipment purchases of $18.0 million.
For 2021, our total capital expenditures, including amounts financed, are estimated to range from $150.0 million to $160.0 million, net of asset sales. These 2021 estimated net capital expenditures include revenue equipment purchases of $100.0 million, primarily for our Asset-Based operations. The remainder of 2021 expected capital expenditures includes real estate projects, dock equipment upgrades and enhancements for our Asset-Based operations, and technology investments across the enterprise. We have the flexibility to adjust certain planned 2021 capital expenditures as business levels dictate. Depreciation and amortization expense, excluding amortization of intangibles, is estimated to be in a range of $115.0 million to $120.0 million in 2021. The amortization of intangible assets is estimated to be approximately $4.0 million in 2021.
Other Liquidity Information
The COVID-19 pandemic was disruptive to businesses, the economy, and the financial markets during 2020, and uncertainty remains about the severity and duration of its impact. General economic conditions, including the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, along with competitive market factors and the related impact on our business, primarily tonnage and shipment levels and the pricing that we receive for our services in future periods, could affect our ability to generate cash from operations and maintain cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments on hand as operating costs increase. Cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments totaled $369.4 million at December 31, 2020. We generated $206.0 million, $170.4 million, and $255.3 million of operating cash flow during 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Our Credit Facility and our accounts receivable securitization program provide available sources of liquidity with flexible borrowing and payment options. We had available borrowing capacity under our Credit Facility and our accounts receivable securitization program of $180.0 million and $113.3 million, respectively, at December 31, 2020. We believe these agreements provide borrowing capacity options necessary for growth of our businesses. We believe existing cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments, cash generated by operations, and amounts available under our Credit Facility or accounts receivable securitization program will be sufficient to finance our operating expenses, fund our ongoing investments in technology, and repay amounts due under our financing arrangements, as disclosed in the Contractual Obligations table within this Liquidity and Capital Resources section of MD&A, over the next 12 months and for the foreseeable future. Notes payable, finance leases, and other secured financing may also be used to fund capital expenditures, provided that such arrangements are available and the terms are acceptable to us.
During 2020, we continued to take actions to enhance shareholder value with our quarterly dividend payments and treasury stock purchases. On January 28, 2021, our Board of Directors declared a dividend of $0.08 per share payable to stockholders of record as of February 11, 2021. We expect to continue to pay quarterly dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future, although there can be no assurance in this regard since future dividends will be at the discretion of the Board of Directors and are dependent upon our future earnings, capital requirements, and financial condition; contractual restrictions applying to the payment of dividends under our Credit Agreement; and other factors.
We have a program in place to repurchase our common stock in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions (see Note J to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K). The program has no expiration date but may be terminated at any time at the Board of Directors’ discretion. Repurchases may be made using cash reserves or other available sources. During 2020, we purchased 252,299 shares of our common stock for an aggregate cost of $6.6 million, leaving $6.6 million available for repurchase under the current buyback program as of December 31, 2020.
As previously announced in our Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on January 28, 2021, the Board of Directors of ArcBest extended our share repurchase program by authorizing a total of $50.0 million to be available for purchases of our common stock. The principal purposes of the share repurchase program are to offset dilution from the issuance of restricted stock units under our equity incentive plan and to enhance long-term stockholder value.
Our Credit Facility, accounts receivable securitization program, and interest rate swap agreements utilize interest rates based on LIBOR. LIBOR is the basic rate of interest used in lending between banks on the London interbank market and is widely used as a reference for setting the interest rates on loans globally. In July 2017, the United Kingdom’s Financial Conduct Authority, which regulates LIBOR, announced that it intends to phase out LIBOR by the end of 2021. In October 2018, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) amended ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging, to permit the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (the “SOFR”) Overnight Index Swap Rate as a U.S. benchmark interest rate. The SOFR is calculated by the Federal Reserve Board based on the interest rates banks charge one another in the overnight market, typically called repurchase agreements, and is intended to be a broad measure of the cost of borrowing cash overnight collateralized by U.S. Treasury securities. The amendment to ASC Topic 815 was effective for us on January 1,
2019 and it did not have an impact on our consolidated financial statements. Any changes to the terms of our borrowing arrangements which would allow for the use of an alternative to LIBOR in calculating the interest rate under such arrangements are anticipated to be effective in 2022 upon our agreement with the lenders as to the replacement reference rate. Our Credit Agreement provides for the use of an alternate rate of interest in accordance with the provisions of the agreement. It is our understanding that replacement of LIBOR with an alternative reference in determining the interest rate under our borrowing arrangements will not have a significant impact on our cost of borrowing; however, there can be no assurances in this regard, as the new rates resulting from the replacement of LIBOR in our borrowing arrangements may not be as favorable to us as those in effect prior to any LIBOR phase-out.
Financial Instruments
We have not historically entered into financial instruments for trading purposes, nor have we historically engaged in a program for fuel price hedging. No such instruments were outstanding as of December 31, 2020 or 2019. We have interest rate swap agreements in place which are discussed in Note G to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Balance Sheet Changes
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable increased $38.3 million from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, reflecting higher business levels in December 2020 compared to December 2019.
Operating Right-of-Use Assets and Operating Lease Liabilities
The increase in operating right of use assets of $46.7 million and the increase in operating lease liabilities, including current portion, of $46.8 million from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, are primarily due to new leases and lease renewals during 2020.
Accounts Payable
Accounts payable increased $36.5 million from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, primarily due to increased business levels in December 2020 compared to December 2019.
Accrued Expenses
Accrued expenses increased $14.4 million from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase in certain performance-based incentive plan accruals and higher accruals for vacation due to an extension of time for which eligible employees may carryover vacation time due to the COVID-19 pandemic. These increases were partially offset by lower accrued balances related to workers’ compensation and third-party casualty insurance, primarily due to net payments in excess of claims activity for 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020, our off-balance sheet arrangements for purchase obligations totaled $44.7 million, as previously discussed in the Contractual Obligations section of Liquidity and Capital Resources.
We have no investments, loans, or any other known contractual arrangements with unconsolidated special-purpose entities, variable interest entities, or financial partnerships and have no outstanding loans with our executive officers or directors.
INCOME TAXES
The Income Taxes section of MD&A generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in the Income Taxes section of MD&A in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Our effective tax rate was 23.1% and 22.3% of pre-tax income for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The difference between our effective rate and the federal statutory rate for 2020 and 2019 was impacted by the passage of The Further Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2020 in December 2019, which retroactively reinstated the alternative fuel tax credit that previously
expired on December 31, 2017, for 2018 and 2019 and extended it through December 31, 2020. As a result, in 2020 we recognized alternative fuel tax credits of $1.3 million, and in the fourth quarter of 2019, we recognized alternative fuel tax credits for 2018 and 2019 totaling $2.3 million. The rates for 2020 and 2019 were also impacted by the recognition of federal research and development tax credits of which $2.1 million were recognized in 2020, and $1.4 million were recognized in 2019 for tax years 2015 through 2018. Additionally, a portion of the difference in the rates for 2020 and 2019 results from state income taxes, the effect of changes in the cash surrender value of life insurance, life insurance proceeds, non-deductible expenses, adjustments to valuation allowances on deferred taxes, adjustments to uncertain tax positions, and the settlement of share-based payment awards.
For 2020, our U.S. statutory tax rate was 21.0%. Our average state tax rate, net of the associated federal deduction, was approximately 5%. However, various factors, including the amount of pre-tax income as well as benefits or deficiencies recognized in the income statement upon settlement of share-based payment awards, caused our full year 2020 effective tax rate to vary significantly from the statutory rate. Due to the impact of non-deductible expenses, lower levels of pre-tax income result in a higher tax rate on income and a lower benefit rate on losses. As pre-tax income or pre-tax losses increase, the impact of non-deductible expenses on the overall rate declines.
We had net deferred tax liabilities after valuation allowances of $66.2 million and $58.5 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Valuation allowances for deferred tax assets totaled $1.3 million, $0.7 million, and $0.1 million at December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. As the Canadian tax rate is now higher than the U.S. tax rate, it is unlikely that foreign tax credit carryforwards will be useable, as U.S. taxes paid will be at a lower rate than the tax rates in Canada. Thus, the foreign tax credit carryforwards were fully reserved, resulting in valuation allowances of $0.4 million and $0.7 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. At December 31, 2020, we had gross federal and state net operating loss carryforwards of $1.3 million and $18.4 million, respectively. These operating loss carryforwards were reserved by valuation allowances of $0.7 million, and an additional valuation allowance of $0.2 million was related to state research and development tax credits, at December 31, 2020. The need for additional valuation allowances is continually monitored by management.
At December 31, 2019 and 2018, we had reserves for uncertain tax positions of $0.9 million and $1.0 million, respectively, related to credits taken on federal returns. Upon the expiration of the statute of limitations for the federal returns on which the credits were claimed, we removed the reserve of less than $0.1 million as of December 31, 2019, and we removed the reserve of $0.9 million, which was established at December 31, 2018, as of March 31, 2020. No reserve for uncertain tax positions remained at December 31, 2020.
Financial reporting income differs significantly from taxable income because of items such as bonus or accelerated depreciation for tax purposes, pension accounting rules, and a significant number of liabilities such as vacation pay, workers’ compensation reserves, and other liabilities, which, for tax purposes, are generally deductible only when paid. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, financial reporting income exceeded taxable income.
We made $28.6 million of federal, state, and foreign tax payments during the year ended December 31, 2020 and received refunds of $13.3 million of federal, state, and foreign taxes that were paid in prior years.
Management expects the cash outlays for income taxes will be less than reported income tax expense in 2021 due primarily to the effect of 100% expensing of qualified depreciable assets in 2019 through 2022 as allowed under the Tax Reform Act. However, in the event we were to become unprofitable, provisions of the Tax Reform Act eliminating net operating loss carrybacks for 2018 and subsequent years would have an adverse impact on liquidity and financial condition.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Estimates are based on prior experience and other assumptions that management considers reasonable in our circumstances. Actual results could differ from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions, which would affect the related amounts reported in the financial statements.
The accounting policies that are “critical” to understanding our financial condition and results of operations and that require management to make the most difficult judgments are described as follows.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues are recognized when or as control of the promised services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. Our performance obligations are primarily satisfied upon final delivery of the freight to the specified destination. Revenue is recognized based on the relative transit time in each reporting period with expenses recognized as incurred using a bill-by-bill analysis or standard delivery times to establish estimates of revenue in transit for recognition in the appropriate period. This methodology utilizes the approximate location of the shipment in the delivery process to determine the revenue to recognize, and management believes it to be a reliable method.
Certain contracts may provide for volume-based or other discounts which are accounted for as variable consideration. We estimate these amounts based on the expected discounts earned by customers and revenue is recognized using these estimates. Revenue adjustments may also occur due to rating or other billing adjustments. We estimate revenue adjustments based on historical information and revenue is recognized accordingly at the time of shipment. We believe that actual amounts will not vary significantly from estimates of variable consideration.
Revenue, purchased transportation expense, and third-party service expenses are reported on a gross basis for certain shipments and services where we utilize a third-party carrier for pickup, linehaul, delivery of freight, or performance of services but we remain primarily responsible for fulfilling delivery to the customer and maintain discretion in setting the price for the services. Purchased transportation expense is recognized as incurred.
For our FleetNet segment, service fee revenue is recognized upon response to the service event and repair revenue is recognized upon completion of the service by third-party vendors. Revenue and expense from repair and maintenance services performed by third-party vendors are reported on a gross basis as FleetNet controls the services prior to transfer to the customer and remains primarily responsible to the customer for completion of the services.
Payment terms with customers may vary depending on the service provided, location or specific agreement with the customer. The time between invoicing and when payment is due is not significant. For certain services, we require payment before the services are delivered to the customer.
We expense sales commissions when incurred because the amortization period is one year or less.
Receivable Allowance
We estimate our allowance for doubtful accounts based on historical write-offs, as well as trends and factors surrounding the credit risk of specific customers. In order to gather information regarding these trends and factors, we perform ongoing credit evaluations of our customers. The allowance for revenue adjustments is an estimate based on historical revenue adjustments and current information regarding trends and business changes. Actual write-offs or adjustments could differ from the allowance estimates due to a number of factors. These factors include unanticipated changes in the overall economic environment or factors and risks surrounding a particular customer. We continually update the history we use to make these estimates so as to reflect the most recent trends, factors, and other information available. Management believes this methodology to be reliable in estimating the allowances for doubtful accounts and revenue adjustments (collectively our receivable allowance). Accounts receivable are written off when the accounts are turned over to a collection agency or when the accounts are determined to be uncollectible. Actual write-offs and adjustments are charged against the allowances for doubtful accounts and revenue adjustments. A 10% increase in the estimate of allowances for doubtful accounts and revenue adjustments would have decreased 2020 operating income by $0.8 million on a pre-tax basis.
Impairment Assessment of Long-Lived Assets
We review our long-lived assets, including property, plant and equipment and capitalized software, which are held and used in our operations, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. If such an event or change in circumstances is present, we will estimate the undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition. If the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows is less than the carrying amount of the related assets, we will recognize an impairment loss. The evaluation of future cash flows requires management’s judgment and the use of estimates and assumptions. Assumptions require considerable judgment because changes in broad economic factors and industry factors can result in variable and volatile values. Economic factors and the industry environment were considered in assessing recoverability of long-lived assets, including revenue equipment (primarily tractors and trailers used in our Asset-Based operations and trailers used
in our expedite and dedicated operations). Our strict equipment maintenance schedules have served to mitigate declines in the value of revenue equipment.
Income Tax Provision and Valuation Allowances on Deferred Tax Assets
Management applies considerable judgment in estimating the consolidated income tax provision, including valuation allowances on deferred tax assets. The valuation allowance for deferred tax assets is determined by evaluating whether it is more likely than not that the benefits of deferred tax assets will be realized through future reversal of existing taxable temporary differences, taxable income in carryback years in jurisdictions where carrybacks are available, projected future taxable income, or tax-planning strategies. Uncertain tax positions, which also require significant judgment, are measured to determine the amounts to be recognized in the financial statements. The income tax provision and valuation allowances are further complicated by complex rules administered in multiple jurisdictions, including U.S. federal, state, and foreign governments.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Our consolidated goodwill balance of $88.3 million at December 31, 2020 is primarily related to acquisitions in the ArcBest segment which are included in the domestic freight transportation reporting unit for goodwill impairment testing, including the expedite freight transportation services we offer under the Panther Premium Logistics brand and certain of our Asset-Light truckload and dedicated businesses. Goodwill is recorded as the excess of an acquired entity’s purchase price over the value of the amounts assigned to identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Goodwill is not amortized, but rather is evaluated for impairment annually or more frequently if indicators of impairment exist. The annual impairment testing on the goodwill balances was performed as of October 1, 2020, and it was determined that the estimated fair value of the domestic freight transportation reporting unit, included within the ArcBest segment, exceeded the recorded balances by less than 5%. The goodwill balance for each of the other reporting units was assessed qualitatively and it was determined that it was more likely than not that there was no impairment of goodwill as of the assessment date.
Our measurement of goodwill impairment involves a comparison of the estimated fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying value. For annual and interim impairment tests, we are required to record an impairment charge, if any, by the amount a reporting unit’s fair value is exceeded by the carrying value of the reporting unit, limited to the carrying value of goodwill included in the reporting unit.
The fair value estimated for this evaluation is derived utilizing a combination of valuation methods, including earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (“EBITDA”) and revenue multiples (market approach) and the present value of discounted cash flows (income approach). Incorporation of the two methods into the impairment test supported the reasonableness of conclusions reached. With the assistance of a valuation firm, we incorporated EBITDA and revenue multiples that were observed for recent acquisitions and those of publicly traded companies which have similar operations. For the 2020 annual impairment tests of goodwill, market data suggests comparable companies are valued in the 0.5 to 1.2 times revenue range and in the 7.3 to 15.0 times EBITDA range. The discounted cash flow models utilized in the income approach incorporate discount rates, terminal multiples, and projections of future revenue, operating margins, and net capital expenditures. The projections used have changed over time based on historical performance and changing business conditions. Assumptions with respect to rates used to discount cash flows are dependent upon market interest rates and the cost of capital for us and the industry at a point in time. We include a cash flow period of five years with a terminal value in the income approach and an annual revenue growth rate assumption that is generally consistent with average historical trends. The evaluation of goodwill impairment requires management’s judgment and the use of estimates and assumptions to determine the fair value of the reporting unit. Changes in cash flow assumptions or other factors that negatively impact the fair value of the operations would influence the evaluation and could result in material impairments of goodwill in the future.
Our indefinite-lived intangible asset, which is the Panther trade name, totaled $32.3 million as of December 31, 2020. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized but rather are evaluated for impairment annually or more frequently if indicators of impairment exist. If the carrying amount of the intangible asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss shall be recognized in an amount equal to that excess. The annual impairment testing on the indefinite-lived intangible asset was performed as of October 1, 2020, and it was determined that the fair value of the Panther trade name was greater than the recorded balance by more than 30%.
The Panther trade name valuation model utilizes the relief from royalty method, whereby the value is determined by calculating the after-tax cost savings associated with owning the trade name and, therefore, not having to pay royalties for its use for the remainder of its estimated useful life. The evaluation of intangible asset impairment requires management’s
judgment and the use of estimates and assumptions to determine the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible assets. Assumptions require considerable judgment because changes in broad economic factors and industry factors can result in variable and volatile fair values. Changes in key estimates and assumptions that impact the operations and resulting revenues, royalty rates, and discount rates could materially affect the intangible asset impairment analysis.
Our finite-lived intangible assets consist primarily of customer relationship intangible assets and are amortized over their respective estimated useful lives. Finite-lived intangible assets are also evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. In reviewing finite-lived intangible assets for impairment, the carrying amount of the asset or asset group is compared to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition. If such cash flows are not sufficient to support the recorded value, an impairment loss to reduce the carrying value of the asset to its estimated fair value will be recognized in operating income.
In its impairment assessment of goodwill and intangible assets, management also considered the total market capitalization, which was noted to increase from the prior year assessment date. The increase in our market capitalization as of October 1, 2020 is believed to be attributable to improved operating results, general market conditions, and the general state of the freight market. We believe that there is no basis for adjustment of asset values at this time.
Insurance Reserves
We are self-insured up to certain limits for workers’ compensation and certain third-party casualty claims. For 2020 and 2019, our self-insurance limits are effectively $1.0 million for each workers’ compensation loss and generally $1.0 million for each third-party casualty loss. Workers’ compensation and third-party casualty claims liabilities, which are reported in accrued expenses, totaled $97.6 million and $101.6 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We do not discount our claims liabilities.
Liabilities for self-insured workers’ compensation and third-party casualty claims are based on the case-basis reserve amounts plus an estimate of loss development and incurred but not reported (“IBNR”) claims, which is developed from an independent actuarial analysis. The process of determining reserve requirements utilizes historical trends and involves an evaluation of claim frequency and severity, claims management, and other factors. Case reserves established in prior years are evaluated as loss experience develops and new information becomes available. Adjustments to previously estimated case reserves are reflected in financial results in the periods in which they are made. Aggregate reserves represent the best estimate of the costs of claims incurred, and it is possible that the ultimate liability may differ significantly from such estimates, as a result of a number of factors, including increases in medical costs and other case-specific factors. A 10% increase in the estimate of IBNR would increase the total 2020 expense for workers’ compensation and third-party casualty claims by approximately $4.7 million. The actual claims payments are charged against our accrued claims liabilities which have been reasonable with respect to the estimates of the related claims.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
New accounting rules and disclosure requirements can significantly impact our reported results and the comparability of financial statements. Accounting pronouncements which have been issued but are not yet effective for our financial statements are disclosed in Note B to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.