ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the section of this report entitled “Selected Financial Data” and our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. This discussion and other parts of this report contain forward-looking statements that involve risk and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section of this report entitled “Risk Factors. ” These forward-looking statements speak only as of the date hereof. Except as required by law, we assume no obligation to update or revise these forward-looking statements for any reason. Unless the context requires otherwise, the terms “Ardelyx”, “Company”, “we”, “us”, and “our” refer to Ardelyx, Inc.
OVERVIEW
We are a specialized biopharmaceutical company focused on developing first-in-class medicines to improve treatment for people with kidney and cardiorenal diseases. This includes patients with chronic kidney disease (“CKD”) on dialysis suffering from elevated serum phosphorus, or hyperphosphatemia; and CKD patients and/or heart failure patients with elevated serum potassium, or hyperkalemia. Our lead product candidate, tenapanor, is a first-in-class medicine for which we submitted a New Drug Application (“NDA”) to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) in June 2020 for the control of serum phosphorus in adult patients with CKD on dialysis. In September 2020 the FDA accepted the filing of our NDA and set a Prescription Drug User Fee Act (“PDUFA”) date of April 29, 2021. Tenapanor has a unique mechanism of action and acts locally in the gut to inhibit the sodium hydrogen exchanger 3, or NHE3. This results in the tightening of the epithelial cell junctions, thereby significantly reducing paracellular uptake of phosphate, the primary pathway of phosphate absorption.
OUR PRODUCT PIPELINE
Tenapanor: A New Approach for The Control of Serum Phosphorus in CKD Patients on Dialysis
Our portfolio is led by the development of tenapanor, a first-in-class medicine for the control of serum phosphorus in adult patients with CKD on dialysis. Tenapanor for the control of serum phosphorus has a unique mechanism of action and acts locally in the gut to inhibit the sodium hydrogen exchanger 3 (“NHE3”). This results in the tightening of the epithelial cell junctions, thereby significantly reducing paracellular uptake of phosphate, the primary pathway of phosphate absorption. In September 2020 we announced that the FDA accepted the filing of our NDA for tenapanor for the control of serum phosphorus in adult patients with CKD on dialysis. The acceptance of our NDA represents the next critical step toward bringing to market a completely new approach to the management of hyperphosphatemia. The FDA has set a PDUFA date of April 29, 2021. We continue to advance our commercial preparations for the launch of tenapanor. The NDA is supported by three successful Phase 3 trials involving over 1,000 patients that evaluated the use of tenapanor for the control of serum phosphorus in CKD patients on dialysis, with two trials evaluating tenapanor as monotherapy and one trial evaluating tenapanor as part of a dual mechanism approach with binders.
We have established agreements with Kyowa Kirin Co., Ltd. (“KKC”) in Japan, Shanghai Fosun Pharmaceutical Industrial Development Co. Ltd. (“Fosun Pharma”) in China and Knight Therapeutics, Inc. (“Knight“) in Canada for the development and commercialization of tenapanor for certain indications in their respective territories.
In December 2019, we reported statistically significant topline efficacy results from our second monotherapy Phase 3 clinical trial, the PHREEDOM trial, which evaluated tenapanor for the control of serum phosphorus in CKD patients on dialysis. The PHREEDOM trial followed a successful monotherapy Phase 3 clinical trial completed in 2017, the BLOCK trial, which achieved statistical significance for the primary endpoint. The only adverse event reported in these Phase 3 trials in less than 5% of patients was diarrhea, with an incidence rate of 52% in the PHREEDOM trial and 39% in the BLOCK trial, with most incidences in each trial being mild to moderate in nature. PHREEDOM is a one-year study with a 26-week open-label treatment period and a 12-week double-blind, placebo-controlled randomized withdrawal period
followed by a 14-week open-label safety extension period. An active safety control group, for safety analysis only, received sevelamer, open-label, for the entire 52-week study period. Patients completing the PHREEDOM trial from both the tenapanor arm and the sevelamer active safety control arm had the option to participate in NORMALIZE, an ongoing open-label 18-month extension study.
In June 2020, we announced positive results from a planned interim data analysis from our ongoing NORMALIZE extension study evaluating tenapanor, as monotherapy or in combination with sevelamer, to achieve serum phosphorus levels in the normal range (2.5 - 4.5 mg/dL) in patients with CKD on dialysis. The NORMALIZE extension study allowed patients from our PHREEDOM study to continue therapy with tenapanor and enabled those patients in the PHREEDOM safety control arm receiving sevelamer carbonate to transition to tenapanor. The data from the planned interim analysis demonstrated that the foundational use of tenapanor as monotherapy or in combination with sevelamer carbonate produces a significant phosphorus-lowering effect with a mean serum phosphorous reduction of 2. 33 mg/dL, from a mean baseline phosphorus of 7. 27 mg/dL at the beginning of the PHREEDOM trial to a mean of 4. 94 mg/dL at the time of this analysis. Of the 171 patients in this interim analysis who completed up to 9 months of treatment in this extension study, up to 47. 4% achieved a normal serum phosphorus level, and of those, the majority were on tenapanor alone or tenapanor with low dose sevelamer of three or fewer sevelamer tablets per day. These data represent a 58% improvement in the rate of patients who achieve a normal serum phosphorus level, as compared to current treatment practice data as reported in the April 2020 Dialysis Outcomes Practice Patterns Study (“DOPPS”) Practice Monitor. The DOPPS data demonstrate that, with currently available treatments, only 30% of patients have serum phosphorous levels less than 4.6 mg/dL. The only adverse event reported in greater than 5% of patients in NORMALIZE was diarrhea, with an incidence rate of 23.3%.
In September 2019, we reported positive results from the AMPLIFY trial, a Phase 3 study evaluating tenapanor in patients with CKD on dialysis who had uncontrolled hyperphosphatemia despite phosphate binder treatment. In this trial, approximately twice the number of patients achieved the serum phosphorus treatment goal of less than 5.5 mg/dL with tenapanor and phosphate binders versus phosphate binders alone. The only adverse event with a placebo-adjusted rate greater than 3% was diarrhea, with an incidence rate of 43%, with most being mild to moderate in nature.
In June 2020, our partner Kyowa Kirin Co., Ltd., a Japan-based global specialty pharmaceutical company exclusively developing tenapanor in Japan, presented results from a Phase 2 trial of tenapanor at the European Renal Association-European Dialysis and Transplant Association annual meeting (“ERA-EDTA 2020”). The trial was designed to evaluate if, with tenapanor, patients with hyperphosphatemia undergoing hemodialysis could achieve at least a 30% decrease in mean pill burden while maintaining their serum phosphorus level. The study results were statistically significant, with 71.6% (p<0.001) of patients achieving at least a 30% reduction in mean pill burden. The overall mean reduction in phosphate binder usage was 80% (reduction from 14.7 to 3.0 pills per day), while maintaining serum phosphorus control. The mean phosphorus level of patients entering the study on treatment with binders was 5.2 mg/dL at baseline and 4.7 mg/dL at the end of the 26-week study.
Tenapanor, if approved, would be the first therapy for phosphate management that blocks phosphorus absorption at the primary pathway of uptake. It is not a phosphate binder. Tenapanor is a novel, potent, small molecule, that has been shown in phase 3 studies to treat hyperphosphatemia as monotherapy and as a dual mechanism approach.
IBSRELA® (tenapanor) for Irritable Bowel Syndrome with Constipation (IBS-C)
In addition to the development of tenapanor for hyperphosphatemia, we have developed tenapanor for the treatment of patients with irritable bowel syndrome with constipation (“IBS-C”). In September 2019, we received FDA approval of IBSRELA® (tenapanor) for the treatment of IBS-C in adults. IBS-C is a burdensome gastrointestinal (“GI”) disorder. It is characterized by significant abdominal pain, constipation, straining during bowel movements, bloating and/or gas.
RDX013 Program: Small Molecule for Treating Hyperkalemia
We are also advancing a small molecule potassium secretagogue program, RDX013, for the potential treatment of hyperkalemia. Hyperkalemia is a common problem in patients with heart and kidney disease, particularly in patients taking common blood pressure medications known as renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (“RAAS”) inhibitors. Similar to what we have done with tenapanor in developing a non-binder approach for the treatment of elevated serum phosphate levels,
RDX013 is designed to target the underlying biological mechanisms of potassium secretion to lower elevated potassium. While currently available therapies are all ion exchange agents, RDX013 is a first in class approach that exerts its effects by amplifying the underlying pathways of potassium secretion in the colon.
Since commencing operations in October 2007, substantially all our efforts have been dedicated to our research and development (“R&D”) activities, including developing our clinical product candidate tenapanor and developing our proprietary drug discovery and design platform. We have not generated any revenues from product sales. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $554.8 million.
We expect to continue to incur substantial operating losses for the foreseeable future as a result of costs associated with the following activities: our continued development of tenapanor for the control of serum phosphorus in CKD patients on dialysis; our preparations for, and if approved, the commercialization of tenapanor in the United States for the control of serum phosphorus in CKD patients on dialysis, including significantly increased personnel costs associated with our commercial team; the performance of certain activities required as a result of our NDA approval of tenapanor for IBS-C; the continued development of RDX013 and the advancement of our research programs into the preclinical stage. To date, we have funded our operations from the sale and issuance of common stock and convertible preferred stock, funds from our collaboration partnerships, which includes license fees, milestones and product supply revenue, as well as funds from our Loan Agreement with Solar Capital Ltd. and Western Alliance Bank.
RDX020 Program: Small molecule for Treating Metabolic Acidosis
We have an ongoing discovery program targeting the inhibition of bicarbonate exchange inhibitor for the treatment of metabolic acidosis, a highly prevalent comorbidity in CKD patients that is strongly correlated with disease progression and adverse outcomes. We have identified lead compounds that are potent, selective and proprietary inhibitors of bicarbonate secretion.
FINANCIAL OPERATIONS OVERVIEW
Revenue
Our revenue to date has been generated primarily through license, research and development collaborative agreements with various collaboration partners. We have not generated any revenue from commercial product sales. In the future, we may generate revenue from a combination of our own product sales, if regulatory approval is received, and payments in connection with our current or future collaborative partnerships, including license fees, other upfront payments, milestone payments, royalties and payments for drug product and/or drug substance. We expect that any revenue we generate will fluctuate in future periods as a result of, among other factors: whether we receive regulatory approval for tenapanor for the control of serum phosphorus in CDK patients on dialysis, and if such approval is received, the timing of such approval and the extent to which we are successful in our efforts to commercialize tenapanor for such indication; the timing and progress of goods and services provided pursuant to our current or future collaborative partnerships; our or our collaborators’ achievement of preclinical, clinical, regulatory or commercialization milestones, to the extent achieved; the timing and amount of any payments to us relating to the aforementioned milestones; and the extent to which any of our product candidates are approved and successfully commercialized by a collaboration partner. If we, our current collaboration partners or any future collaboration partners fail to obtain regulatory approval for tenapanor, our ability to generate future revenue from our product sales or from our collaborative arrangements, and our results of operations and financial position, would be materially and adversely affected. Our past revenue performance is not necessarily indicative of results to be expected in future periods. See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the notes to our financial statements, included in Part II, Item 8, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for further details.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue currently represents payments due to AstraZeneca, which under the terms of a termination agreement entered into in 2015 is entitled to (i) future royalties at a rate of 10% of net sales of tenapanor or other NHE3 products by us or our licensees, and (ii) 20% of non-royalty revenue received from our collaboration partners to which we provide
rights to develop and commercialize tenapanor or certain other NHE3 inhibitors. We have agreed to pay AstraZeneca up to a maximum of $75.0 million in the aggregate for (i) and (ii). We recognize these expenses as cost of revenue when we recognize the corresponding revenue that gives rise to payments due to AstraZeneca. To date, we recognized an aggregate of $10.6 million as cost of revenue under the AZ Termination Agreement since 2017. See details in Note 12, Collaboration and Licensing Agreements, under AstraZeneca, in the notes to our financial statements, included in Part II, Item 8, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Research and Development
We recognize all research and development expenses as they are incurred to support the discovery, research, development and manufacturing of our product candidates. Research and development expenses include, but are not limited to, the following:
● external research and development expenses incurred under agreements with consultants, third-party contract research organizations (“CROs”) and investigative sites where a substantial portion of our clinical studies are conducted, and with contract manufacturing organizations where our clinical supplies are produced;
● expenses associated with supplies and materials consumed in connection with our research operations;
● expenses associated with producing tenapanor for the control of serum phosphorus in adult patients with CKD on dialysis prior to FDA approval;
● other costs associated with research, clinical development and regulatory activities; and
● employee-related expenses, which include salaries, bonuses, benefits, travel and stock-based compensation;
● facilities and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, depreciation and amortization expense, information technology expense and other supplies.
We expect to continue to make substantial investments in research and development activities as we further progress the development of tenapanor, RDX013 and our other product candidates as we advance our research programs into the preclinical stage and as we continue our early stage research. The process of conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming. We may not succeed in achieving marketing approval for our product candidates, including tenapanor for the control of serum phosphorus in adult patients with CKD on dialysis. The probability of success of each of the product candidates may be affected by numerous factors, including preclinical data, clinical data, the regulatory process, market acceptance, sufficient third-party coverage or reimbursement, our ability to access capital on acceptable terms, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability.
We anticipate that we will make determinations as to which programs to pursue and how much funding to direct to each program on an ongoing basis in response to the scientific and clinical success of each product candidate, ongoing assessment as to each product candidate’s commercial potential, and our ability to access capital on acceptable terms. We will need to raise additional capital to complete the development and commercialization of tenapanor. If we are unable to access capital on a timely basis and on terms that are acceptable to us, we may be forced to restructure certain aspects of our business or identify and complete one or more strategic collaborations or other transactions in order to fund the development or commercialization of tenapanor, the development of RDX013 or certain of our product candidates through the use of alternative structures.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related benefits, including stock-based compensation, for certain of our executives, our board members, and our finance, legal, business development, market development, commercial and support staff. Other general and administrative expenses include facility related costs and
professional fees for legal, accounting and audit, investor relations, other consulting services and allocated facility related costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future primarily because of increased pre-commercial and commercial activities, personnel costs and professional fees for services to support the potential launch and commercialization of tenapanor for the control of serum phosphorus in adult patients with CKD on dialysis.
Interest Expense
Interest expense represents the interest paid on our loan payable.
Other Income, net
Other income, net consists of interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents and held-to-maturity investments, the periodic revaluation of the exit fee related to our loan and currency exchange gains and losses.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our provision for income taxes includes current and deferred tax, including foreign withholding taxes paid on payments received from certain collaboration partners. Deferred income taxes reflect the tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. Our deferred tax assets continue to be fully offset by a valuation allowance, including deferred tax assets related to our net operating loss carryforwards, which may be subject to annual limitations as a result of ownership changes that may have occurred or could occur in the future.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICES AND ESTIMATES
A detailed discussion of our significant accounting policies can be found in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the notes to our financial statements, included in Part II, Item 8, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Critical accounting policies are those that require significant judgment and/or estimates by management at the time that financial statements are prepared such that materially different results might have been reported if other assumptions had been made. These estimates form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates.
We consider certain accounting policies related to revenue recognition, accrued research and development expenses and stock-based compensation to be critical policies to understanding the judgments and estimates applied in our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue primarily from research and collaboration and license agreements with customers. Goods and services in the agreements may include the grant of licenses for the use of our technology, the provision of services associated with the research and development of product candidates, manufacturing services, and participation in joint steering committees. The terms of these arrangements typically include payment to us of one or more of the following: non-refundable, up-front license fees; research, development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments; reimbursement of research and development services; option payments; reimbursement of certain costs; payments for manufacturing supply services; and future royalties on net sales of licensed products.
When two or more contracts are entered into with the same customer at or near the same time, we evaluate the contracts to determine whether the contracts should be accounted for as a single arrangement. Contracts are combined and accounted for as a single arrangement if one or more of the following criteria are met: (i) the contracts are negotiated as a package
with a single commercial objective; (ii) the amount of consideration to be paid in one contract depends on the price or performance of the other contract; or (iii) the goods or services promised in the contracts (or some goods or services promised in each of the contracts) are a single performance obligation.
In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under each of our agreements, management performs the following steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including any constraints on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation. As part of the accounting for contracts with customers, we develop assumptions that require judgment to determine whether promised goods and services represent distinct performance obligations and the standalone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract. This evaluation is subjective and requires us to make judgments about the promised goods and services and whether those goods and services are separable from other aspects of the contract. Further, determining the standalone selling price for performance obligations requires significant judgment, and when an observable price of a promised good or service is not readily available, we consider relevant assumptions to estimate the standalone selling price, including, as applicable, market conditions, development timelines, probabilities of technical and regulatory success, reimbursement rates for personnel costs, forecasted revenues, potential limitations to the selling price of the product and discount rates.
We apply judgment in determining whether a combined performance obligation is satisfied at a point in time or over time, and, if over time, concluding upon the appropriate method of measuring progress to be applied for purposes of recognizing revenue. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, as estimates related to the measure of progress change, related revenue recognition is adjusted accordingly. Changes in our estimated measure of progress are accounted for prospectively as a change in accounting estimate. We recognize collaboration revenue by measuring the progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation using an input measure. In order to recognize revenue over the research and development period, we measure actual costs incurred to date compared to the overall total expected costs to satisfy the performance obligation. Revenues are recognized as the program costs are incurred. We will re-evaluate the estimate of expected costs to satisfy the performance obligation each reporting period and make adjustments for any significant changes. Amounts received prior to satisfying the revenue recognition criteria are recorded as contract liabilities in our balance sheets. If the related performance obligation is expected to be satisfied within the next twelve months, this will be classified in current liabilities. Amounts recognized as revenue prior to receipt are recorded as contract assets in our balance sheets. If we expect to have an unconditional right to receive the consideration in the next twelve months, this will be classified in current assets. A net contract asset or liability is presented for each contract with a customer.
Milestone Payments: At the inception of each arrangement that includes research and development milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. Amounts of variable consideration are included in the transaction price to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur and when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. Milestone payments that are not within the control of us or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis, for which we recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of such development milestones and any related constraints, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect earnings in the period of adjustment.
Manufacturing supply services: Arrangements that include a promise for the future supply of drug substance or drug product for either clinical development or commercial supply at the customer’s discretion are generally considered as options. We assess if these options provide a material right to the licensee and if so, they are accounted for as separate performance obligations. If we are entitled to additional payments when the customer exercises these options, any payments are recorded in product supply revenues when the customer obtains control of the goods, which is upon delivery.
Royalties: For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and where the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). To date, we have not recognized any royalty revenue resulting from any of our licensing arrangements.
Licenses of intellectual property: If a license granted to a customer to use our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenue from consideration allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the licensee and the licensee is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we apply judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, to conclude upon the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue related to consideration allocated to the performance obligation.
Options: Customer options, such as options granted to allow a licensee to choose to research, develop and commercialize licensed compounds are evaluated at contract inception in order to determine whether those options provide a material right (i. e. , an optional good or service offered for free or at a discount) to the customer. If the customer options represent a material right, the material right is treated as a separate performance obligation at the outset of the arrangement. We allocate the transaction price to material rights based on the standalone selling price, and revenue is recognized when or as the future goods or services are transferred or when the option expires. Customer options that are not material rights do not give rise to a separate performance obligation, and as such, the additional consideration that would result from a customer exercising an option in the future is not included in the transaction price for the current contract. Instead, the option is deemed a marketing offer, and additional option fee payments are recognized or being recognized as revenue when the licensee exercises the option. The exercise of an option that does not represent a material right is treated as a separate contract for accounting purposes.
Contract modifications: Contract modifications, defined as changes in the scope or price (or both) of a contract that are approved by the parties to the contract, such as a contract amendment, exist when the parties to a contract approve a modification that either creates new or changes existing enforceable rights and obligations of the parties to the contract. Depending on facts and circumstances, we account for a contract modification as one of the following: (i) a separate contract; (ii) a termination of the existing contract and a creation of a new contract; or (iii) a combination of the preceding treatments. A contract modification is accounted for as a separate contract if the scope of the contract increases because of the addition of promised goods or services that are distinct and the price of the contract increases by an amount of consideration that reflects our standalone selling prices of the additional promised goods or services. When a contract modification is not considered a separate contract and the remaining goods or services are distinct from the goods or services transferred on or before the date of the contract modification, we account for the contract modification as a termination of the existing contract and a creation of a new contract. When a contract modification is not considered a separate contract and the remaining goods or services are not distinct, we account for the contract modification as an add-on to the existing contract and as an adjustment to revenue on a cumulative catch-up basis.
We receive payments from our licensees as established in each contract. Upfront payments and fees are recorded as deferred revenue upon receipt or when due and may require deferral of revenue recognition to a future period until we perform our obligations under these arrangements. Where applicable, amounts are recorded as unbilled revenue when our right to consideration is unconditional. We do not assess whether a contract with a customer has a significant financing component if the expectation at contract inception is such that the period between payment by the licensees and the transfer of the promised goods or services to the licensees will be one year or less.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service
providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
● CROs in connection with clinical studies;
● investigative sites in connection with clinical studies;
● vendors related to contract manufacturing, development and distribution of clinical supplies;
● collaborator entities in connection with our collaboration agreements; and
● vendors in connection with preclinical development activities.
We record expenses related to clinical studies and manufacturing development activities based on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with our CROs and manufacturing vendors that conduct and manage these activities on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract, and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of subjects and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which each component of a service will be performed, and estimate, with vendor input if appropriate, the resulting level of completion of each component of the service, with such estimates often involving drivers that provide a surrogate measurement of completion such as number of enrolled subjects and/or number of sites activated in the calculation of clinical trial fee accruals. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrued or prepaid expense balance accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, we may report amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period.
Stock-Based Compensation
We estimate the fair value of stock options and Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“the ESPP”) shares using the Black-Scholes valuation model. The Black-Scholes model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions which determine the fair value of stock-based awards. These assumptions include:
Expected Term-We have limited historical information to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior for our stock-option grants. As such, the expected term is estimated using the simplified method whereby the expected term equals the arithmetic average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option.
Expected Volatility- Since January 1, 2017, we have used the historic volatility of our own stock over the retrospective period corresponding to the expected remaining term of the options, or the period since our shares were first quoted on The Nasdaq Global Market, if that is shorter, to compute our expected stock price volatility.
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate assumption is based on zero-coupon U.S. Treasury instruments on the date of grant with a maturity date consistent with the expected term of our stock option grants.
Expected Dividend- To date, we have not declared or paid any cash dividends and do not have any plans to do so in the future. Therefore, we use an expected dividend yield of zero.
As required, we review our valuation assumptions at each grant date and, as a result, we are likely to change our valuation assumptions used to value employee stock-based awards granted in future periods. Employee and director stock-
based compensation costs are to be recognized over the vesting period of the award, and we have elected to use the straight-line attribution method. Forfeitures are estimated at the time of grant and revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. We estimate forfeitures based on historical experience.
Restricted stock units, or RSUs, are measured at the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant and expensed over the period of vesting using the straight-line attribution approach.
Performance-based RSUs, or PRSUs, are valued at grant-date fair market value. The vesting of the PRSUs is based on performance conditions. Performance conditions include: (i) a specific performance criteria and (ii) the employee’s continuous employment by the company for a stated period of time in order to earn the right to the related PRSUs to vest. The Company recognizes compensation cost with respect to the vesting of the PRSUs on a ratable basis over the requisite service period, upon the performance conditions being deemed probable of achievement.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Below is a summary of our total revenue (dollars in thousands):
The increase in our revenue was primarily attributable to $4.9 million higher collaborative development revenue recognized in connection with the 2019 KKC Agreement, which was entered into in November 2019, a $0.7 million licensing revenue recognized upon Knight’s achievement of a development milestone pursuant to the Knight Agreement and a $1.4 million increase in manufacturing supply of tenapanor and other materials sold to KKC in accordance with the 2017 KKC Agreement, partially offset by $3.0 million revenue related to achievement of a milestone pursuant to the Fosun agreement during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Operating Expenses
Below is a summary of our operating expenses (dollars in thousands):
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $0.5 million, or 75.8%, compared to $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cost of revenue in both periods is the portion of tenapanor-related upfront and milestone payment from our collaboration partners that we are required to make to AstraZeneca under the AstraZeneca Termination Agreement.
Research and Development
Below is a summary of our research and development expenses (dollars in thousands):
The decrease in our external R&D expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily includes a $9.7 million decrease in our tenapanor-related expenses, partially offset by $3.0 million of higher expenses attributable to KKC Research Agreement-related research and general R&D expenses. Of the overall tenapanor-related decrease, approximately $11.0 million relates to lower clinical study costs due to the winding down of expenses associated with our Phase 3 program for tenapanor for the control of hyperphosphatemia, offset by an out-of-period adjustment recorded during 2019 that reduced clinical trial expenses by $3.6 million related to our tenapanor clinical trials for the nine months ended September 30, 2019; and approximately $2.9 million relates to lower manufacturing expenses due to reduced validation related expenses for tenapanor in 2020 as compared to 2019; offset by an increase of $3.1 million related to regulatory expenses that includes $2.9 million paid to the FDA for the filing of a NDA for tenapanor for the control of serum phosphorus in CKD patients on dialysis in June 2020.
General and Administrative
The increase in general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to an increase in costs associated with building and staffing our commercial infrastructure and teams as we prepare for the anticipated U.S. launch of tenapanor for the control of serum phosphorus in CKD patients on dialysis. The increase consisted of headcount and related personnel costs and an increase in external spending for disease awareness initiatives, commercial infrastructure and strategy.
Other Income (Expense), net
Below is a summary of our other income (expense), net (dollars in thousands):
The decrease in interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to lower interest rates on our variable-rate term loan.
The decrease in other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to a decrease in investment income, a lower exit fee revaluation adjustment related to our loan agreement and a decrease in currency exchange losses.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Revenue
Below is a summary of our operating expenses (dollars in thousands):
Total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $5.3 million, which represents an increase of $2.7 million, or 102.6%, as compared to total revenues of $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The licensing revenue of $4.5 million is attributable to the achievement of a milestone, which amounted to $3.0 million, pursuant to our exclusive license agreement with Fosun Pharma, entered into in December 2017 for the development, commercialization and distribution of tenapanor in China for both hyperphosphatemia and IBS-C, and the full recognition of the $1.5 million license fee related to the XuanZhu Agreement, as discussed in Note 12, Collaboration and Licensing Agreements, to our financial statements, included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The increase in collaborative development revenue is attributed to revenue recognized during the fourth quarter of 2019 related to the 2019 KKC Agreement. We expect to recognize the remaining $9.5 million of the initial transaction price over the research and development period of the program, which we currently expect to extend through the end of 2021. We will revisit our current estimates and timing of performance at the end of each future reporting period and adjust as necessary.
Product supply revenue of $0.3 million relates to the manufacturing supply of tenapanor and other materials sold to KKC in connection with that collaboration partner’s product development and clinical trials in Japan.
Operating Expenses
Below is a summary of our operating expenses (dollars in thousands):
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue was $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $0.1 million, or 28.8%, compared to $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Cost of revenue in both periods is the portion of tenapanor-related up front and milestone payment from our collaboration partners that we are required to make to AstraZeneca under the AstraZeneca Termination Agreement.
Research and Development
Below is a summary of our research and development expenses (dollars in thousands):
Research and development expenses were $71.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $2.3 million, or 3.3%, compared to $69.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase consisted of a $3.7 million increase to advance our internal pipeline programs and a $1.4 million decrease in our collaboration program costs.
The increase in our internal costs of $3.7 million was primarily due to an increase in headcount and related personnel costs and an increase in stock-based compensation expenses.
The decrease in our external program costs of $1.4 million included a $4.6 million decrease in expenses primarily related to manufacturing of tenapanor and regulatory expenses related to our IBS-C NDA in 2018, partially offset by $2.5 million increase in clinical development expenses related to our RDX013 program and a $0.7 million increase primarily related to our tenapanor clinical trial expenses that includes an out-of-period adjustment recorded during the second quarter of 2019 that reduced clinical trial expenses by $3.6 million related to our tenapanor clinical trials.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses were $24.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $0.6 million, or 2.3%, compared to $23.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to an increase in personnel costs, stock-based compensation expense, audit expenses and recruiting expenses, partially offset by a decrease in other professional services.
Other Income (Expense), net
Below is a summary of our other income (expense), net (dollars in thousands):
Interest expense, net was $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $2.2 million, or 62.0%, compared to $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in interest expense in 2019 compared to 2018 was because the interest expense during 2018 represents only part of the year related to the loan agreement entered in May 2018, as compared with a full year of interest expense in 2019.
Other income, net, was $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which represents a decrease of $0.8 million, or 26.2%, compared to $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in treasury-related income and revaluation adjustments related to our loan agreement.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Below is a summary of our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities (in thousands):
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities totaling $188.6 million compared to $247.5 million as of December 31, 2019.
In July 2020, we filed a Form S-3 registration statement, which became effective in August 2020, containing (i) a base prospectus for the offering, issuance and sale by the Company of up to a maximum aggregate offering price of $250.0 million of the Company’s common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants and/or units, from time to time in one or more offerings; and (ii) a prospectus supplement for the offering, issuance and sale by the Company of up to a maximum aggregate offering price of $100.0 million of our common stock that may be issued and sold, from time to time, under a sales agreement with Jefferies LLC, deemed to be “at the market offerings.” As of December 31, 2020, we have received net proceeds of $21.2 million through the sale of approximately 3.3 million shares pursuant to this sales agreement.
On December 9, 2019, we completed an underwritten public offering of 20.0 million shares of common stock at a price of $6.25 per share before underwriting discounts and commissions (“the 2019 Offering”). In connection with the 2019 Offering, we entered into an underwriting agreement (“the 2019 Underwriting Agreement”) with Citigroup Global Markets Inc., Cowen and Company LLC, SVB Leerink LLC and Piper Jaffray & Co., collectively “the 2019 Underwriters”) pursuant to which we granted to the 2019 Underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional 3.0 million shares of our common stock (“the 2019 Overallotment”). We completed the sale of 23.0 million shares, inclusive of the 2019 Overallotment, and that sale resulted in our receipt of aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $143.8 million, less underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses totaling approximately $8.9 million, which resulted in net proceeds of approximately $134.9 million.
On November 22, 2019, we and KKC entered into a stock purchase agreement, pursuant to which we sold an aggregate of 2.9 million shares of our common stock at $6.96 per share for aggregate net proceeds of approximately $20.0 million, or the Private Placement. The Private Placement closed on November 25, 2019.
On May 25, 2018, we completed an underwritten public offering of 12.5 million shares of common stock at a price of $4.00 per share before underwriting discounts and commissions (“the 2018 Offering”). In connection with the 2018 Offering, we entered into an underwriting agreement (“the 2018 Underwriting Agreement”) with Jefferies LLC and SVB Leerink (formerly known as Leerink Partners LLC), or together the 2018 Underwriters, pursuant to which we granted to the 2018 Underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional 1.9 million shares of our common stock (“the 2018 Overallotment”). We completed the sale of 14.4 million, inclusive of the 2018 Overallotment, to the 2018 Underwriters. That sale resulted in our receipt of aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $57.5 million, less underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses totaling approximately $3.7 million, which resulted in net proceeds of approximately $53.8 million.
On May 16, 2018, we entered into a loan and security agreement (“the Loan Agreement”) with Solar Capital Ltd. and Western Alliance Bank (“the Lenders”). The Loan Agreement provides for a $50.0 million term loan facility with a maturity date of November 1, 2022. The full amount of the loan was funded on May 16, 2018. We received net proceeds from the loan of $49.3 million, after deducting the closing fee, legal expenses and issuance cost. On October 9, 2020, we and the Lenders entered into an amendment to the Loan Agreement, as defined and discussed in Note 6, Borrowings, to extend the date through which we are permitted to make interest-only payments on the Term Loan from December 1, 2020 to December 1, 2021. See Note 6, Borrowings, in the notes to our financial statements, included in Part II, Item 8, for details on our Loan Agreement.
Our primary sources of cash have been from the sale and issuance of common stock (in both public offerings and private placements) and private placements of convertible preferred stock, funds from our collaboration partnerships and funds from our loan agreement. Our primary uses of cash are to fund operating expenses, primarily research and development expenditures and pre-commercial expenses. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses.
We believe that our existing capital resources as of December 31, 2020 will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months following our financial statement issuance date. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. In particular, our operating plan can change, and we may require significant additional capital to fund our operations, including to support the development, commercialization and manufacturing efforts for tenapanor. We may seek to obtain such additional capital through debt financings, credit facilities, additional equity offerings and/or strategic collaborations. We currently have no unutilized credit facility or committed sources of capital, and there can be no assurances that such sources of capital will be available to us when needed or on acceptable terms. There are numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization initiatives, and actual results could vary materially as a result of a number of factors, many of which are outside of our control. Our future capital requirements are difficult to forecast and will depend on many factors, including:
● the FDA’s actions and decisions with respect to the NDA submitted to the FDA on June 30, 2020 to request marketing authorization for tenapanor for the control of serum phosphorus in adult CKD patients on dialysis;
● our ability to successfully commercialize tenapanor in the U.S. for the control of serum phosphorus in CKD patients on dialysis, if approved;
● the sales price and the availability of adequate third-party reimbursement for tenapanor, if approved;
● the manufacturing costs of our product candidates, and the availability of one or more suppliers for our product candidates at reasonable costs, both for clinical and commercial supply;
● the selling and marketing costs associated with tenapanor, including the cost and timing of building our sales and marketing capabilities;
● our ability to maintain our existing collaboration partnerships and to establish additional collaboration partnerships, in-license/out-license, joint ventures or other similar arrangements and the financial terms of such agreements;
● the timing, receipt, and amount of sales of, or royalties on, tenapanor, if any;
● the cash requirements of any future acquisitions or discovery of product candidates;
● the number and scope of preclinical and discovery programs that we decide to pursue or initiate, and any clinical trials we decide to pursue for other product candidates, including RDX013;
● the time and cost necessary to respond to technological and market developments;
● the costs of filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights, including litigation costs and the outcome of such litigation, including costs of defending any claims of infringement brought by others in connection with the development, manufacture or commercialization of tenapanor or any of our product candidates; and
● the payment of interest and principal related to our loan and security agreement entered into with Solar Capital and Western Alliance Bank in May 2018, as amended on October 9, 2020.
CASH FLOW ACTIVITIES
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
2020 compared to 2019
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $81.4 million, as compared to $76.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The most significant factors that contributed to the $5.0 million increase in net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019 was primarily a $6.2 million decrease to changes in operating assets and liabilities, primarily driven by cash received in 2019 and reported as deferred revenue for the KKC Research Agreement that was recognized as revenue in 2020, offset by a $0.6 million increase in non-cash charges and $0.6 million decrease to the net loss.
2019 compared to 2018
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019, was $76.5 million, as compared to $70.3 million of net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2018. The $6.2 million increase in net cash used in operating activities is predominantly attributable toa $1.9 million decrease in payments made to AstraZeneca during 2019 in connection with the AZ Termination Agreement, as compared to payments made in 2018; a $0.4 million increase in cash R&D expenses (excluding working capital-related fluctuations) in 2019, as compared to 2018;
● a $0.4 million decrease in cash G&A expenses (excluding working capital-related fluctuations) in 2019, as compared to 2018;
● a $2.1 million increase in net cash interest payments in 2019, as compared to 2018;
● a $0.9 million decrease in cash paid for income taxes in 2019, as compared to 2018; and
● a $6.5 million net increase in cash used related to fluctuations in components of our non-revenue-related working capital in 2019, as compared to 2018, which was comprised of a $7.8 million decrease, a $1.9 million decrease and a $0.4 million decrease in cash provided by fluctuations in our non-payroll-related accruals and other current liabilities, lease liability and prepaid expenses and other current assets, respectively, partially offset by a $2.2 million increase and a $1.4 million increase of cash provided by fluctuations in our accrued compensation and benefits and accounts payable, respectively.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
2020 compared to 2019
Net cash provided by investing activities decreased by $54.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was attributable to a $48.2 million increase in purchases of available-for-sale investments and a decrease in proceeds from maturities and redemptions of short-term investments of $6.6 million.
2019 compared to 2018
Net cash provided by investing activities increased by $53.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was attributable to a $66.3 million decrease in purchases of short-term available-for-sale investments and a $1.2 million increase in sales and redemptions of investments, partially offset by a decrease in proceeds from maturities and redemptions of short-term investments of $13.1 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
2020 compared to 2019
Net cash provided by financing activities decreased by $132.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was predominantly attributable to $134.9 million in net proceeds received in connection with underwritten public offering initiatives that was received in 2019 but did not recur in 2020. This decrease was partially offset by $2.4 million net additional proceeds received in 2020 as compared to 2019 from sales of our common stock pursuant to our at-the-market sales agreement with Jefferies LLC, employee stock plan purchases and option exercises, and the 2019 sale of common stock in the Private Placement with KKC..
2019 compared to 2018
Net cash provided by financing activities increased by $51.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was predominantly attributable to an $81.2 million increase in net proceeds received in connection with underwritten public offering initiatives and a $20.0 million increase in net proceeds received in connection with the Private Placement, partially offset by a net $49.3 million decrease in proceeds received in connection with a long-term loan borrowing.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K as promulgated by the SEC.
SMALLER REPORTING COMPANY AND NON-ACCELERATED FILER STATUS
On June 28, 2018, the SEC adopted amendments that raise the thresholds in the smaller reporting company, or SRC, definition, whereby we were determined to qualify as an SRC. We elected to reflect that determination and avail ourselves with most of the SRC scaled disclosure accommodations in our filings subsequent to the adoption. On March 12, 2020, the SEC amended its rules to allow SRCs that have less than $100.0 million in annual revenue and a public float of less than $700.0 million to qualify as a non-accelerated filer. As a non-accelerated filer, we are not required to obtain an opinion of our independent auditors with respect to our internal controls over financial reporting for the period ended December 31, 2020.