ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-looking statements: Statements about our future expectations are “forward-looking statements” and are not guarantees of future performance. When used herein, the words “may,” “should,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “appear,” “intend,” “plan,” “expect,” “estimate,” “approximate,” and similar expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. These statements involve risks and uncertainties inherent in our business, including those set forth under the caption “Risk Factors,” in this Report, and are subject to change at any time. Our actual results could differ materially from these forward-looking statements. This Annual Report on Form 10-K does not have any statutory safe harbor for this forward-looking statement. We undertake no obligation to update publicly any forward-looking statements.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K (the “Financial Statements”). The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting policies in the United States (“GAAP”). Except as otherwise disclosed, all dollar figures included therein and in the following management discussion and analysis are quoted in United States dollars.
The following discussion of the Company’s financial condition and the results of operations should be read in conjunction with the Financial Statements and footnotes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Report.
The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 provides a safe harbor for forward-looking statements. In order to comply with the terms of the safe harbor, the Company notes that in addition to the description of historical facts contained herein, this report contains certain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties as detailed herein and from time to time in the Company’s other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission and elsewhere. Such statements are based on management’s current expectations and are subject to a number of factors and uncertainties, which could cause actual results to differ materially from those, described in the forward-looking statements. These factors include, among others: (a) the Company’s fluctuations in sales and operating results; (b) risks associated with international operations; (c) regulatory, competitive and contractual risks; (d) development risks; (e) the ability to achieve strategic initiatives, including but not limited to the ability to achieve sales growth across the business segments through a combination of enhanced sales force, new products, and customer service; and (f) pending litigation.
Operations
On June 9, 2016 a change in control occurred, a sixty percent (60%) ownership interest was obtained by American Rebel, Inc. from our former officer and director and founder. On June 17, 2017, the Company acquired the business of its control stockholder accounted for and presented financially as a reverse merger transaction. Our majority stockholder, American Rebel, Inc. became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company and we distributed shares to the stockholders of American Rebel, Inc. As a result of this reverse merger, the reported operating history of the Company is now the operating history of American Rebel, Inc. Financial statements of both companies are now consolidated and all material intercompany transactions and balances are eliminated.
We are a development stage company and have limited financial resources. We have not established a firm source of equity or debt financing. Our independent registered public accounting firm has included an explanatory paragraph in their report filed on March, 2021 and included with our Form 10-K emphasizing the uncertainty of our ability to remain as a going concern. An investor or financial statement reader should read our Risk Factors in full.
Description of Business
Company Overview
American Rebel is boldly positioning itself as America’s Patriotic Brand. The Company has identified the market opportunity to design, manufacture, and market innovative concealed carry products and safes. American Rebel accesses its market uniquely through its positioning as America’s Patriotic Brand and the appeal of its products as well as through the profile and public persona of its founder and CEO, Andy Ross. Andy hosted his own television show for 12 years, has made multiple appearances over the years at trade shows, and is well-known in the archery world as the founder of Ross Archery, which was the world’s fastest-growing bow company in 2007 and 2008. Andy has also released 3 CDs, done numerous radio and print interviews, and performed many concerts in front of thousands of people. Andy has the ability to present American Rebel to large numbers of potential customers through the appeal of his music and other supporting appearances. For example, his appearance on the History Channel hit show Counting Cars in February 2014 has been viewed by over 2 million people. Bringing innovative products that satisfy an existing demand to the market through exciting means is the American Rebel blueprint for success.
Other
As a corporate policy, we will not incur any cash obligations that we cannot satisfy with known resources, of which there are currently none except as described in “Liquidity” below or elsewhere in this report. We believe that the perception that many people have of a public company makes it more likely that they will accept restricted securities from a public company as consideration for indebtedness to them than they would from a private company. We have not performed any studies of this matter. Our conclusion is based on our own observations. Additionally, the issuance of restricted shares will dilute the percentage of ownership interest of our stockholders.
Results of Operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020
Revenue and cost of goods sold
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we reported Sales of $1,255,703, compared to Sales of $535,109 for the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we reported Cost of Sales of $952,511, compared to Cost of Sales of $379,079 for the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we reported Gross Profit of $303,192, compared to Gross Profit of $156,033 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Sales of our products began during the fourth quarter of 2016.
Expenses
Total operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $3,075,113 compared to $6,156,254 for the year ended December 31, 2019 as further described below.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred consulting and business development expenses of $529,094, compared to consulting and business development expenses of $3,809,291 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in consulting and business development expenses relates primarily to not having the expansion of activities in preparation of a 2019 product launch.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred product development expenses of $320,472, compared to product development expenses of $309,061 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in product development expenses is due to the fact that 2019 was a year of releasing product to the marketplace.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred marketing and brand development expenses of $390,294, compared to marketing and brand development expenses of $632,522 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in marketing and brand development expenses relates primarily to the benefit of the prior year’s investment in the marketing of the American Rebel brand.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred general and administrative expenses of $1,773,529, compared to general and administrative expenses of $1,343,352 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase relates primarily to an increase in professional, consulting and operating fees necessary to manage the growing business.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred depreciation expense of $61,724, compared to depreciation expense of $62,028 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other income and expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred interest expense of $2,292,957, compared to interest expense of $1,601,851 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net Loss
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 201920 amounted to $5,981,082, resulting in a loss per share of $0.10, compared to $7,602,072 for the year ended December 31, 2019, resulting in a loss per share of $0.25. The decrease in the net loss from the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily due to the investment in compensation that occurred in September 2019.
Liquidity
We are a development stage company and realized minimal but growing revenue from our planned operations. We have a working capital deficit of $888,280 at December 31, 2018 and $2,812,957 at December 31, 2019, and have incurred a deficit of $20,870,713 from inception to December 31, 2020. We have funded operations primarily through the issuance of capital stock, convertible debt and other securities.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we raised net cash of $- by issuance of common shares, as compared to $3,500 for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we raised net cash of $2,869,171 through the issuance of promissory notes secured by specific inventory, as compared to $3,105,441 for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repaid $0 on loans received from our CEO, as compared to $12,092 that we repaid on loans from our CEO during the year ended December 31, 2019.
As we proceed with the launch of our American Rebel concealed carry product and safe lines we have devoted and expect to continue to devote significant resources in the areas of capital expenditures and marketing, sales, and operational expenditures.
We expect to require additional funds to further develop our business plan, including the anticipated launch of additional products in addition to the launch of our concealed carry product line. Since it is impossible to predict with certainty the timing and amount of funds required to establish profitability, we anticipate that we will need to raise additional funds through equity or debt offerings or otherwise in order to meet our expected future liquidity requirements. Any such financing that we undertake will likely be dilutive to existing stockholders.
In addition, we expect to also need additional funds to respond to business opportunities and challenges, including our ongoing operating expenses, protecting our intellectual property, developing or acquiring new lines of business and enhancing our operating infrastructure. While we may need to seek additional funding for such purposes, we may not be able to obtain financing on acceptable terms, or at all. In addition, the terms of our financings may be dilutive to, or otherwise adversely affect, holders of our common stock. We may also seek additional funds through arrangements with collaborators or other third parties. We may not be able to negotiate any such arrangements on acceptable terms, if at all. If we are unable to obtain additional funding on a timely basis, we may be required to curtail or terminate some or all of our product lines.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related footnotes requires us to make judgments, estimates, and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities.
An accounting policy is considered to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, and if different estimates that reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting estimates that are reasonably likely to occur periodically, could materially impact the financial statements.
Financial Reporting Release No. 60 requires all companies to include a discussion of critical accounting policies or methods used in the preparation of financial statements. There are no critical policies or decisions that rely on judgments that are based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made. Note 1 to the financial statements, included elsewhere in this report, includes a summary of the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Emerging Growth Company - We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the recently enacted Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”). As a result, we are permitted to, and intend to, rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements. For so long as we are an emerging growth company, among other things, we will not be required to:
·Have an auditor report on our internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
·Submit certain executive compensation matters to shareholder advisory votes, such as “say-on-pay” and “say-on-frequency”
·Obtain shareholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved; and
·Disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executives compensation to median employee compensation.
In addition, Section 107 of the JOBS Act also provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period. Our financial statements may therefore not be comparable to those of companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards.
We will remain an “emerging growth company” until the earliest of (i) the last day of the first fiscal year in which our total annual gross revenues exceed $1 billion; (ii) the fifth anniversary of our first sale of common equity pursuant to an effective registration statement; (iii) the date that we become a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which would occur if the market value of our ordinary shares that are held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed third fiscal quarter; or (iv) the date on which we have issued more than $1 billion in non-convertible debt during the preceding three-year period.
Recent Pronouncements
The Company evaluated recent accounting pronouncements through December 31, 2020 and believes that none have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements except for the following.
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842). The objective of ASU 2016-02 is to recognize lease assets and lease liabilities by lessees for those leases classified as operating leases under previous U.S. GAAP. ASU 2016-02 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption of ASU 2016-02 is permitted. The Company is evaluating the effects adoption of this guidance will have on its consolidated financial statements.
In July 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-11, Earnings Per Share (Topic 260)-Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (Topic 480); Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815): (Part I) Accounting for Certain Financial Instruments with Down Round Features, (Part II) Replacement of the Indefinite Deferral for Mandatorily Redeemable Financial Instruments of Certain Nonpublic Entities and Certain Mandatorily Redeemable Noncontrolling Interests with a Scope Exception. The amendments in Part I of the ASU change the classification analysis of certain equity-linked financial instruments (or embedded features) with down round features. When determining whether certain financial instruments should be classified as liabilities or equity instruments a down round feature no longer precludes equity classification when assessing whether the instrument is indexed to an entity’s own stock. The amendments in Part II recharacterize the indefinite deferral of certain provisions of Topic 480 with a scope exception and do not have an accounting effect. The ASU is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2018, and interim periods within those annual periods. The Company is evaluating the effects adoption of this guidance will have on its consolidated financial statements.
In August 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-12, Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815)-Targeted Improvements to Accounting for Hedging Activities. The new guidance is intended to more closely align hedge accounting with entities’ hedging strategies, simplify the application of hedge accounting, and increase the transparency of hedging programs. The ASU is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2018, and interim periods within those annual periods. The Company is evaluating the effects adoption of this guidance will have on its consolidated financial statements.