Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Disclosure
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes included under Item 8 of this annual report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements, which involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including but not limited to, those discussed elsewhere in this annual report. Please see the discussion of forward-looking statements at the beginning of this annual report under "Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements".
COVID-19 Pandemic
On March 11, 2020, in light of the rapid spread of the novel Coronavirus (“COVID-19” or "Coronavirus"), the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak to be a global pandemic and the United States declared a National Public Health Emergency. The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly disrupted consumer demand, as well as the Company’s restaurant operations. Following the pandemic declaration in March 2020, federal, state and local governments began to respond to the public health crisis by requiring social distancing, "stay at home" directives, and mandatory closure of all of our locations.
We are subject to continued risks and uncertainties as a result of the outbreak of, and local, state and federal governmental responses to, the COVID-19 pandemic. We experienced significant disruptions to our business as suggested and mandated social distancing and shelter-in-place orders led to the temporary closure of all of our restaurants. In the third quarter of fiscal 2020, certain jurisdictions began allowing the reopening of restaurant dining rooms, and we began to reopen dining rooms. While restrictions on the type of permitted operating model and occupancy capacity may continue to change, as of October 2, 2021, all of our restaurants were operating with no indoor dining restrictions. We cannot predict how long the COVID-19 pandemic will last, whether vaccines will be effective at eliminating or slowing the spread of the virus or variants, whether it will reoccur or whether variants will spike, what additional restrictions may be enacted, to what extent we can maintain sales volumes during or following any resumption of mandated social distancing protocols or vaccination or mask mandates and what long-lasting effects the COVID-19 pandemic may have on the restaurant industry as a whole. The ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including, but not limited to, labor-related impacts, supply chain disruption and consumer behavior, will determine the continued significance of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic to our operating results and financial position.
Overview
As of October 2, 2021, the Company owned and operated 17 restaurants and bars, 17 fast food concepts and catering operations, exclusively in the United States, that have similar economic characteristics, nature of products and service, class of customer and distribution methods. The Company believes it meets the criteria for aggregating its operating segments into a single reporting segment in accordance with applicable accounting guidance. The consolidated statements of operations for the year ended October 2, 2021 includes revenues and income of approximately $5,929,000 and $981,000, respectively, related to Blue Moon Fish Company, which was acquired on December 1, 2020. As of September 1, 2021, the Company advised the landlord of Clyde Frazier's Wine and Dine that we would be closing the property permanently and terminating the lease. In connection with this notification, the Company recorded a gain of $810,000 during the year ended October 2, 2021 consisting of: (i) rent and other costs incurred in accordance with the termination provisions of the lease in the amount of $318,000, (ii) impairment of long-lived assets in the amount of $69,000 and (iii) the write-off of our security deposit in the amount of $121,000 offset by the write-off of ROU assets and related lease liabilities in the net amount of $1,318,000.
Accounting Period
Our fiscal year ends on the Saturday nearest September 30. We report fiscal years under a 52/53-week format. This reporting method is used by many companies in the hospitality industry and is meant to improve year-to-year comparisons of operating results. Under this method, certain years will contain 53 weeks. The fiscal years ended October 2, 2021 and October 3, 2020 included 52 and 53 weeks, respectively.
Seasonality
The Company has substantial fixed costs that do not decline proportionally with sales. Although our business is highly seasonal, our broader geographical reach as a result of recent acquisitions mitigates some of the risk. For instance, the second quarter of our fiscal year, consisting of the non-holiday portion of the cold weather season in New York and Washington (January, February and March), is the poorest performing quarter; however, in recent years this has been partially offset by our locations in Florida as they experience increased results in the winter months. We generally achieve our best results during the warm weather, attributable to our extensive outdoor dining availability, particularly at Bryant Park in New York and Sequoia in Washington, D.C. (our largest restaurants) and our outdoor cafes. However, even during summer months these facilities can be adversely affected by unusually cool or rainy weather conditions. Our facilities in Las Vegas are indoor and generally operate on a more consistent basis throughout the year.
Results of Operations
The Company’s operating income for the year ended October 2, 2021 was $6,207,000 as compared to an operating loss of $(7,796,000) for the year ended October 3, 2020. This increase resulted primarily from the strong performance of our Florida, Alabama and Las Vegas operations in the current year combined with the government mandated closure of our restaurants in March 2020 in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, with limited capacity when they reopened, as well as a $364,000 loss on the termination of a lease. In addition to the decrease in restaurant revenue from the mandatory closures and operating at varying levels of limited capacity in the year ended October 3, 2020, the Company estimates that it incurred approximately $3,150,000 of costs directly related to COVID-19 consisting primarily of payments to employees for paid-time off during restaurant closures, inventory waste, and rent and rent related costs for closed restaurants from the day that they closed.
The following table summarizes the significant components of the Company’s operating results for the years ended October 2, 2021 and October 3, 2020, respectively:
Revenues
During the year ended October 2, 2021, revenues increased 23.8% as compared to revenues in the year ended October 3, 2020. This increase resulted primarily from our properties operating with fewer or no capacity restrictions in the current year in comparison to prior year as a result of government mandates in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Food and Beverage Same-Store Sales
On a Company-wide basis, same-store food and beverage sales increased 25.4% for the year ended October 2, 2021 as compared to the year ended October 3, 2020 as follows:
The increase in company-wide same-store sales was driven primarily by increased customer traffic as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the prior year combined with targeted increases in menu pricing in the current year. Same-store sales in New York decreased 5.8% due to lower traffic in midtown Manhattan where our properties are located as a result of companies allowing employees to continue to work from home. Same-store sales in Connecticut decreased 55.3% due to declining traffic at the Foxwoods Resort and Casino where our property is located.
Other food and beverage sales consist of sales related to new restaurants opened or acquired during the applicable period (Blue Moon Fish Company - $5,929,000 in 2021), sales related to properties that were closed (Clyde Frazier's Wine and Dine - $866,000 in 2021 and $2,038,000 in 2020, Gallagher's Steakhouse and Gallagher's Burger Bar - $430,000 in 2021 and $2,205,000 in 2020 and Thunder Grill - $1,034,000 in 2020) and other adjustments and fees.
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, our restaurants generally did not achieve substantial increases in revenue from year to year, which we consider to be typical of the restaurant industry. To achieve significant increases in revenue or to replace revenue of restaurants that lose customer favor or which close because of lease expirations or other reasons, we would have to open additional restaurant facilities or expand existing restaurants. There can be no assurance that a restaurant will be successful after it is opened, particularly since in many instances we do not operate our new restaurants under a trade name currently used by us, thereby requiring new restaurants to establish their own identity.
Other Revenues
Included in Other Revenues are purchase service fees which represent commissions earned by a subsidiary of the Company for providing purchasing services to other restaurant groups, as well as merchandise sales, license fees, property management fees and other rentals. The increase in Other Revenues for the year ended October 2, 2021 as compared to the year ended October 3, 2020 is primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the prior year.
Costs and Expenses
Costs and expenses for the years ended October 2, 2021 and October 3, 2020 were as follows (in thousands):
Food and beverage costs as a percentage of total revenues for the year ended October 2, 2021 increased as compared to last year primarily as a result of increases in crab, seafood, chicken and beef prices.
Payroll expenses as a percentage of total revenues for the year ended October 2, 2021 decreased as compared to last year primarily as a result of retaining key restaurant management personnel with lower corresponding revenues in the prior period as a result of the government mandated closures and/or capacity restrictions at all of our restaurants in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic partially offset by higher group medical costs, wage rates and overtime in fiscal 2021.
Occupancy expenses as a percentage of total revenues for the year ended October 2, 2021 decreased as compared to last year primarily as a result of the finalization of several abatements with landlords resulting in a reduction of rent expense in the amount of $800,000 in the current year.
Other operating costs and expenses as a percentage of total revenues for the year ended October 2, 2021 decreased as compared to last year as a result of the fixed nature of some of these expenses and lower sales in the prior period as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, decreased maintenance at properties where we are experiencing lower traffic and increased professional fees at the restaurant-level in the prior periods.
General and administrative expenses (which relate solely to the corporate office in New York City) as a percentage of total revenues for the year ended October 2, 2021 decreased as compared to last year primarily as a result of lower legal fees in the current period partially offset by headcount and salary reductions of corporate personnel in the prior period as a result of the impacts on our business from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Depreciation and amortization expense for the year ended October 2, 2021 decreased as compared to last year primarily as a result of lower charges in the current period as a result of asset impairments in the first quarter of 2020.
(Gain) Loss on Lease Termination
On September 1, 2021, the Company advised the landlord of Clyde Frazier's Wine and Dine that we would be closing the property permanently and terminating the lease. In connection with this notification, the Company recorded a gain of $810,000 during the year ended October 2, 2021 consisting of: (i) rent and other costs incurred in accordance with the termination provisions of the lease in the amount of $318,000, (ii) impairment of long-lived assets in the amount of $69,000 and (iii) the write-off of our security deposit in the amount of $121,000 offset by the write-off of ROU assets and related lease liabilities in the net amount of $1,318,000.
On April 2, 2020, the Company advised the landlord of a catering space in New York, NY that we would be terminating the lease. In connection with this notification, the Company recorded a loss of $364,000 during the 13 weeks ended March 28, 2020, consisting of (i) rent accrued in accordance with the termination provisions of the lease, (ii) the write-off of the unamortized balance of purchased leasehold rights, (iii) the write-off of our security deposit, (iv) the write-off of ROU assets and related lease liabilities, and (v) the write-off of net book value of fixed assets.
Impairment loss from write-down of long-lived assets
Management continually evaluates unfavorable cash flows, if any, related to underperforming restaurants. Periodically it is concluded that certain properties have become impaired based on their existing and anticipated future economic outlook in their respective markets. In such instances, we may impair assets to reduce their carrying values to fair values. Estimated fair values of impaired properties are based on comparable valuations, cash flows and/or management judgment. Included in the year ended October 2, 2021 is an impairment charge of $69,000 related to Clyde Frazier's Wine and Dine.
Income Taxes
Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and liabilities for uncertain tax positions reflect management’s best estimate of current and future taxes to be paid. We are subject to income tax in numerous state taxing jurisdictions. Significant judgment and estimates are required in the determination of consolidated income tax expense. The provision for income taxes reflects federal income taxes calculated on a consolidated basis and state and local income taxes which are calculated on a separate entity basis.
For state and local income tax purposes, certain losses incurred by a subsidiary may only be used to offset that subsidiary’s income, with the exception of the restaurants operating in the District of Columbia. Accordingly, our overall effective tax rate has varied depending on the level of income and losses incurred at individual subsidiaries.
Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the consolidated financial statements, which will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets in the jurisdiction from which they arise, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. The assumptions about future taxable income require the use of significant judgment and are consistent with the plans and estimates we are using to manage the underlying businesses.
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was enacted to provide economic relief to those impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition to the Paycheck Protection Program loans, the CARES Act made various tax law changes including among other things (i) modifications to the federal net operating loss rules including permitting federal net operating losses incurred in 2018, 2019, and 2020 tax years to be carried back to the five preceding taxable years in order to generate a refund of previously paid income taxes, (ii) enhanced recoverability of AMT tax credit carryforwards, (iii) increased the limitation under Internal Revenue Code ("IRC") Section 163(j) for 2019 and 2020 to permit additional expensing of interest, and (iv) enacted a technical correction so that qualified improvement property can be immediately expensed under IRC Section 168(k).
On December 27, 2020, the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 (“CAA”) was enacted and provided clarification on the tax deductibility of expenses funded with PPP loans as fully deductible for tax purposes. During the year ended October 2, 2021, the Company recorded income for financial reporting purposes related to the forgiveness of $10,400,000 (including $84,000 of accrued interest) of its PPP loans. The forgiveness of these amounts is not taxable.
As a result of the CARES Act and the CAA, the Company carried back taxable losses from fiscal year 2020 and is expected to carryback taxable losses from fiscal 2021 to generate a refund of previously paid income taxes. As a result of these carrybacks, the Company recorded income tax benefits as the taxable losses from fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2021 are being carried back to tax years in which the Company was subject to a higher federal corporate income tax rate. Included in Prepaid and Refundable Income Taxes at October 2, 2021 is $3,766,000 related to these carryback claims.
The Company’s overall effective tax rate in the future will be affected by factors such as the utilization of state and local net operating loss carryforwards, the generation of FICA tax credits and the mix of earnings by state taxing jurisdictions as Nevada does not impose a state income tax, as compared to the other major state and local jurisdictions in which the Company has operations. Our overall effective tax rate in the future will be affected by factors such as income earned by our VIEs, generation of FICA TIP credits and the mix of geographical income for state tax purposes as Nevada does not impose an income tax.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary source of capital has been cash provided by operations and, in recent years, bank and other borrowings to finance specific transactions, acquisitions and large remodeling projects. We utilize cash generated from operations to fund the cost of developing and opening new restaurants and smaller remodeling projects of existing restaurants we own. Consistent with many other restaurant operators, we typically use operating lease arrangements for our restaurants. In recent years we have been able to acquire the underlying real estate at several locations along with the restaurant operation. We believe that our operating lease
arrangements provide appropriate leverage of our capital structure in a financially efficient manner. As of October 2, 2021, we had a cash and cash equivalents balance of $19,171,000.
We are subject to continued risks and uncertainties as a result of the outbreak of, and local, state and federal governmental responses to, the COVID-19 pandemic which was declared a National Public Health Emergency in March 2020. We experienced significant disruptions to our business as suggested and mandated social distancing and shelter-in-place orders led to the temporary closure of all of our restaurants. In the third quarter of fiscal 2020, certain jurisdictions began allowing the reopening of restaurant dining rooms, and we began to reopen dining rooms. While restrictions on the type of permitted operating model and occupancy capacity may continue to change, as of October 2, 2021, all of our restaurants were operating with no indoor dining restrictions. We cannot predict how long the COVID-19 pandemic will last, whether vaccines will be effective at eliminating or slowing the spread of the virus or variants, whether it will reoccur or whether variants will spike, what additional restrictions may be enacted, to what extent we can maintain sales volumes during or following any resumption of mandated social distancing protocols or vaccination or mask mandates and what long-lasting effects the COVID-19 pandemic may have on the restaurant industry as a whole. The ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including, but not limited to, labor-related impacts, supply chain disruption and consumer behavior, will determine the continued significance of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic to our operating results and financial position.
The Company had a working capital of $2,572,000 at October 2, 2021 as compared with a deficiency of $(3,234,000) at October 3, 2020. This increase resulted primarily from cash provided by operations offset by a change in our debt maturities in connection with conversion of our revolving credit borrowings to term loans. We believe that our existing cash balances and current banking facilities will be sufficient to meet our liquidity and capital spending requirements and finance our operating activities for at least the next 12 months.
Cash Flows for the Years Ended October 2, 2021 and October 3, 2020
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended October 2, 2021 increased to $9,294,000 as compared to $(4,528,000) used in operations for the year ended October 3, 2020. This increase was attributable to an increase in operating income as a result of the continued recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic and changes in net working capital primarily related to accounts receivable, inventory, prepaid, refundable and accrued income taxes and accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended October 2, 2021 and October 3, 2020 was $(3,450,000) and $(2,457,000), respectively, and resulted primarily from purchases of fixed assets at existing restaurants and, in the current period, the cash portion of the purchase price of the Blue Moon Fish Company acquisition.
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended October 2, 2021 of $(3,559,000) resulted primarily from principal payments on notes payable and the payment of distributions to non-controlling interests partially offset by proceeds from stock option exercises. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended October 3, 2020 of $16,694,000 resulted primarily from borrowings under our credit facility and proceeds from PPP loans partially offset by principal payments on notes payable and the payment of dividends.
On November 26, 2019, the Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.25 per share on the Company’s common stock which was paid on January 7, 2020, to shareholders of record at the close of business on December 16, 2019.
On March 13, 2020, the Company announced that, in light of the unprecedented circumstances and rapidly changing situation with respect to COVID-19, as part of an overall plan to preserve cash flow, the Board of Directors determined that it was appropriate for the Company to defer payment of the dividend that was declared on March 2, 2020. Payment of such dividend, which was scheduled for April 6, 2020 to shareholders of record on March 16, 2020, was canceled on July 1, 2020.
The Company’s leases at the New York-New York Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas, Nevada are scheduled to expire in January 2023. The Company is currently negotiating extensions with the landlord. The failure to reach new agreements will have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and cash flows.
The payment of future dividends is at the discretion of the Company’s Board of Directors and is based on future earnings, cash flow, financial condition, capital requirements and other relevant factors. The Company does not expect to pay quarterly cash dividends for the foreseeable future as a result of the disruption to its operations from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Restaurant Expansion and Other Developments
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company was in the process of developing three restaurants at a large outdoor mall in Easton, Ohio in partnership with the landlord. In connection therewith, the Company had capitalized costs of approximately $400,000, of which $200,000 was reimbursed by the landlord in October 2020. The Company does not expect this project to continue. Accordingly, the balance of the unreimbursed costs in the amount of $200,000 were written off and are included in general and administrative expenses for the year ended October 3, 2020.
On December 1, 2020, the Company, through a newly formed, wholly-owned subsidiary, acquired the assets of Bear Ice, Inc. and File Gumbo Inc., which collectively operated a restaurant and bar named Blue Moon Fish Company located in Lauderdale-by-the-Sea, FL. The total purchase price of $2,820,000 was paid with cash in the amount of $1,820,000 and a four-year note held by the sellers in the amount of $1,000,000 payable monthly with 5% interest. Concurrent with the acquisition, the Company assumed the related lease which expires in 2026 and has four five-year extension options. Rent payments under the lease are approximately $360,000 per year and increase by approximately 15% as each option is exercised.
On January 26, 2021, the Company exercised its right-of-first-refusal to acquire the land, building and parking lot associated with JB’s on the Beach and immediately contributed such rights and interest to an unrelated entity ("Newco") that purchased the properties on March 22, 2021. In exchange, the Company received a 5% interest in Newco, which plans future development of the sites. In addition, all rights and privileges under the current lease were assigned to Newco, as landlord and the lease terms remain unchanged.
The opening of a new restaurant is invariably accompanied by substantial pre-opening expenses and early operating losses associated with the training of personnel, excess kitchen costs, costs of supervision and other expenses during the pre-opening period and during a post-opening “shake out” period until operations can be considered to be functioning normally. The amount of such pre-opening expenses and early operating losses can generally be expected to depend upon the size and complexity of the facility being opened.
Our restaurants generally do not achieve substantial increases in revenue from year to year, which we consider to be typical of the restaurant industry. To achieve significant increases in revenue or to replace revenue of restaurants that lose customer favor or which close because of lease expirations or other reasons, we would have to open additional restaurant facilities or expand existing restaurants. There can be no assurance that a restaurant will be successful after it is opened, particularly since in many instances we do not operate our new restaurants under a trade name currently used by us, thereby requiring new restaurants to establish their own identity.
We may take advantage of other opportunities we consider to be favorable, when they occur, depending upon the availability of financing and other factors.
Recent Restaurant Dispositions
On April 2, 2020, the Company advised the landlord of a catering space in New York, NY that we would be terminating the lease. In connection with this notification, the Company recorded a loss of $364,000 at March 28, 2020, consisting of rent accrued in accordance with the termination provisions of the lease, the write-off of the unamortized balance of purchased leasehold rights, our security deposit and the net book value of fixed assets.
On November 13, 2020, the Company was advised by the landlord that it would have to vacate Gallagher’s Steakhouse and Gallagher’s Burger Bar at the Resorts Casino Hotel located in Atlantic City, NJ which were on a month-to-month, no rent lease. The closure of these properties occurred on January 2, 2021 and did not result in a material charge to the Company’s operations.
As of January 2, 2021, the Company determined that it would not reopen Thunder Grill in Washington, D.C. which had been closed since March 20, 2020. This closure did not result in a material charge to the Company’s operations.
On September 1, 2021, the Company advised the landlord of Clyde Frazier's Wine and Dine that we would be closing the property permanently and terminating the lease. In connection with this notification, the Company recorded a gain of $810,000 during the year ended October 2, 2021 consisting of: (i) rent and other costs incurred in accordance with the termination provisions of the lease in the amount of $318,000, (ii) impairment of long-lived assets in the amount of $69,000 and (iii) the write-off of our security deposit in the amount of $121,000 offset by the write-off of ROU assets and related lease liabilities in the net amount of $1,318,000.
Investment in and Receivable from New Meadowlands Racetrack
On March 12, 2013, the Company made a $4,200,000 investment in the New Meadowlands Racetrack LLC (“NMR”) through its purchase of a membership interest in Meadowlands Newmark, LLC, an existing member of NMR. On November 19, 2013, the Company invested an additional $464,000 in NMR through a purchase of an additional membership interest in Meadowlands Newmark, LLC resulting in a total ownership of 11.6% of Meadowlands Newmark, LLC, and an effective ownership interest in NMR of 7.4%, subject to dilution. In 2015, the Company invested an additional $222,000 in NMR with no change in ownership. In February 2017 the Company funded its proportionate share ($222,000) of a $3,000,000 capital call bringing its total investment to $5,108,000 with no change in ownership.
In addition to the Company’s ownership interest in NMR, if casino gaming is approved at the Meadowlands and NMR is granted the right to conduct said gaming, the Company shall be granted the exclusive right to operate the food and beverage concessions in the gaming facility with the exception of one restaurant.
In conjunction with this investment, the Company, through a 97% owned subsidiary, Ark Meadowlands LLC (“AM VIE”), also entered into a long-term agreement with NMR for the exclusive right to operate food and beverage concessions serving the new raceway facilities (the “Racing F&B Concessions”) located in the new raceway grandstand constructed at the Meadowlands Racetrack in northern New Jersey. Under the agreement, NMR is responsible to pay for the costs and expenses incurred in the operation of the Racing F&B Concessions, and all revenues and profits thereof inure to the benefit of NMR. AM VIE receives an annual fee equal to 5% of the net profits received by NMR from the Racing F&B Concessions during each calendar year.
On April 25, 2014, the Company loaned $1,500,000 to Meadowlands Newmark, LLC. The note bears interest at 3%, compounded monthly and added to the principal, and is due in its entirety on January 31, 2024. The note may be prepaid, in whole or in part, at any time without penalty or premium. On July 13, 2016, the Company made an additional loan to Meadowlands Newmark, LLC in the amount of $200,000. Such amount is subject to the same terms and conditions as the original loan as discussed above. The principal and accrued interest related to this note, after a $500,000 payment made in July 2021, in the amounts of $1,317,000 and $1,766,000, are included in Investment In and Receivable From New Meadowlands Racetrack in the consolidated balance sheets at October 2, 2021 and October 3, 2020, respectively.
On June 7, 2018, the New Jersey State Legislature voted to legalize sports betting at casinos and racetracks in the state. Pursuant to this legislation, NMR operates a sports book in partnership with FanDuel, a leading provider of daily fantasy sports.
Notes Payable - Bank
On June 1, 2018, the Company refinanced (the "Refinancing") its then existing indebtedness with its current lender, Bank Hapoalim B.M. (“BHBM”), by entering into an amended and restated credit agreement (the “Revolving Facility”), which was to mature on May 19, 2022 (as extended). The Revolving Facility provided for total availability of the lesser of (i) $10,000,000 and (ii) $35,000,000 less the then aggregate amount of all indebtedness and obligations to BHBM. On July 26, 2021, all outstanding Revolver Borrowings, in the amount of $9,666,000, were converted to a promissory note with quarterly principal payments of $500,000 commencing on September 1, 2021, with a balloon payment of $2,166,000 on June 1, 2025. Such note bears interest at LIBOR plus 3.5% per annum. We expect that the LIBOR rate will be discontinued at some point during 2022 and to work with BHBM to identify a suitable replacement rate and amend our debt agreements to reflect this new reference rate accordingly. We do not expect the discontinuation of LIBOR as a reference rate in our debt agreements to have a material adverse effect on our financial position or materially affect our interest expense.
Borrowings under the Revolving Facility, which include the promissory notes as discussed in Note 10 of the consolidated financial statements in the aggregate amount of $27,047,000, are secured by all tangible and intangible personal property (including accounts receivable, inventory, equipment, general intangibles, documents, chattel paper, instruments, letter-of-credit rights, investment property, intellectual property and deposit accounts) and fixtures of the Company. The loan agreements provide, among other things, that the Company meet minimum quarterly tangible net worth amounts, maintain a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio and meet minimum annual net income amounts. The loan agreements also contain customary representations, warranties and affirmative covenants as well as customary negative covenants, subject to negotiated exceptions on liens, relating to other indebtedness, capital expenditures, liens, affiliate transactions, disposal of assets and certain changes in ownership.
On June 12, 2020 and again on February 15, 2021, as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, BHBM agreed to modified financial covenants through fiscal Q2 2022. The Company was in compliance with all of its financial covenants under the Revolving Facility as of October 2, 2021.
Paycheck Protection Program Loans
During the year ended October 3, 2020, subsidiaries (the “Borrowers”) of the Company received loan proceeds from several banks (the “Lenders”) in the aggregate amount of $14,995,000 (the “PPP Loans”) under the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) of the CARES Act, which was enacted March 27, 2020. In addition, during the 13 weeks ended April 3, 2021, one of our consolidated VIEs received a second draw PPP Loan in the amount of $111,000. The PPP Loans are evidenced by individual promissory notes of each of the Borrowers (together, the “Notes”) in favor of the Lender, which Notes bear interest at the rate of 1.00% per annum. Funds from the PPP Loans may be used only for payroll and related costs, costs used to continue group health care benefits, mortgage payments, rent, utilities, and interest on other debt obligations that were incurred by a Borrower prior to February 15, 2020 (the “Qualifying Expenses”). Under the terms of the PPP Loans, some or all of the amounts thereunder, including accrued interest, may be forgiven if they are used for Qualifying Expenses as described in and in compliance with the CARES Act. Each Note may be prepaid by the respective Borrower at any time prior to maturity with no prepayment penalties. No payments of principal or interest are due under the Notes until the date on which the amount of loan forgiveness (if any) under the CARES Act for each respective Note is remitted to the Lender and a forgiveness decision is received by the Borrower. Forgiveness applications can be submitted up to 10 months after the end of the related notes covered period (which is defined as 24 weeks after the date of the loan) (the “Deferral Period”) and the ultimate forgiveness decisions can be made by the Lenders up to 60 days after submitting the applications and possibly longer if forgiveness is fully or partially denied and the Borrower appeals the decision. While the Company believes that it and each Borrower used the PPP Loan proceeds exclusively for Qualifying Expenses, it is unclear and uncertain whether the conditions for forgiveness of the PPP Loans outstanding at October 2, 2021 will be met under the current guidelines of the CARES Act. Therefore, we cannot make any assurances that the Company, or any of the Borrowers, will be eligible for forgiveness of the remaining PPP Loans, in whole or in part. Accordingly, based on the above, we have classified $2,032,000 of the PPP Loans as short-term in the consolidated balance sheet as of October 2, 2021.
During the year ended October 2, 2021, $10,400,000 (including $84,000 of accrued interest) of PPP Loans were forgiven. To the extent, if any, that any of the remaining PPP Loans are not forgiven, beginning one month following expiration of the Deferral Period, and continuing monthly for 10 months (the “Maturity Date”), each respective Borrower is obligated to make monthly payments of principal and interest to the Lender with respect to any unforgiven portion of the Notes, in such equal amounts required to fully amortize the principal amount outstanding on such Notes as of the last day of the applicable Deferral Period by the applicable Maturity Date.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements. While all of these significant accounting policies impact our financial condition and results of operations, we view certain of these policies as critical. Policies determined to be critical are those policies that have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements and require management to use a greater degree of judgment and estimates. Actual results may differ from those estimates.
We believe that given current facts and circumstances, it is unlikely that applying any other reasonable judgments or estimate methodologies would cause a material effect on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows for the periods presented in this report.
Below are listed certain policies that management believes are critical:
Revenue Recognition
In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, and issued subsequent amendments to the initial guidance to provide additional clarification on specific topics (“ASC 606”). This ASU provides a comprehensive new revenue recognition model that requires a company to recognize revenue to depict the transfer of goods or services to a customer at an amount that reflects the consideration it expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. We adopted ASC 606 using the modified retrospective method on September 30, 2018 and, based on our evaluation of our revenue streams, determined that there was not a material impact as of the date of adoption between the new revenue standard and how we previously recognized revenue, and therefore the adoption did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
We recognize revenues when it satisfies a performance obligation by transferring control over a product or service to a restaurant guest or other customer. Revenues from restaurant operations are presented net of discounts, coupons, employee meals and complimentary meals and recognized when food, beverage and retail products are sold. Sales tax collected from customers is excluded from sales and the obligation is included in sales tax payable until the taxes are remitted to the appropriate taxing authorities. Catering service revenue is generated through contracts with customers whereby the customer agrees to pay a contract
rate for the service. Revenues from catered events are recognized in income upon satisfaction of the performance obligation (the date the event is held) and all customer payments, including nonrefundable upfront deposits, are deferred as a liability until such time.
Revenues from gift cards are deferred and recognized upon redemption. Deferrals are not reduced for potential non-use as we generally have a legal obligation to remit the value of unredeemed gift cards to the relevant jurisdictions in which they are sold.
Other revenues include purchase service fees which represent commissions earned by a subsidiary of the Company for providing purchasing services to other restaurant groups, as well as license fees, property management fees and other rentals.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. The accounting estimates that require management’s most difficult and subjective judgments include allowances for potential bad debts on receivables, the useful lives and recoverability of its assets, such as property and intangibles, fair values of financial instruments and share-based compensation, the realizable value of its tax assets and determining when investment impairments are other-than-temporary. Because of the uncertainty in such estimates, actual results may differ from these estimates.
Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets, such as property, plant and equipment, and purchased intangibles subject to amortization, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. In the evaluation of the fair value and future benefits of long-lived assets, management continually evaluates unfavorable cash flows, if any, related to underperforming restaurants. Periodically it is concluded that certain properties have become impaired based on their existing and anticipated future economic outlook in their respective markets. In such instances, we may impair assets to reduce their carrying values to fair values. Estimated fair values of impaired properties are based on comparable valuations, cash flows and/or management judgment. Management continually evaluates unfavorable cash flows, if any, related to underperforming restaurants. Periodically it is concluded that certain properties have become impaired based on their existing and anticipated future economic outlook in their respective markets. In such instances, we may impair assets to reduce their carrying values to fair values. Estimated fair values of impaired properties are based on comparable valuations, cash flows and/or management's judgment. Included in the year ended October 2, 2021 is an impairment charge of $69,000 related to Clyde Frazier's Wine and Dine.
Recoverability of Investment in New Meadowlands Racetrack (“NMR”)
The carrying value of our investment in Meadowlands Newmark LLC, which has a 63.7% ownership in NMR, is determined using the cost method. In accordance with the cost method, our initial investment is recorded at cost and we record dividend income when applicable, if dividends are declared. We review our investment in NMR each reporting period to determine whether a significant event or change in circumstances has occurred that may have an adverse effect on its fair value.
As a result, we performed an assessment of the recoverability of our indirect investment in NMR as of October 2, 2021 which involved critical accounting estimates. These estimates require significant management judgment, include inherent uncertainties and are often interdependent; therefore, they do not change in isolation. Factors that management estimated include, among others, the probability of gambling being approved in northern New Jersey which is the most heavily weighted assumption and NMR obtaining a license to operate a casino, revenue levels, cost of capital, marketing spending, tax rates and capital spending.
In performing this assessment, we estimate the fair value of our investment in NMR using our best estimate of these assumptions which we believe would be consistent with what a hypothetical marketplace participant would use. The variability of these factors depends on a number of conditions, including uncertainty about future events and our inability as a minority shareholder to control certain outcomes and thus our accounting estimates may change from period to period. If other assumptions and estimates had been used when these tests were performed, impairment charges could have resulted.
As mentioned above, these factors do not change in isolation and, therefore, we do not believe it is practicable or meaningful to present the impact of changing a single factor. Furthermore, if management uses different assumptions or if different conditions occur in future periods, future impairment charges could result.
Leases
We determine if an arrangement contains a lease at inception. An arrangement contains a lease if it implicitly or explicitly identifies an asset to be used and conveys the right to control the use of the identified asset in exchange for consideration. As a lessee, we include operating leases in Operating lease right-of-use assets and Operating lease liabilities in our consolidated balance sheet. Right-of-use assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Operating lease right-of-use assets and liabilities are recognized upon commencement of the lease based on the present value of the lease payments over the lease term. As most of our leases do not provide an implicit interest rate, we use our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at commencement date to determine the present value of lease payments. Our lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease. Options are included when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. Lease expense for lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Amendments or modifications to lease terms are accounted for as variable lease payments. Leases with a lease term of 12 months or less are accounted for using the practical expedient which allows for straight-line rent expense over the remaining term of the lease.
Deferred Income Tax Valuation Allowance
We provide such allowance due to uncertainty that some of the deferred tax amounts may not be realized. Certain items, such as state and local tax loss carryforwards, are dependent on future earnings or the availability of tax strategies. Future results could require an increase or decrease in the valuation allowance and a resulting adjustment to income in such period.
Goodwill and Trademarks
Goodwill and trademarks are not amortized, but are subject to impairment analysis. We assess the potential impairment of goodwill and trademarks annually (at the end of our fourth quarter) and on an interim basis whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. If we determine through the impairment review process that goodwill or trademarks are impaired, we record an impairment charge in our consolidated statements of operations.
Such impairment analyses for goodwill requires a comparison of the fair value of the Company’s equity to the carrying amount of goodwill since the Company operates in one segment. At October 2, 2021 and October 3, 2020, we performed qualitative assessments of factors to determine whether further impairment testing of goodwill was required. Based on this assessment, no impairment losses were warranted at October 2, 2021 and October 3, 2020. Qualitative factors considered in this assessment included industry and market considerations, overall financial performance and other relevant events, management expertise and stability at key positions. Additional impairment analyses at future dates may be performed to determine if indicators of impairment are present, and if so, such amount will be determined and the associated charge will be recorded to the consolidated statements of operations.
Our impairment analysis for trademarks consists of a comparison of the fair value to the carrying value of the assets. This comparison is made based on a review of historical, current and forecasted sales and profit levels, as well as a review of any factors that may indicate potential impairment. For the years ended October 2, 2021 and October 3, 2020, our impairment analysis did not result in any other charges related to trademarks.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company measures stock-based compensation cost at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and recognizes it as expense over the applicable vesting period using the straight-line method. Excess income tax benefits related to share-based compensation expense that must be recognized directly in equity are considered financing rather than operating cash flow activities.
The fair value of each of the Company’s stock options is estimated on the date of grant using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model that uses assumptions that relate to the expected volatility of the Company’s common stock, the expected dividend yield of our stock, the expected life of the options and the risk-free interest rate. The Company issues new shares upon the exercise of employee stock options.
Recently Adopted and Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of recent accounting pronouncements, including those adopted in fiscal 2021 and the expected dates of adoption and the anticipated impact on the consolidated financial statements.