Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes contained elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis are set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ substantially from those referred to herein due to a number of factors, including but not limited to risks described in the section entitled “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Our predecessor, C3 Jian, Inc., was incorporated under the laws of the state of California on November 4, 2005. On February 26, 2016, as part of a reorganization transaction, C3 Jian, Inc. merged with a wholly owned subsidiary of C3J, and as part of this process, C3 Jian, Inc. was converted to a limited liability company organized under the laws of the State of California named C3 Jian, LLC. On May 9, 2019, C3J completed a reverse merger with AmpliPhi, where Ceres Merger Sub, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of AmpliPhi, merged with and into C3J. Following the completion of the Merger, and a $10.0 million concurrent private placement financing, the former C3J stockholders owned approximately 76% of our common stock and the former AmpliPhi stockholders owned approximately 24% of our common stock.
Immediately prior to the Merger, AmpliPhi completed a 1-for-14 reverse stock split and changed its name to Armata Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Our common stock is traded on the NYSE American exchange under the symbol “ARMP.” We are headquartered in Marina Del Rey, CA, in a 35,500 square-foot research and development facility built for product development with capabilities spanning from bench to clinic. In addition to microbiology, synthetic biology, formulation, chemistry and analytical laboratories, the facility is equipped with two licensed GMP drug manufacturing suites enabling the production, testing and release of clinical material.
Statements contained in this Annual Report that are not statements of historical fact are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the U.S. Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such forward-looking statements include, without limitation, statements concerning product development plans, commercialization of our products, the expected market opportunity for our products, the use of bacteriophages and synthetic phages to kill bacterial pathogens, having resources sufficient to fund our operations into the first quarter of 2022, future funding sources, general and administrative expenses, clinical trial and other research and development expenses, costs of manufacturing, costs relating to our intellectual property, capital expenditures, the expected benefits of our targeted phage therapies strategy, the potential market for our products, tax credits and carry-forwards, and litigation-related matters. Words such as “believe,” “anticipate,” “plan,” “expect,” “intend,” “will,” “goal,” “potential” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements, though not all forward-looking statements necessarily contain these identifying words. These statements are subject to risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth below under Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These forward-looking statements speak only as of the date on which they were made, and we undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company focused on the development of pathogen-specific bacteriophage therapeutics for the treatment of antibiotic-resistant and difficult-to-treat bacterial infections using our proprietary bacteriophage-based technology. Bacteriophages or “phages” have a powerful and highly differentiated mechanism of action that enables binding to and killing specific bacteria, in contrast to traditional broad-spectrum antibiotics. We believe that phages represent a promising means to treat bacterial infections, especially those that have developed resistance to current standard of care therapies, including the so-called multidrug-resistant or “superbug” strains of bacteria. We are a leading developer of phage therapeutics which are uniquely positioned to address the growing worldwide threat of antibiotic-resistant bacterial infections.
We are combining our proprietary approach and expertise in identifying, characterizing and developing both naturally-occurring and engineered (synthetic) bacteriophages with our proprietary phage-specific cGMP manufacturing capabilities to advance a broad pipeline of high-quality bacteriophage product candidates. We believe that synthetic phage, engineered using advances in sequencing and synthetic biology techniques, represent a promising means to advance phage therapy, including phage-based diagnostics and improving upon the ability of natural phage to treat bacterial infections, especially those that have developed resistance to current antibiotic therapies, including the multidrug-resistant or “superbug” bacterial pathogens.
We are developing and advancing our lead clinical phage candidate for P. aeruginosa. On October 14, 2020, Armata received the approval to proceed from the FDA for its Investigational New Drug application for AP-PA02. We plan to continue to advance the “SWARM-P.a.” study - a Phase 1b/2a, multicenter, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, single ascending dose (SAD) and multiple ascending dose (MAD) clinical trial to evaluate the safety and tolerability of inhaled AP-PA02 in subjects with CF and chronic pulmonary P. aeruginosa infection, provided that the impacts of COVID-19 do not impede our ability to enroll subjects in this clinical trial. This study is supported by the CFF, which granted us a Therapeutics Development Award of up to $5.0 million.
We are also developing a phage product candidate for S. aureus for the treatment of S. aureus bacteremia. On June 15, 2020, we entered into an agreement (the “MTEC Agreement”) with the Medical Technology Enterprise Consortium (“MTEC”), pursuant to which we will receive a $15.0 million grant and entered into a three-year program administered by the DoD through MTEC with funding from the Defense Health Agency and Joint Warfighter Medical Research Program. We expect to use the grant to partially fund a Phase 1/2, multi-center, randomized, double-blind, placebo- controlled dose escalation study, provided that COVID-19 disease has been reduced to the point that clinical trials in patients are enrolling, that will assess the safety, tolerability, and efficacy of this development program in 2021, using our phage-based candidate, AP-SA02, for the treatment of adults with complicated S. aureus bacteremia.
In partnership with Merck & Co., known as Merck Sharp & Dohme outside of the United States and Canada (“Merck”), we are developing proprietary synthetic phage candidates to target undisclosed infectious disease agents. Our proprietary phage engineering platform serves to enhance the clinical and commercial prospects of phage therapy.
These attributes include expanded host range, improved potency which is a fundamental drug property that can translate into improved clinical efficacy, and importantly, biofilm disruption, which is a critical aspect of serious infections that needs to be addressed.
In addition to our more advanced pipeline programs, we have phage discovery efforts underway to target other major pathogens of infectious disease (including ESKAPE pathogens) and preventable infectious disease of the microbiome.
We are committed to conducting randomized controlled clinical trials required for FDA approval in order to move toward commercialization of alternatives to traditional antibiotics and provide a potential method of treating patients suffering from drug-resistant bacterial infections.
The following chart summarizes the status of our phage product candidate development programs and partners.
We have generally incurred net losses since our inception and our operations to date have been primarily limited to research and development and raising capital. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $179.7 million. We anticipate that a substantial portion of our capital resources and efforts in the foreseeable future will be focused on completing the development and seeking to obtain regulatory approval of our product candidates.
We currently expect to use our existing cash and cash equivalents for the continued research and development of our product candidates, including through our targeted phage therapies strategy, and for working capital and other general corporate purposes. We expect to continue to incur significant and increasing operating losses at least for the next several years. We do not expect to generate product revenue unless and until we successfully complete development and obtain marketing approval for at least one of our product candidates.
We may also use a portion of our existing cash and cash equivalents for the potential acquisition of, or investment in, product candidates, technologies, formulations or companies that complement our business, although we have no current understandings, commitments or agreements to do so. Our existing cash and cash equivalents will not be sufficient to enable us to complete all necessary development of any potential product candidates. Accordingly, we will be required to obtain further funding through one or more other public or private equity offerings, debt financings, collaboration, strategic financing, grants or government contract awards, licensing arrangements or other sources. Our ability to raise additional capital may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to, and volatility in, financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing
COVID-19 pandemic. Adequate additional funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on acceptable terms, we may be required to defer, reduce or eliminate significant planned expenditures, restructure, curtail or eliminate some or all of our development programs or other operations, dispose of assets, enter into arrangements that may require us to relinquish rights to certain of our product candidates, technologies or potential markets, file for bankruptcy or cease operations altogether. Any of these events could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations and result in a loss of investment by our stockholders.
Business Update Regarding COVID-19
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) announced a global health emergency because of a new strain of coronavirus originating in Wuhan, China (the “COVID-19 outbreak”) and the risks to the international community as the virus spreads globally beyond its point of origin. In March 2020, the WHO classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic, based on the rapid increase in exposure globally.
The COVID-19 pandemic has directly and indirectly impacted our business, results of operations and financial condition and is expected to continue to impact our business. For example, the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in delays in our clinical trials due to the implementation of COVID-19 protocols at investigator sites, which resulted in longer than anticipated site identification and initiation activities. In addition, while we currently do not anticipate any interruptions in our supply chain, it is possible that the COVID-19 pandemic and response efforts may have a future impact on our third-party suppliers and partners. It is possible that due to the increasing emphasis on the development of vaccines for COVID-19, certain basic supply chain materials such as resins, vessels, vials and stoppers may be in high demand by the pharmaceutical companies developing vaccines and our ability to obtain these materials for our development activities could be negatively impacted. We have experienced some delays of this nature in the fourth quarter of 2020.
The full extent of the COVID-19 pandemic impact will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19, the actions taken to contain it or treat its impact, the development and distribution of vaccines and the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets. Management continues to actively monitor the developments regarding the pandemic and the impact that the pandemic could have on our financial condition, liquidity, ability to enroll patients in our contemplated clinical trials, manufacturing and research and development operations, suppliers to our operations and suppliers to our outside clinical trial organizations, biotech industry overall, and importantly the health and safety of our workforce. Given the continuing evolution of the COVID-19 outbreak and the global responses to curb its spread, we are not able to estimate the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak on its results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity for fiscal year 2021 or 2022. Any recovery from negative impacts to our business and related economic impact due to the COVID-19 outbreak may also be slowed or reversed by a number of factors, including the current widespread resurgence in COVID-19 infections, combined with the seasonal flu.
Recent Events
On January 26, 2021, we entered into the 2021 Securities Purchase Agreement in connection with the 2021 Private Placement. See the section entitled “Business-Recent Developments” for a description of the 2021 Private Placement, which is incorporated herein by reference.
The Company received aggregate gross proceeds from the 2021 Private Placement of approximately $20.0 million, before deducting transaction expenses, and excluding proceeds (if any) received in connection with the exercise of any warrants.
Results of Operations
As a result of the Merger, C3J was considered the accounting acquirer of AmpliPhi because C3J’s shareholders retained a majority control of ownership of the combined company subsequent to the Merger; therefore, the historical financial statements presented herein prior to the closing of the Merger are the historical financial statements of C3J.
Comparison of year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Grant Revenue
We recognized $0.8 million of grant revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020, which represents MTEC’s share of the costs incurred for our AP-SA02 program for the treatment of S. aureus bacteremia infections. We invoice MTEC on a monthly basis for eligible costs incurred under the grant agreement.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $14.4 million and $9.8 million, respectively. The net increase of $4.6 million was partially due to a $2.3 million increase of clinical trial and laboratory supply expenses in connection with our clinical trial of the AP-PA02 program, a $1.6 million increase in payroll and related expenses due to increased headcount during 2020, a $0.4 million increase in regulatory costs, a $0.4 million net increase in facility and maintenance costs and a reduction of $0.3 million in research and development consulting expenses. Also included in research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.0 million of CFF Award accounted for as offset to research and development expenses. Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 included a credit of $1.3 million for Australian tax rebates received in 2019.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $8.0 million and $9.3 million, respectively. The net decrease of $1.3 million was primarily due to a $1.2 million decrease in share-based compensation, a $1.0 million decrease of professional expenses due to merger related expenses in the year ended December 31, 2019, offset by a $0.3 million increase in insurance costs, and a $0.4 million increase in payroll, incentive compensation and related expenses.
Loss on sale of assets
Loss on sale of available-for-sale assets of $0.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 represented the excess of carrying value of Slovenia net assets sold over proceeds received. The loss primarily related to fixed assets sold and accordingly, there was no impact on cash and cash equivalents from this transaction.
Other Income (Expense)
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded noncash interest expense of $0.6 million and $0.9 million as a result of interest accretion on the time-based cash payments due in connection with the SGI asset acquisition. The decrease of $0.3 million was primarily related to a reduced balance due to SGI as a result of a cash payment of $1.0 million in January 2019 and $1.0 million in January 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a noncash gain of $1.1 million upon the settlement of the derivative liability as a result of the issuance of equity in connection with the SGI asset acquisition coinciding with the closing of the Merger. See Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes
There was no income tax expense or benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 or December 31, 2019.
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $18.3 million, as compared to $15.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $2.7 million was due to a $2.7 million increase in net loss, $1.3 million net decrease in non-cash adjustments to cash used in operating activities, offset by a $1.3 million net decrease in operating assets and liabilities.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities of $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to purchases of property and equipment. Cash provided by investing activities was $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to $3.0 million of cash acquired in connection with the Merger, offset in part by net capital equipment purchases of $0.1 million.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $23.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily comprised of $22.9 million net proceeds raised from the 2020 Private Placement transaction with Innoviva, $0.7 million proceeds from the PPP loan, and $0.2 million proceeds received from warrant and employee stock option exercises, offset by a payment of $0.6 million in deferred consideration related to the time-based payment obligation in connection with the SGI asset acquisition.
Net cash of $9.0 million provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was comprised of net cash proceeds of $10.0 million from a common stock sale coinciding with the Merger, offset by a payment of $1.0 million in deferred consideration related to the time-based payment obligation in connection with the SGI asset acquisition.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Financial Condition
We have prepared our consolidated financial statements on a going concern basis, which assumes that we will realize our assets and satisfy our liabilities in the normal course of business. However, we have incurred net losses since our inception and have negative operating cash flows. These circumstances raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classifications of liabilities that may result from the outcome of the uncertainty concerning our ability to continue as a going concern. Management plans to raise additional capital through equity offerings, debt financings, or other capital sources, including potential collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. While management believes this plan to raise additional funds will alleviate the conditions that raise substantial doubt, these plans are not entirely within its control and cannot be assessed as being probable of occurring. We may not be able to secure additional financing in a timely manner or on favorable terms, if at all.
On January 26, 2021, we entered into the 2021 Securities Purchase Agreement in connection with the 2021 Private Placement. See the section entitled “Business-Recent Developments” for a description of the 2021 Private Placement, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Management believes our existing cash resources and including the proceeds from the 2021 Private Placement of $20.0 million will be sufficient to fund our planned operations into the first quarter of 2022, but not one year from the issuance of the 2020 financial statements. For the foreseeable future, our ability to continue our operations is dependent upon our ability to obtain additional capital.
Future Capital Requirements
We will need to raise additional capital in the future to continue to fund our operations. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the costs and timing of our research and development activities;
● the progress and cost of our clinical trials and other research and development activities;
● manufacturing costs associated with our targeted phage therapies strategy and other research and development activities;
● the terms and timing of any collaborative, licensing, acquisition or other arrangements that we may establish;
● whether and when we receive future Australian tax rebates, if any;
● the costs and timing of seeking regulatory approvals;
● the costs of filing, prosecuting and enforcing any patent applications, claims, patents and other intellectual property rights; and
● the costs of potential lawsuits involving us or our product candidates.
We may seek to raise capital through a variety of sources, including:
● the public equity market;
● private equity financings;
● collaborative arrangements, government grants or strategic financings;
● licensing arrangements; and
● public or private debt.
Any additional fundraising efforts may divert our management team from their day-to-day activities, which may adversely affect our ability to develop and commercialize our product candidates. Our ability to raise additional funds will depend, in part, on the success of our product development activities, including our targeted phage therapies strategy and any clinical trials we initiate, regulatory events, our ability to identify and enter into in-licensing or other strategic arrangements, and other events or conditions that may affect our value or prospects, as well as factors related to financial, economic and market conditions, many of which are beyond our control. We cannot be certain that sufficient funds will be available to us when required or on acceptable terms. If we are unable to secure additional funds on a timely basis or on acceptable terms, we may be required to defer, reduce or eliminate significant planned expenditures, restructure, curtail or eliminate some or all of our development programs or other operations, dispose of technology or assets, pursue an acquisition of our company by a third party at a price that may result in a loss on investment for our stockholders, enter into arrangements that may require us to relinquish rights to certain of our product candidates, technologies or potential markets, file for bankruptcy or cease operations altogether. Any of these events could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Moreover, if we are unable to obtain additional funds on a timely basis, there will be substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern and increased risk of insolvency and loss of investment by our stockholders. To the extent that additional capital is raised through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the issuance of such securities could result in dilution to our existing stockholders. Our ability to raise additional capital may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to, and volatility in, financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and expenses and the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to impairment assessment of our grants and awards, indefinite lived intangible
assets, and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Grants and Awards
We determined that grants and awards are out of the scope of ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”) because the funding entities do not meet the definition of a “customer”, as defined by ASC 606, as there is no transfer of control of goods or services. With respect to each grant or award, we determine if it has a collaboration in accordance with ASC Topic 808, Collaborative Arrangements (“ASC 808”). To the extent the grant or award is within the scope of ASC 808, we recognize amounts received as a contra-expense or grant revenue in the consolidated statement of operations when the related research and development expenses are incurred. For grant and awards outside the scope of ASC 808, we apply ASC 606 or International Accounting Standards No. 20, Accounting for Government Grants and Disclosure of Government Assistance, by analogy, and revenue is recognized when we incur expenses related to the grants for the amount we are entitled to under the provisions of the contract.
We also consider the guidance in ASC Topic 730, Research and Development (“ASC 730”), which requires an assessment, at the inception of the grant or award, of whether the agreement is a liability. If we are obligated to repay funds received regardless of the outcome of the related research and development activities, then we are required to estimate and recognize that liability. Alternatively, if we are not required to repay the funds, then payments received are recorded as revenue or contra-expense as the expenses are incurred.
Deferred grant or award liability represents award funds received or receivable for which the allowable expenses have not yet been incurred as of the balance sheet date.
Valuation of Goodwill and Intangible Assets with Indefinite Lives
Our goodwill represents the excess of the cost over the fair value of net assets acquired from our business combination. The determination of the value of goodwill and intangible assets arising from the business combination requires extensive use of accounting estimates and judgments to allocate the purchase price to the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired, including capitalized in-process research and development, or IPR&D. Intangible assets acquired in a business combination that are used for IPR&D activities are considered indefinite lived until the completion or abandonment of the associated research and development efforts. Upon commercialization of the relevant research and development project, we will amortize the acquired in-process research and development over its estimated useful life or expense the acquired in-process research and development should the research and development project be unsuccessful with no future alternative use.
Goodwill and IPR&D are not amortized; however, they are assessed for impairment using fair value measurement techniques on an annual basis or more frequently if facts and circumstance warrant such a review. The goodwill or IPR&D are considered to be impaired if we determine that the carrying value of the reporting unit or IPR&D exceeds its respective fair value, respectively.
Impairment of Goodwill
We perform our goodwill impairment analysis at the reporting unit level. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our company has one reporting unit. We perform our annual impairment analysis by either doing a qualitative assessment of a reporting unit’s fair value from the last quantitative assessment to determine if there is potential impairment, or comparing a reporting unit’s estimated fair value to its carrying amount. If a quantitative assessment is performed the evaluation includes management estimates of cash flow projections based on internal future projections and/or use of a market approach by looking at market values of comparable companies. Our market capitalization is also considered as a part of this analysis.
In accordance with our accounting policy, we completed the annual evaluation for impairment of goodwill as of December 31, 2020 using the qualitative method and determined that no impairment existed.
Impairment Review of In-process Research and Development (“IPR&D”)
We test our IPR&D asset for impairment as of December 31 of each year or more frequently if indicators of impairment are present. The authoritative accounting guidance provides an optional qualitative assessment for any indicators that indefinite-lived intangible assets are impaired. If it is determined that it is more likely than not that the indefinite-lived intangible assets, including IPR&D, are impaired, the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible assets is compared with the carrying amount and impairment is recorded for any excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible assets.
If and when a quantitative analysis of IPR&D assets is required based on the result of the optional qualitative assessment, the estimated fair value of IPR&D assets is calculated based on the income approach, which includes discounting expected future net cash flows associated with the assets to a net present value. The fair value measurements utilized to perform the impairment analysis are categorized within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy. Significant management judgment is required in the forecast of future operating results that are used in our impairment analysis. The estimates management use are consistent with the plans and estimates that it uses to manage its business. Significant assumptions utilized the income approach model include the discount rate, timing of clinical studies and regulatory approvals, the probability of success of its research and development programs, timing of commercialization of these programs, forecasted sales, gross margin, selling, general and administrative expenses, capital expenditures, as well as anticipated growth rates. Our analysis indicated no impairment existed.
Stock-Based Compensation
Compensation expense related to stock options granted is measured at the grant date based on the estimated fair value of the award and is recognized on an accelerated attribution method over the requisite service period. We determine the estimated fair value of each stock option on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model which uses assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield for a period consistent with the expected term of the option in effect at the time of the grant. Expected volatility is based on an analysis of the historical volatility of Armata and peer companies’ common stock. The expected term represents the period that we expect our stock options to be outstanding. The expected term assumption is estimated using the simplified method set forth in the U.S. Securities and Exchange (the “SEC”) Staff Accounting Bulletin 110, which is the mid-point between the option vesting date and the expiration date. For stock options granted to parties other than employees or directors, we elect, on a grant by grant basis, to use the expected term or the contractual term of the option award. We have never declared or paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to do so in the foreseeable future. Forfeitures are recognized as a reduction of stock-based compensation expense as they occur. Changes in these assumptions may lead to variability with respect to the amount of stock compensation expense we recognize related to stock options.
Stock-based compensation expense for an award with a performance condition is recognized when the achievement of such performance condition is determined to be probable. If the outcome of such performance condition is not determined to be probable or is not met, no compensation expense is recognized and any previously recognized compensation expense is reversed.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 3 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. In addition, we do not engage in trading activities involving non-exchange traded contracts. Therefore, we are not materially exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in these relationships.