Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
(dollars in millions, except per-share amounts and per-metric ton amounts; shipments in thousands of metric tons (kmt))
References to (i) “ParentCo” refer to Arconic Inc., a Delaware corporation, and its consolidated subsidiaries (through March 31, 2020, at which time it was renamed Howmet Aerospace Inc.), and (ii) “2016 Separation Transaction” refer to the November 1, 2016 separation of Alcoa Inc., a Pennsylvania corporation, into two standalone, publicly-traded companies, Arconic Inc. and Alcoa Corporation.
Overview
Our Business
Arconic Corporation (or the “Company”) is a manufacturer of fabricated aluminum products, including sheet and plate, extrusions, and architectural products, with a primary focus on the ground transportation, aerospace, building and construction, industrial products, and packaging end markets. The Company has 22 primary operating locations in 8 countries around the world, situated in the United States, Canada, China, France, Germany, Hungary, Russia, and the United Kingdom.
The Separation
On February 8, 2019, ParentCo announced that its Board of Directors approved a plan to separate into two standalone, publicly-traded companies (the “Separation”). The spin-off company, later named Arconic Corporation, was to include the rolled aluminum products, aluminum extrusions, and architectural products operations of ParentCo, as well as the Latin America extrusions operations sold in April 2018, (collectively, the “Arconic Corporation Businesses”). The existing publicly traded company, ParentCo, was to continue to own the engine products, engineered structures, fastening systems, and forged wheels operations (collectively, the “Howmet Aerospace Businesses”).
The Separation was subject to a number of conditions, including, but not limited to: final approval by ParentCo’s Board of Directors (see below); receipt of an opinion of legal counsel (received on March 31, 2020) regarding the qualification of the distribution, together with certain related transactions, as a “reorganization” within the meaning of Sections 335 and 368(a)(1)(D) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (i.e., a transaction that is generally tax-free for U.S. federal income tax purposes); and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) declaring effective a Registration Statement on Form 10, as amended, filed with the SEC on February 13, 2020 (effectiveness was declared by the SEC on February 13, 2020).
On February 5, 2020, ParentCo’s Board of Directors approved the completion of the Separation by means of a pro rata distribution by ParentCo of all of the outstanding shares of common stock of Arconic Corporation to ParentCo common stockholders of record as of the close of business on March 19, 2020 (the “Record Date”). At the time of the Separation, ParentCo common stockholders were to receive one share of Arconic Corporation common stock for every four shares of ParentCo common stock (the “Separation Ratio”) held as of the Record Date (ParentCo common stockholders were to receive cash in lieu of fractional shares).
In connection with the Separation, as of March 31, 2020, Arconic Corporation and Howmet Aerospace entered into several agreements to implement the legal and structural separation between the two companies; govern the relationship between Arconic Corporation and Howmet Aerospace after the completion of the Separation; and allocate between Arconic Corporation and Howmet Aerospace various assets, liabilities, and obligations, including, among other things, employee benefits, environmental liabilities, intellectual property, and tax-related assets and liabilities. These agreements included a Separation and Distribution Agreement, Tax Matters Agreement, Employee Matters Agreement, and certain Patent, Know-How, Trade Secret License and Trademark License Agreements. The Separation and Distribution Agreement identified the assets to be transferred, the liabilities to be assumed, and the contracts to be transferred to each of Arconic Corporation and Howmet Aerospace as part of the Separation, and provided for when and how these transfers and assumptions were to occur.
On April 1, 2020 (the “Separation Date”), the Separation was completed and became effective at 12:01 a.m. Eastern Daylight Time. To effect the Separation, ParentCo undertook a series of transactions to separate the net assets and certain legal entities of ParentCo, resulting in a cash payment of $728 to ParentCo by Arconic Corporation from a portion of the aggregate net proceeds of previously executed financing arrangements (see Financing Activities in Liquidity and Capital Resources below). In connection with the Separation, 109,021,376 shares of Arconic Corporation common stock were distributed to ParentCo stockholders. This was determined by applying the Separation Ratio to the 436,085,504 shares of ParentCo’s outstanding common stock as of the Record Date. “Regular-way” trading of Arconic Corporation’s common stock began with the opening of the New York Stock Exchange on April 1, 2020 under the ticker symbol “ARNC.” Arconic Corporation’s common stock has a par value of $0.01 per share.
ParentCo incurred costs to evaluate, plan, and execute the Separation, and Arconic Corporation was allocated a pro rata portion of these costs based on segment revenue (see Cost Allocations below). ParentCo recognized $38 from January 2020 through March 2020 and $78 in 2019 for such costs, of which $18 and $40, respectively, was allocated to Arconic Corporation. The allocated amounts were included in Selling, general administrative, and other expenses on Arconic Corporation's Statement of Consolidated Operations.
Basis of Presentation. The Consolidated Financial Statements of Arconic Corporation are prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP). In accordance with GAAP, certain situations require management to make estimates based on judgments and assumptions, which may affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. They also may affect the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Actual results could differ from those estimates upon subsequent resolution of identified matters. These estimates are based on historical experience and, in some cases, assumptions based on current and future market experience, including considerations related to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. Management has made its best estimates using all relevant information available at the time, but it is possible that these estimates will differ from actual results and affect the Consolidated Financial Statements in future periods and potentially require adverse adjustments to the recoverability of goodwill and long-lived assets, the realizability of deferred tax assets and other judgments and estimations and assumptions that may be impacted by COVID-19.
Prior to the Separation Date, Arconic Corporation did not operate as a separate, standalone entity. Arconic Corporation’s operations were included in ParentCo’s financial results. Accordingly, for all periods prior to the Separation Date, the Consolidated Financial Statements of Arconic Corporation were prepared from ParentCo’s historical accounting records and were presented on a standalone basis as if the Arconic Corporation Businesses had been conducted independently from ParentCo. Such Consolidated Financial Statements include the historical operations that were considered to comprise the Arconic Corporation Businesses, as well as certain assets and liabilities that were historically held at ParentCo’s corporate level but were specifically identifiable or otherwise attributable to Arconic Corporation.
Cost Allocations. The description and information on cost allocations is applicable for all periods included in Arconic Corporation's Consolidated Financial Statements prior to the Separation Date.
The Consolidated Financial Statements of Arconic Corporation include general corporate expenses of ParentCo that were not historically charged to the Arconic Corporation Businesses for certain support functions that were provided on a centralized basis, such as expenses related to finance, audit, legal, information technology, human resources, communications, compliance, facilities, employee benefits and compensation, and research and development activities. These general corporate expenses were included on Arconic Corporation's Statement of Consolidated Operations within Cost of goods sold, Selling, general administrative and other expenses, and Research and development expenses. These expenses were allocated to Arconic Corporation on the basis of direct usage when identifiable, with the remainder allocated based on the Arconic Corporation Businesses’ segment revenue as a percentage of ParentCo’s total segment revenue, as reported in the respective periods.
All external debt not directly attributable to Arconic Corporation was excluded from Arconic Corporation's Consolidated Balance Sheet. Financing costs related to these debt obligations were allocated to Arconic Corporation based on the ratio of capital invested by ParentCo in the Arconic Corporation Businesses to the total capital invested by ParentCo in both the Arconic Corporation Businesses and the Howmet Aerospace Businesses, and were included on Arconic Corporation's Statement of Consolidated Operations within Interest expense.
The following table reflects the allocations described above:
__________________
(1) For all periods presented, amount principally relates to an allocation of expenses for ParentCo’s retained pension and other postretirement benefit obligations associated with closed and sold operations.
(2) In 2020 (January through March) and 2019, amount includes an allocation of $18 and $40, respectively, for costs incurred by ParentCo associated with the Separation (see above).
(3) In 2018, amount includes an allocation of settlement and curtailment charges and benefits related to several actions taken (lump sum payments and benefit reductions) by ParentCo associated with pension and other postretirement benefit plans.
Management believes the assumptions regarding the allocation of ParentCo’s general corporate expenses and financing costs were reasonable.
Nevertheless, the Consolidated Financial Statements of Arconic Corporation may not include all of the actual expenses that would have been incurred and may not reflect Arconic Corporation’s consolidated results of operations, financial position, and cash flows had it been a standalone company during the periods prior to the Separation Date. Actual costs that would have been incurred if Arconic Corporation had been a standalone company would depend on multiple factors, including organizational structure, capital structure, and strategic decisions made in various areas, including information technology and infrastructure. Transactions between Arconic Corporation and ParentCo, including sales to the Howmet Aerospace Businesses, were presented as related party transactions in Arconic Corporation's Consolidated Financial Statements and were considered to be effectively settled for cash at the time the transaction was recorded. The total net effect of the settlement of these transactions was reflected on Arconic Corporation’s Statement of Consolidated Cash Flows as a financing activity and on the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheet as Parent Company net investment.
Management Review of 2020 and Outlook for the Future
After the Separation from ParentCo on April 1, 2020, we immediately took actions to conserve cash, manage working capital more efficiently, and preserve operational flexibility as the COVID-19 pandemic continued to adversely impact the global economy. In the weeks that followed, we optimized our capital structure through new debt offerings and a new credit facility. The new debt structure created greater financial flexibility to operate in an uncertain economic environment and improved our liquidity. While 2020 was a challenging year, the Company demonstrated agility and solid performance in the face of pandemic driven lower demand and uncertainty. As we completed the Separation during a global pandemic that caused rapid shifts in the markets we serve, we have become a stronger and more dynamic organization.
In 2020, Sales of $5,675 declined 22% from 2019, reflecting lower volumes across the Company's three segments mainly caused by the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and/or production declines due to delays associated with the Boeing 737 MAX. Lower aluminum prices also contributed to the decline, with a 5% drop in the average LME aluminum price and a 33% decrease in the average Midwest premium (United States). Revenue in the fourth quarter of 2020 was $1,462, down 14% year over year, but up 3% over the third quarter of 2020 reflecting a continued recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic impacts. The decline in revenue over the prior year quarter was primarily a result of continued softness in aerospace and was partially offset by strength in the industrial products and packaging end markets. In the segments, Total Segment Adjusted EBITDA decreased 14% in 2020 compared with 2019 due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic across all end markets, partially offset by cost actions implemented during the year and the absence of certain employee retirement benefit plan expenses (see Cost of Goods Sold under Results of Operations below).
In 2020, the Company recorded a net loss of $109, or $1.00 per share, compared to net income of $177, or $1.63 per share, in 2019. The 2020 results included a pre-tax charge of $198 ($156 after-tax) for the settlement of certain employee retirement benefits related to the annuitization of pension plan obligations in the U.S. and the U.K. Of this charge, $140 ($108 after-tax) was recorded in the fourth quarter of 2020. Additional items impacting the fourth quarter of 2020 included a pre-tax benefit of $25 ($19 after-tax) for contingent consideration received related to the 2018 sale of the Texarkana (Texas) rolling mill and a pre-tax benefit of $20 ($20 after-tax) for the reversal of a liability previously established at the Separation Date related to a potential indemnification to Howmet Aerospace by Arconic Corporation for an outstanding income tax matter in Spain. The results for 2020 compared to 2019 were also favorably impacted by a lower corporate cost structure as a standalone company compared to an allocation of ParentCo’s corporate overhead in 2019.
We ended the year with a cash balance of $787, and total liquidity of approximately $1,500. Subsequent to year-end, we accelerated our 2021 U.S. pension contributions into January 2021 and funded $200 to be opportunistic on capitalizing on investment arbitrage by using our balance sheet cash. The Company is planning to complete additional annuitizations of its pension obligations over the first half of 2021.
As we look forward to 2021 and beyond, we see multiple paths to growth on both the top and bottom line through driving asset utilization, debottlenecking operations, maintaining permanent cost reductions, and capturing productivity driven cost savings. We have identified several opportunities that are expected to drive future volume growth and increase market penetration for continued improvement of our results. We are continuing to ramp up incremental capacity for automotive and industrial products at our Tennessee facility and we expect to benefit from an increase in demand in the industrial products end
market due to favorable outcomes in the U.S. common alloy aluminum sheet trade case. We are also in the process of re-entering packaging in several markets following the expiration of the non-compete agreement from the 2016 Separation Transaction. We are bringing our Tennessee can sheet facility back online and are in discussions with customers about qualification runs. Bringing this capacity back online is timely, as surging aluminum packaging demand over recent years has driven multiple recently announced capacity additions by North American can makers resulting in increased demand for can sheet.
Based on current internal and external projections of build rates and leading indicators in the markets we serve, and assuming an average LME aluminum price of $2,030 per metric ton and an average Midwest premium of $320 per metric ton, our expectations for sales by major end market in 2021 follow. These expectations may change during the course of the year given the continued uncertainty in the global economy. For the ground transportation end market, we expect sales to increase approximately 25% to 35% in 2021 compared with 2020. This range is somewhat wider reflecting uncertainty on how quickly the supply chain recovers from the semiconductor chip shortage. Automotive sales are expected to increase due to strong consumer demand and a recovery from soft 2020 levels, along with continued improvement in heavy duty truck sales. For the industrial products end market, we anticipate sales to increase by approximately 15% to 20% in 2021 compared with 2020, driven by increased capabilities and capacity at our Tennessee facility and stronger domestic pricing and volume demand due to the impact of ongoing U.S. trade actions. For the building and construction end market, we anticipate sales to be flat in 2021 compared with 2020, as global macro uncertainty continues to pressure non-residential construction, which comprises the vast majority of our sales in this segment. For the packaging end market, we expect sales to be relatively flat in 2021 compared with 2020. In 2020, our facility in Russia was operating at near full capacity to satisfy strong global packaging demand. Although the non-compete agreement expired in the fourth quarter of 2020, the qualification and negotiation process to reenter the U.S. packaging market is expected to take several quarters. Therefore, we would expect U.S. packaging production to meaningfully contribute to results in 2022. For the aerospace end market, we expect sales to decline approximately 25% to 30% from 2020, which is approximately 50% below pre-pandemic 2019 levels as continued destocking is expected to impact the entire aerospace supply chain. This destocking impact is anticipated to continue through the first half of 2021 and we expect return to year over year growth in the second half of the year.
COVID-19 Pandemic
Our operations and financial results have been, and are expected to continue to be, adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Since Arconic Corporation’s launch as a standalone company on April 1, 2020, market conditions have been changing rapidly and unpredictably. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, several of our automotive and aerospace customers temporarily suspended operations. While many of our customers have resumed operations, we are unable to estimate with certainty at this time the status, frequency, or duration of any potential reoccurrences of customer shutdowns, or the duration or extent of resumed operations. In 2020, we derived approximately 33% of our revenue from the ground transportation end market-including approximately 11% of its revenue from Ford, our largest customer-and 14% from the aerospace end market. Due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our customers, we are experiencing, and expect to continue experiencing, lower demand and volume for our products. These trends may lead to charges, impairments and other adverse financial impacts over time. The duration of the current disruptions to our customers and related financial impact to us has been estimated, but remains highly uncertain at this time. The impact on our business, results of operations, financial condition, liquidity, and/or cash flows will be magnified if the disruption from the COVID-19 pandemic continues for an extended period.
We believe that our diverse end markets and geographic composition mitigate a portion of the impact on the Company from any singular area of decline. Furthermore, despite the challenges that we currently face in North America and Europe, we are seeing positive momentum at our Chinese facilities that felt the full brunt of the COVID-19 pandemic in early 2020 and are now back to essentially normal production. Our Russian packaging facility is running at full operations due to strong end market demand. Moreover, our operating footprint benefits from a highly variable cost structure and we are actively managing operations to effectively flex activity to respond to changing automotive and aerospace market conditions. However, the geographic locations in which our products are manufactured, distributed or sold are in varying stages of continued restrictions or lifting of restrictions, and the status of restrictions in certain areas may change on short notice. Because we rely on supply chain continuity, restrictions in one location may materially impact operations in multiple locations, and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in one location may have a disproportionate effect on our operations in the future.
The safety of our employees is our highest priority. We heightened measures at all of our locations to maintain strict hygiene, increase social distancing, and enable employees to work remotely where possible. In response to market conditions we implemented a series of proactive actions starting in April 2020 to mitigate the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, including the following:
•deferred initiating a dividend on common stock;
•reduced the CEO’s salary and the Board of Directors’ cash compensation by 30%*;
•reduced salaries for senior-level management by 20% and for all other salaried employees by 10%*;
•restructuring of the salaried workforce, targeting a 10% reduction;
•idling of various production facilities based on market conditions within the regions where the Company operates;
•decreasing production and operating with a reduced labor force through shortened work weeks, shift reductions, layoffs, and the elimination of temporary workers and contractors at U.S.-based rolling and extrusion facilities;
•implementing a combination of modified schedules, adjusted work hours, lower costs, and/or delayed raises at all rolling mill facilities in Europe, China and Russia;
•suspended the 401K match program for U.S. salaried employees*; and
•reducing capital expenditures by approximately $50, or approximately 30%.
*Effective September 1, 2020, the Company restored both the salaries of all salaried employees and the 401K match of all salaried U.S. employees, including executive officers, to the levels in effect prior to the actions described above. Also effective September 1, 2020, the Company restored the annual cash retainers payable to the non-employee members of the Company’s Board of Directors to the levels in effect prior to the previous reduction described above.
The foregoing measures from our cash conservation program resulted in actual cost savings of approximately $160, comprised of $100 in temporary savings (i.e., 2020 only) and $60 in permanent savings, as well as an additional $50 for capital expenditure reductions, from April 2020 through December 2020. While we anticipate incremental cost savings in future periods related to the measures that resulted in permanent cost savings during 2020, we may not achieve such savings. In addition, we may determine that it is necessary to modify or rescind cost-saving actions, in which case certain of the realized permanent cost savings may not continue and/or any anticipated incremental cost savings would not be fully realized. Further disruptions and uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic could require us to take additional cost-saving actions or to modify or rescind current cost-saving actions, make additional modifications to our strategic plans and/or incur additional expenses as part of our continued response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The cost-savings measures taken to date, and any cost-cutting measures we may need to take in the future, could have a material and adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition, liquidity, and/or cash flows.
While we are continuing to evaluate the impact of this global event, our liquidity and financial position remains strong despite the COVID-19 pandemic’s impact to our business. Our business is flexible and we have demonstrated a robust and agile cash management program in 2020, and together with potential future cash conservation actions, we believe we have adequate liquidity to operate the Company over the next twelve months.
The timing for the Company and/or our customers resuming operations and the levels of operations experienced before the COVID-19 pandemic depend on numerous factors beyond the Company’s control, including, among other things: the revision of governmental quarantine, shelter in place or similar social distancing orders or guidelines; the occurrence and magnitude of future outbreaks; the availability of vaccines or other medical remedies and preventive measures; the location of facilities; and determinations regarding, among other things, health and safety, demand for specific products, and broader economic conditions. We are continuing to evaluate the impact this global event may have on its future results of operations, financial condition, liquidity, and cash flows.
See Part I. Item 1A. “Risk Factors” for additional information regarding the continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations.
Results of Operations
Earnings Summary
Effective July 1, 2020, the Company changed its inventory cost method to average cost for all U.S. inventories previously carried at LIFO cost. The effects of the change in accounting principle have been retrospectively applied to all prior periods presented in the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements. See Note M to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Sales. Sales were $5,675 in 2020 compared with $7,277 in 2019, a decrease of $1,602, or 22%. The decrease was principally due to depressed volumes within each of the Company's three segments, mainly caused by the economic impact of COVID-19 and/or production declines due to delays associated with the Boeing 737 MAX; lower aluminum prices in the Rolled Products segment, driven by a drop in both the average LME price and regional premiums; the absence of sales ($176) related to the divestitures of a rolling mill in Brazil (February 2020) and an extrusions plant in South Korea (March 2020); an unfavorable impact related to the curtailment of a rolling mill and both the exit and rationalization of two separate product lines in the Building and Construction Systems segment; and unfavorable product mix in the Rolled Products segment.
Sales in 2019 were $7,277 compared with $7,442 in 2018, a decrease of $165, or 2%. The decrease was largely attributable to lower aluminum prices, the absence of sales ($169 combined) as a result of both the ramp down of the Company’s North American packaging operations (completed in December 2018) and the divestiture of its Latin America Extrusions business (April 2018), and unfavorable foreign currency movements. These negative impacts were mostly offset by favorable product mix and pricing in the Rolled Products segment and volume growth related to the packaging (excluding North America), aerospace, and industrial end markets.
Cost of Goods Sold. COGS was $4,862 in 2020 compared with $6,332 in 2019, a decline of $1,470, or 23%. Also, COGS as a percentage of Sales was 85.7% in 2020 compared to 87.0% in 2019. This percentage was positively impacted by net cost savings, including lower labor costs (see Outlook above), and the absence of certain employee retirement benefit plan expenses ($69 - see below), mostly offset by lower volumes and unfavorable product mix.
COGS was $6,332 in 2019 compared with $6,527 in 2018, a decline of $195, or 3%. Also, COGS as a percentage of Sales was 87.0% in 2019 compared to 87.7% in 2018. This percentage was positively impacted by favorable product pricing and mix in the Rolled Products segment and the absence of a charge for a physical inventory adjustment at an Extrusions plant ($14). These positive impacts were partially offset by costs associated with the transition of the Company’s Tennessee plant to industrial products from packaging, a charge to increase an environmental reserve related to a U.S. Extrusions plant ($25), and a charge, primarily for a one-time employee signing bonus, related to a collective bargaining agreement negotiation ($9 - see below).
In June of 2019, Arconic Corporation and the United Steelworkers (USW) reached a tentative three-year labor agreement covering approximately 3,400 employees at four U.S. locations; the previous labor agreement expired on May 15, 2019. The tentative agreement was ratified on July 11, 2019.
In preparation for the Separation, effective January 1, 2020, certain U.S. defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans previously sponsored by ParentCo were separated into standalone plans for both Arconic Corporation and Howmet Aerospace. Additionally, effective April 1, 2020, Arconic Corporation assumed a portion of the obligations associated with certain non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans that included participants related to both the Arconic Corporation Businesses and the Howmet Aerospace Businesses, as well as legacy defined benefit pension plans assigned to the Company as a result of the Separation. As a result, beginning in the first quarter of 2020 for these U.S. plans and in the second quarter of 2020 for these non-U.S. plans, Arconic Corporation applied defined benefit plan accounting resulting in benefit plan expense being recorded in operating income (service cost) and nonoperating income (nonservice cost). In all historical periods prior to these respective timeframes, Arconic Corporation was considered a participating employer in ParentCo’s defined benefit plans and, therefore, applied multiemployer plan accounting resulting in the Company’s share of benefit plan expense being recorded entirely in operating income. Also, Arconic Corporation is the plan sponsor of certain other non-U.S. defined benefit plans that contain participants related only to the Arconic Corporation Businesses and, therefore, the related benefit plan expense was recorded in accordance with defined benefit plan accounting in all periods presented. The following table presents the total benefit plan expense (excluding settlements and curtailments) recorded by Arconic Corporation based on the foregoing in each period presented:
Selling, General Administrative, and Other Expenses. SG&A expenses were $258, or 4.5% of Sales, in 2020 compared with $346, or 4.8% of Sales, in 2019. The decrease of $88, or 25%, was largely attributable to a combination of a lower corporate cost structure as a standalone company in 2020 compared to an allocation of ParentCo’s corporate overhead (excluding costs for the Separation) in 2019 and cost reduction actions in response to COVID-19 (see Outlook above), a lower allocation ($22) of costs incurred for the Separation (see Cost Allocations under The Separation above), and the absence of certain employee retirement benefit plan expenses ($13 - see Cost of goods sold above).
SG&A expenses were $346, or 4.8% of Sales, in 2019 compared with $288, or 3.9% of Sales, in 2018. The increase of $58, or 20%, was primarily the result of a higher allocation (increase of $59) of ParentCo’s corporate overhead, which was mostly driven by the following: costs incurred for the Separation ($78, of which $40 was allocated to Arconic Corporation) and higher
expenses for both executive compensation and estimated annual employee incentive compensation, all of which was somewhat offset by reductions in several other overhead costs.
Research and Development Expenses. R&D expenses were $36 in 2020 compared with $45 in 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by a lower amount of expenses associated with the Company's standalone R&D facility in 2020 compared to the expenses allocated to Arconic Corporation by ParentCo (see Cost Allocations under The Separation above) in 2019. The lower cost structure was the result of the consolidation of this R&D facility in connection with cost reduction efforts initiated by ParentCo in 2019.
R&D expenses were $45 in 2019 compared with $63 in 2018. The decrease was principally related to a lower allocation of ParentCo’s expenses, which was driven by decreased spending.
Provision for Depreciation and Amortization. The provision for D&A was $251 in 2020 compared with $252 in 2019. The decrease of $1 was primarily due to lower D&A due to restructuring actions related to impairment of assets in 2019, mostly offset by capital projects placed into service.
The provision for D&A was $252 in 2019 compared with $272 in 2018. The decrease of $20, or 7%, was primarily due to the divestiture of the Texarkana (Texas) rolling mill and cast house.
Restructuring and Other Charges. In 2020, 2019, and 2018, Restructuring and other charges were comprised of a net charge of $188, a net charge of $87, and a net benefit of $104, respectively. See Note E to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Interest Expense. Interest expense was $118 in 2020 compared with $115 in 2019. The increase of $3, or 3%, was primarily due to the write-off and immediate expensing of $19 in debt issuance costs as a result of a debt refinancing (see Financing Activities under Liquidity and Capital Resources below) in May 2020, partially offset by a lower amount of interest associated with the Company’s standalone outstanding debt (see Financing Activities under Liquidity and Capital Resources below) in 2020 compared to the interest allocated to Arconic Corporation by ParentCo (see Cost Allocations under The Separation above) in 2019.
Interest expense was $115 in 2019 compared with $129 in 2018. The decrease of $14, or 11%, was mostly the result of a lower allocation (decrease of $10) of ParentCo’s financing costs due to a lower average amount of ParentCo’s outstanding debt in 2019 compared to 2018 and an increase ($3) in the amount of interest capitalized due to expansion projects at the Company's Davenport (Iowa) and Tennessee facilities (see Investing Activities in Liquidity and Capital Resources below).
Other Expenses (Income), Net. Other expenses, net was $70 in 2020 compared with Other income, net of $15 in 2019. The unfavorable change of $85 was mainly the result of an increase ($76) in non-service cost related to the new standalone U.S. pension and other postretirement benefit plans that became effective January 1, 2020 (see Cost of goods sold above), as well as net unfavorable foreign currency movements ($28), somewhat offset by the reversal of a liability ($20) established at Separation for Arconic Corporation’s share of a Spanish tax matter of ParentCo that was favorably settled in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Other income, net was $15 in 2019 compared with Other expenses, net of $4 in 2018. The change of $19 was largely attributable to net favorable foreign currency movements.
Provision (Benefit) for Income Taxes. Arconic Corporation’s effective tax rate was (0.9)% (provision on a loss) in 2020, (53.9)% (benefit on income) in 2019, and 28.9% (provision on income) in 2018. See Note I to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a reconciliation of the effective tax rate for each of these years to the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21%.
Segment Information
Arconic Corporation’s operations consist of three reportable segments: Rolled Products, Building and Construction Systems, and Extrusions. Segment performance under Arconic Corporation’s management reporting system is evaluated based on several factors; however, the primary measure of performance is Segment Adjusted EBITDA (Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization).
Effective in the second quarter of 2020, management elected to change the profit or loss measure of the Company’s reportable segments from Segment operating profit to Segment Adjusted EBITDA for internal reporting and performance measurement purposes. This change was made to enhance the transparency and visibility of the underlying operating performance of each segment. Effective in the third quarter of 2020, management refined the Company’s Segment Adjusted EBITDA measure to remove the impact of metal price lag (see footnote 4 to the Reconciliation of Total Segment Adjusted
EBITDA below). This change was made to further enhance the transparency and visibility of the underlying operating performance of each segment by removing the volatility associated with metal prices.
Arconic Corporation calculates Segment Adjusted EBITDA as Total sales (third-party and intersegment) minus each of (i) Cost of goods sold, (ii) Selling, general administrative, and other expenses, and (iii) and Research and development expenses, plus Stock-based compensation expense and Metal price lag. Previously, the Company calculated Segment operating profit as Segment Adjusted EBITDA minus each of (i) the Provision for depreciation and amortization, (ii) Stock-based compensation expense, and (iii) Metal price lag. Arconic Corporation’s Segment Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies’ reportable segments.
Also, effective July 1, 2020, the Company changed its inventory cost method to average cost for all U.S. inventories previously carried at LIFO cost. The effects of the change in accounting principle have been retrospectively applied to all prior periods presented in the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements. See Note M to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Segment information for all prior periods presented was recast to reflect the new measure of segment profit or loss and the change in inventory cost method.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA for all reportable segments totaled $648 in 2020, $757 in 2019, and $702 in 2018. The following information provides Sales and Segment Adjusted EBITDA for each reportable segment for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020. See Note D to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Rolled Products
__________________
* Sales to the Howmet Aerospace Businesses were $75, $131, and $145, respectively, in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. These sales are deemed to be related-party sales and are presented as such on Arconic Corporation’s Statement of Consolidated Operations. The product sold to the Howmet Aerospace Businesses consists of aluminum billet.
Overview. The Rolled Products segment produces aluminum sheet and plate for a variety of end markets. Sheet and plate are sold directly to customers and through distributors related to the aerospace, automotive, commercial transportation, packaging, building and construction, and industrial products (mainly used in the production of machinery and equipment and consumer durables) end markets. A small portion of this segment also produced aseptic foil for the packaging end market prior to February 1, 2020 (see below). While the customer base for flat-rolled products is large, a significant amount of sales of sheet and plate is to a relatively small number of customers. Prices for these products are generally based on the price of metal plus a premium for adding value to the aluminum to produce a semi-finished product, resulting in a business model in which the underlying price of metal is contractually passed-through to customers. Generally, the sales and costs and expenses of this segment are transacted in the local currency of the respective operations, which are the U.S. dollar and, to a lesser extent, each of the following: the Russian ruble, Chinese yuan, the euro, the British pound, and the Brazilian real.
On February 1, 2020, Arconic Corporation completed the sale of its aluminum rolling mill in Itapissuma, Brazil to Companhia Brasileira de Alumínio. This rolling mill produced aseptic foil and sheet products. The rolling mill generated third-party sales of $10, $143, and $179 in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, and, at the time of divestiture, had approximately 500 employees. See Note S to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
On November 1, 2016, Arconic Corporation entered into a toll processing agreement with Alcoa Corporation for the tolling of metal for the Warrick, IN rolling mill which became a part of Alcoa Corporation upon the completion of the 2016 Separation Transaction. As part of this arrangement, Arconic Corporation provided a toll processing service to Alcoa Corporation to produce can sheet products at its facility in Tennessee through the end date of the contract, December 31, 2018. Alcoa Corporation supplied all required raw materials to Arconic Corporation, which processed the raw materials into finished can sheet coils ready for shipment to the end customer. Tolling revenue for 2018 was $144.
Sales. Third-party sales for the Rolled Products segment decreased $1,274, or 23%, in 2020 compared with 2019, primarily attributable to depressed volumes (see below), unfavorable product mix, lower aluminum prices (see below), and the absence of sales related to both the February 2020 divestiture of a rolling mill in Brazil ($133) and the December 2019 curtailment of operations in San Antonio (Texas).
The lower volumes were largely attributable to a decline in the ground transportation end market due to the economic impact of COVID-19. Additionally, volumes related to the aerospace end market were also unfavorably impacted due to the economic impact of COVID-19 and production declines due to delays associated with the Boeing 737 MAX.
In 2020, the lower aluminum prices were largely driven by a 5% drop in the average LME aluminum price and a 33% decrease in the average Midwest premium (United States).
Third-party sales for this segment decreased $122, or 2%, in 2019 compared with 2018, primarily attributable to lower aluminum prices (see below), the absence of sales ($144) as a result of the ramp down of the Company’s North American packaging operations (completed in December 2018), and unfavorable foreign currency movements. These negative impacts were partially offset by favorable product pricing and mix and higher volumes in the packaging (excluding North America), aerospace, and industrial products end markets.
In 2019, the lower aluminum prices were largely driven by a 15% drop in the average LME aluminum price and a 6% decrease in the average Midwest premium.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA. Segment adjusted EBITDA for the Rolled Products segment decreased $113, or 18%, in 2020 compared with 2019, primarily driven by lower volumes, unfavorable product mix, and unfavorable pricing on industrial and ground transportation products, partially offset by net cost savings, including lower labor costs (see Outlook under Results of Operations above), and the absence of certain employee retirement benefit plan expenses (see footnote 1 to the Reconciliation of Total Segment Adjusted EBITDA below).
Segment adjusted EBITDA for this segment increased $78, or 14%, in 2019 compared with 2018, principally driven by favorable pricing adjustments on industrial products and commercial transportation products, favorable aluminum price impacts, net cost savings, and favorable product mix. These positive impacts were somewhat offset by the Company’s Tennessee plant’s transition to industrial production from packaging production.
Building and Construction Systems
Overview. The Building and Construction Systems segment manufactures products that are used in the non-residential building and construction end market. These products include integrated aluminum architectural systems and architectural extrusions, which are sold directly to customers and through distributors. A limited amount of this segment’s product sales is directly impacted by metal pricing, which is a pass-through to the related customers. Generally, the sales and costs and expenses of this segment are transacted in the local currency of the respective operations, which are the U.S. dollar and, to a lesser extent, each of the following: the euro, the British pound, and Canadian dollar.
Sales. Third-party sales for the Building and Construction Systems segment decreased $155, or 14%, in 2020 compared with 2019, primarily due to lower volumes driven by the economic impact of COVID-19, the exit of the Reynobond product line in Europe, and the rationalization of the windows product line.
Third-party sales for this segment decreased $22, or 2%, in 2019 compared with 2018, primarily driven by unfavorable foreign currency movements, principally driven by a weaker euro, and unfavorable aluminum pricing (see below). These negative impacts were somewhat offset by higher volume.
In 2019, the lower aluminum prices were largely driven by a 15% drop in the average LME aluminum price.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA. Segment adjusted EBITDA for the Building and Construction Systems segment increased $11, or 9%, in 2020 compared with 2019, principally driven by net cost savings and a decrease in employee retirement benefit plan expenses (see footnote 1 to the Reconciliation of Total Segment Adjusted EBITDA below), partially offset by lower volumes.
Segment adjusted EBITDA for this segment increased $9, or 8%, in 2019 compared with 2018, principally driven by net cost savings.
Extrusions
__________________
* Sales to the Howmet Aerospace Businesses were $33, $52, and $61 in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. These sales are deemed to be related-party sales and are presented as such on Arconic Corporation’s Statement of Consolidated Operations. The product sold to the Howmet Aerospace Businesses consists of aluminum billet and forged aluminum stock.
Overview. The Extrusions segment produces a range of extruded and machined parts for the aerospace, automotive, commercial transportation, and industrial products end markets. These products are sold directly to customers and through distributors. Prices for these products are generally based on the price of metal plus a premium for adding value to the aluminum to produce a semi-finished product, resulting in a business model in which the underlying price of metal is contractually passed-through to customers. Generally, the sales and costs and expenses of this segment are transacted in the local currency of the respective operations, which are the U.S. dollar and, to a lesser extent, the euro.
On March 1, 2020, Arconic Corporation completed the sale of its hard alloy extrusions plant in South Korea. The extrusions plant generated third-party sales of $8, $51, and $53 in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, and, at the time of divestiture, had approximately 160 employees. See Note S to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Sales. Third-party sales for the Extrusions segment decreased $169, or 31%, in 2020 compared with 2019, primarily driven by lower volumes related to the aerospace, ground transportation, and industrial end markets, driven by the economic impact of COVID-19 and/or production declines due to delays associated with the Boeing 737 MAX, and the absence of sales ($43) related to the divestiture of an extrusions plant in South Korea (see above). These negative impacts were slightly offset by a favorable aerospace mix.
Third-party sales for this segment increased $4, or 1%, in 2019 compared with 2018, primarily driven by favorable product mix (mainly related to the automotive end market).
Segment Adjusted EBITDA. Segment Adjusted EBITDA for the Extrusions segment decreased $7 in 2020 compared with 2019, principally caused by lower volumes and costs ($9) related to both inventory write-downs and customer settlements, partially offset by net cost savings, including lower labor costs (see Outlook under Results of Operations above), and the absence of certain employee retirement benefit plan expenses (see footnote 1 to the Reconciliation of Total Segment Adjusted EBITDA below).
Segment Adjusted EBITDA for this segment decreased $32 in 2019 compared with 2018, principally driven by higher operating costs, including labor, maintenance, and transportation. These negative impacts were partially offset by the absence of a charge for a physical inventory adjustment at one plant ($14).
Reconciliation of Total Segment Adjusted EBITDA to Consolidated Net (Loss) Income Attributable to Arconic Corporation
_________________
(1)In preparation for the Separation, effective January 1, 2020, certain U.S. defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans previously sponsored by ParentCo were separated into standalone plans for both Arconic Corporation and Howmet Aerospace. Additionally, effective April 1, 2020, Arconic Corporation assumed a portion of the obligations associated with certain non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans that included participants related to both the Arconic Corporation Businesses and the Howmet Aerospace Businesses, as well as legacy defined benefit pension plans assigned to the Company as a result of the Separation. As a result, beginning in the first quarter of 2020 for these U.S. plans and in the second quarter of 2020 for these non-U.S. plans, Arconic Corporation applied defined benefit plan accounting resulting in benefit plan expense being recorded in operating income (service cost) and nonoperating income (nonservice cost). In all historical periods prior to these respective timeframes, Arconic Corporation was considered a participating employer in ParentCo’s defined benefit plans and, therefore, applied multiemployer plan accounting resulting in the Company’s share of benefit plan expense being recorded entirely in operating income. Also, Arconic Corporation is the plan sponsor of certain other non-U.S. defined benefit plans that contain participants related only to the Arconic Corporation Businesses and, therefore, the related benefit plan expense was recorded in accordance with defined benefit plan accounting in all periods presented. The following table presents the total benefit plan expense (excluding settlements and curtailments) recorded by Arconic Corporation based on the foregoing in each period presented:
(2)Effective July 1, 2020, the Company changed its inventory cost method to average cost for all U.S. inventories previously carried at LIFO cost. The effects of the change in accounting principle have been retrospectively applied to all prior periods presented in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements. See Note M to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
(3)Corporate expenses are composed of general administrative and other expenses of operating the corporate headquarters and other global administrative facilities, as well as research and development expenses of the corporate technical center. Amounts presented for all periods prior to second quarter 2020 represent an allocation of ParentCo’s corporate expenses (see the Cost Allocations section of The Separation under Overview above).
(4)Metal price lag represents the financial impact of the timing difference between when aluminum prices included in Sales are recognized and when aluminum purchase prices included in Cost of goods sold are realized. This adjustment aims to remove the effect of the volatility in metal prices and the calculation of this impact considers applicable metal hedging transactions.
(5)In 2020, Restructuring and other charges includes a $199 charge for the settlement of certain employee retirement benefits virtually all within the United States and the United Kingdom. See Note H to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
(6)Other includes certain items that impact Cost of goods sold and Selling, general administrative, and other expenses on the Company’s Statement of Consolidated Operations that are not included in Segment Adjusted EBITDA.
Environmental Matters
See the Environmental Matters section of Note T to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Arconic Corporation’s primary future cash needs are centered on operating activities, including working capital, as well as recurring and strategic capital expenditures. The Company’s ability to fund its cash needs depends on its ongoing ability to generate and raise cash in the future. Although management believes that Arconic Corporation's future cash from operations, together with the Company's access to capital markets, will provide adequate resources to fund Arconic Corporation's operating and investing needs, the Company's access to, and the availability of, financing on acceptable terms in the future will be affected by many factors, including: (i) Arconic Corporation’s credit rating; (ii) the liquidity of the overall capital markets; and (iii) the current state of the economy. There can be no assurances that the Company will continue to have access to capital markets on terms acceptable to Arconic Corporation.
For all periods prior to the Separation Date, ParentCo provided capital, cash management, and other treasury services to the Company. Only cash amounts specifically attributable to Arconic Corporation were reflected in the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements. Transfers of cash, both to and from ParentCo’s centralized cash management system, were reflected as a component of Parent Company net investment in Arconic Corporation's Consolidated Financial Statements.
Cash provided from operations and financing activities is expected to be adequate to cover the Company’s operational and business needs over the next 12 months. For an analysis of long-term liquidity, see Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements below.
At December 31, 2020, the Company’s cash and cash equivalents were $787, of which $256 was held outside the United States. Arconic Corporation has a number of commitments and obligations related to the Company’s operations in various foreign jurisdictions, resulting in the need for cash outside the United States. Management continuously evaluates the Company's local and global cash needs for future business operations, which may influence future repatriation decisions.
Operating Activities
Cash provided from operations was $6 in 2020 compared with $457 in 2019 and $503 in 2018.
In 2020, cash provided from operations was comprised of a positive add-back for non-cash transactions in earnings of $552 and a favorable change in noncurrent assets and liabilities of $56, mostly offset by pension contributions of $271, an unfavorable change in working capital of $222 (see below), and a net loss of $109.
In 2019, cash provided from operations was comprised primarily of a positive add-back for non-cash transactions in earnings of $313 and net income of $177, slightly offset by an unfavorable change in working capital of $57.
In 2020, working capital was significantly impacted by the fact that customer receivables related to the Arconic Corporation Businesses were no longer included in ParentCo’s accounts receivable securitization program effective January 2, 2020. In periods prior to 2020, certain identified customer receivables related to the Arconic Corporation Businesses were sold on a revolving basis to a ParentCo subsidiary under this program. Accordingly, sales of such receivables were reflected as a
component of Parent Company net investment on Arconic Corporation’s Consolidated Balance Sheet as Arconic Corporation no longer had the right to collect and receive cash from the related customers. Had customer receivables related to the Arconic Corporation Businesses not been included in ParentCo’s program in 2019, the previously mentioned unfavorable change in working capital of $57 would have increased by $281. See Cash Management in Note A to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
In 2018, cash provided from operations was comprised primarily of a positive add-back for non-cash transactions in earnings of $201, net income of $187, and a favorable change in working capital of $137.
Financing Activities
Cash provided from financing activities was $744 in 2020 compared with cash used for financing activities of $295 in 2019 and cash used for financing activities of $536 in 2018. The source of cash in 2020 was due to $2,343 in net proceeds (reflects additional debt issuance costs paid from cash on hand) from the issuance of new indebtedness (see below) and $216 in net cash funding provided by ParentCo prior to the Separation Date, partially offset by $1,100 for the repayment of debt (see below) and a $728 payment to ParentCo in connection with the Separation (see The Separation under Overview above). The use of cash in both 2019 and 2018 was mostly due to net cash transfers to ParentCo.
Financing Arrangements. In connection with the capital structure to be established at the time of the Separation, Arconic Corporation secured $1,200 in third-party indebtedness. On February 7, 2020, Arconic Corporation completed a Rule 144A (U.S. Securities Act of 1933, as amended) debt offering for $600 of 6.125% Senior Secured Second-Lien Notes due 2028 (the “2028 Notes”). The Company received $593 in net proceeds from the debt offering reflecting a discount to the initial purchasers of the 2028 Notes. Also, on March 25, 2020, Arconic Corporation entered into a credit agreement, which provided a $600 Senior Secured First-Lien Term Loan B Facility (variable rate and seven-year term) (the “Term Loan”) and a $1,000 Senior Secured First-Lien Revolving Credit Facility (variable rate and five-year term) (the “Credit Facility”), with a syndicate of lenders and issuers named therein (the “Credit Agreement”). The Company received $575 in net proceeds from the Term Loan reflecting upfront fees and costs to enter into the financing arrangement.
The Company used a portion of the $1,168 in net proceeds from the aggregate indebtedness to make a $728 payment to ParentCo on April 1, 2020 to fund the transfer of certain net assets from ParentCo to Arconic Corporation in connection with the completion of the Separation (see The Separation under Overview above). The payment to ParentCo was calculated as the difference between (i) the $1,168 of net proceeds from the aggregate indebtedness and (ii) the difference between a beginning cash balance at the Separation Date of $500, as provided for in the Separation and Distribution Agreement, and the amount of cash held by Arconic Corporation Businesses at March 31, 2020 ($60 - the sum of this amount and the aggregate indebtedness in (i) equals the sum of Cash and cash equivalents and Restricted cash on the Company’s Combined Balance Sheet as of March 31, 2020).
On April 2, 2020, Arconic Corporation borrowed $500, which was subject to an interest rate equal to the sum of the three-month LIBOR plus a 2.0% applicable margin, under the Credit Facility. This borrowing was a proactive measure taken by the Company to bolster its liquidity and preserve financial flexibility in light of uncertainties resulting from the COVID-19 outbreak (see Outlook under Results of Operations above).
On May 13, 2020, Arconic Corporation executed a refinancing of its existing Credit Agreement in order to provide improved financial flexibility. Arconic Corporation completed a Rule 144A (U.S. Securities Act of 1933, as amended) debt offering for $700 of 6.0% Senior Secured First-Lien Notes due 2025 (the “2025 Notes”). The Company received $691 in net proceeds from the debt offering reflecting a discount to the initial purchasers of the 2025 Notes. Additionally, Arconic Corporation entered into a credit agreement with a syndicate of lenders named therein and Deutsche Bank AG New York Branch, as administrative agent (the “ABL Credit Agreement”). The ABL Credit Agreement provides for a senior secured asset-based revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of $800 (availability was $678 during the 2020 fourth quarter and was determined to be $732 for the 2021 first quarter - see ABL Credit Agreement in Note Q to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K), including a letter of credit sub-facility and a swingline loan sub-facility (the “ABL Credit Facility”). In addition, the ABL Credit Facility includes an accordion feature allowing the Company to request one or more increases to the revolving commitments in an aggregate principal amount up to $350.
Arconic Corporation used the net proceeds from the new indebtedness, together with cash on hand, to prepay in full the obligations outstanding under both the Term Loan ($600) and Credit Facility ($500) and to terminate in full the commitments under the Credit Agreement.
See Note Q to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K for descriptions of the 2028 Notes, 2025 Notes, and ABL Credit Agreement.
In connection with the issuance of the 2028 Notes and the execution of the Credit Agreement, the Company paid $42 in discounts to the initial purchasers and/or upfront fees and costs (the “debt issuance costs”), of which $30 was attributable to the Term Loan and the Credit Facility. The debt issuance costs were initially deferred and were being amortized to interest expense over the respective terms of the 2028 Notes, the Term Loan, and the Credit Facility. In connection with the issuance of the 2025 Notes and the execution of the ABL Credit Agreement, the Company paid $15 in discounts to the initial purchasers and/or upfront fees and costs (the “new debt issuance costs”). As a result of applying both debt modification and debt extinguishment accounting, as appropriate based on the lender mix for each debt instrument, to the debt refinancing, the Company was required to write off $16 of the $30 in debt issuance costs and immediately expense $3 of the $15 in new debt issuance costs. This $19 was reported within Interest expense on the Company’s Statement of Consolidated Operations. The remaining $14 in debt issuance costs continued to be deferred and the remaining $12 in new debt issuance costs were deferred; both are being amortized to interest expense over the respective terms of the 2025 Notes and the ABL Credit Agreement.
Ratings. Arconic Corporation’s cost of borrowing and ability to access the capital markets are affected not only by market conditions but also by the ratings assigned to Arconic Corporation and its debt by the major credit rating agencies. As of December 31, 2020, the following are the most recent ratings for Arconic Corporation and its outstanding debt.
Moody’s Investor Service (Moody’s) has assigned a Ba3 rating to both the Company and the 2028 Notes and a Ba1 rating to the 2025 Notes. Additionally, Moody's has given these ratings a stable outlook.
Standard and Poor’s Global Ratings (S&P) has assigned a BB rating to the Company, a B+ rating to the 2028 Notes, and a BB+ rating to the 2025 Notes. Additionally, S&P has given these ratings a stable outlook.
Fitch Ratings (Fitch) has assigned a BB+ rating to both the Company and the 2028 Notes and a BBB- rating to both the 2025 Notes and the ABL Credit Facility. Additionally, Fitch has given these ratings a negative outlook.
Investing Activities
Cash used for investing activities was $38 in 2020 compared with $170 in 2019 and $10 in 2018.
The use of cash in 2020 reflects capital expenditures of $163, mostly offset by $98 in net proceeds received from the sales of an extrusions plant in South Korea and a rolling mill in Brazil and additional proceeds of $25 (contingent consideration) received from the 2018 sale of the Texarkana (Texas) rolling mill.
The use of cash in 2019 reflects capital expenditures of $201, including for an approximately $140 project at the Davenport (Iowa) plant and an approximately $100 project at the Tennessee plant, slightly offset by additional proceeds of $27 (contingent consideration) received from the 2018 sale of the Texarkana (Texas) rolling mill. At Davenport, Arconic Corporation installed a new horizontal heat treat furnace to capture growth in the aerospace and industrial products markets. This project began near the end of 2017 and was completed in 2019 (furnace was in customer qualification stage as of December 31, 2019). At Tennessee, Arconic Corporation is expanding its hot mill capability and adding downstream equipment capabilities to capture growth in the automotive and industrial products markets. This project began in early 2019 and was essentially complete at the end of 2020.
The use of cash in 2018 reflects capital expenditures of $317, including for a horizontal heat treat furnace at the Davenport (Iowa) plant, mostly offset by proceeds of $302 from the sale of the Texarkana (Texas) rolling mill and cast house.
Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Contractual Obligations. Arconic Corporation is required to make future payments under various contracts, including long-term purchase obligations, lease agreements, and financing arrangements. The Company also has commitments to make contributions to its funded pension plans, provide payments for pension (unfunded) and other postretirement benefit plans, and fund capital projects. As of December 31, 2020, a summary of Arconic Corporation’s outstanding contractual obligations is as follows (these contractual obligations are grouped in the same manner as they are classified in the Statement of Consolidated Cash Flows in order to provide a better understanding of the nature of the obligations and to provide a basis for comparison to historical information):
Obligations for Operating Activities
Raw material purchase obligations consist mostly of aluminum with expiration dates ranging from less than one year to two years. Energy-related purchase obligations consist primarily of electricity and natural gas contracts with expiration dates ranging from one year to eight years. Many of these purchase obligations contain variable pricing components, and, as a result, actual cash payments may differ from the estimates provided in the preceding table.
Operating leases represent multi-year obligations for certain land and buildings, plant equipment, vehicles, and computer equipment.
Interest related to debt is based on stated interest rates on debt with maturities that extend to 2028 (see the Financing Arrangements section of Financing Activities under Liquidity and Capital Resources above).
Pension contributions (funded plans) and pension (unfunded plans) and other postretirement benefit payments are based on actuarial estimates using current assumptions for, among others, discount rates, long-term rate of return on plan assets, rate of compensation increases, and/or health care cost trend rates. It is Arconic Corporation’s policy to contribute amounts to funded pension plans sufficient to meet the minimum requirements set forth in applicable country employee benefit and tax regulations. The minimum required contributions to funded pension plans are estimated to be $192 for 2021, $144 for 2022, $164 for 2023, $152 for 2024, and $117 for 2025. In January 2021, the Company contributed a combined $200 to its two U.S. funded pension plans, comprised of the estimated minimum required funding for 2021 of $183 and an additional $17. Accordingly, the amount for pension contributions - funded plans in the preceding table for 2021 includes the $17. Pension benefit payments for unfunded plans are expected to approximate $7 to $8 annually for years 2021 through 2030. Other postretirement benefit payments are expected to approximate $30 to $35 annually for years 2021 through 2025 and $30 annually for years 2026 through 2030. The other postretirement benefit payments will be slightly offset by subsidy receipts related to Medicare Part D, which are estimated to approximate $1 annually. Management has determined that it is not practicable to present pension contributions (funded plans) and both pension (unfunded plans) and other postretirement benefit payments beyond 2025 and 2030, respectively.
Layoff and other restructuring payments relate virtually all to severance costs.
Uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken on an income tax return may result in additional payments to tax authorities. As of December 31, 2020, no interest and penalties were accrued related to such positions. The total amount of uncertain tax positions is included in the “Thereafter” column as Arconic Corporation is not able to reasonably estimate the timing of potential future payments. If a tax authority agrees with the tax position taken or expected to be taken or the applicable statute of limitations expires, then additional payments will not be necessary.
Obligations for Financing Activities
The debt amount in the preceding table represents the principal amounts of all outstanding long-term debt, which have maturities that extend to 2028 (see the Financing Arrangements section of Financing Activities under Liquidity and Capital Resources above).
As of December 31, 2020, Arconic Corporation had 109,205,226 issued and outstanding shares of common stock. Dividends on common stock are subject to authorization by the Company’s Board of Directors. Arconic Corporation did not declare or pay any dividends from April 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020.
Obligations for Investing Activities
Capital projects in the preceding table only include amounts approved by management as of December 31, 2020. Funding levels may vary in future years based on anticipated construction schedules of the projects. It is expected that significant expansion projects will be funded through various sources, including cash provided from operations. Total capital expenditures are anticipated to be approximately $180 in 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements. Arconic Corporation has outstanding bank guarantees related to, among others, tax matters and customs duties. The total amount committed under these guarantees, which expire at various dates between 2021 and 2026 was $2 at December 31, 2020. Additionally, Howmet Aerospace has outstanding bank guarantees related to the Company in the amount of $1 at December 31, 2020. In the event Howmet Aerospace would be required to perform under any of these instruments, Howmet Aerospace would be indemnified by Arconic Corporation in accordance with the Separation and Distribution Agreement. Furthermore, Alcoa Corporation has outstanding bank guarantees related to the Company in the amount of $14 at December 31, 2020. In the event Alcoa Corporation would be required to perform under any of these instruments, Alcoa Corporation would be indemnified by Arconic Corporation in accordance with the 2016 Separation and Distribution Agreement.
Arconic Corporation has outstanding letters of credit primarily related to insurance, environmental, and lease obligations. The total amount committed under these letters of credit, which automatically renew or expire at various dates, mostly in 2021, was $7 at December 31, 2020. Additionally, Howmet Aerospace has outstanding letters of credit related to the Company in the amount of $43 at December 31, 2020. In the event Howmet Aerospace would be required to perform under any of these instruments, Howmet Aerospace would be indemnified by Arconic Corporation in accordance with the Separation and Distribution Agreement.
Arconic Corporation has outstanding surety bonds primarily related to customs duties and environmental obligations. The total amount committed under these surety bonds, which expire at various dates, primarily in 2021, was $45 at December 31, 2020. Additionally, Howmet Aerospace has outstanding surety bonds related to the Company in the amount of $4 at December 31, 2020. In the event Howmet Aerospace would be required to perform under any of these instruments, Howmet Aerospace would be indemnified by Arconic Corporation in accordance with the Separation and Distribution Agreement. Furthermore, Alcoa Corporation has outstanding surety bonds related to the Company in the amount of $5 at December 31, 2020. In the event Alcoa Corporation would be required to perform under any of these instruments, Alcoa Corporation would be indemnified by Arconic Corporation in accordance with the 2016 Separation and Distribution Agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of Arconic Corporation’s Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make certain estimates based on judgments and assumptions regarding uncertainties that may affect the amounts reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and disclosed in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Areas that require such estimates include the review of properties, plants, and equipment and goodwill for impairment, and accounting for each of the following: environmental and litigation matters; pension and other postretirement employee benefit obligations; stock-based compensation; and income taxes.
Management uses historical experience and all available information to make these estimates, and actual results may differ from those used to prepare Arconic Corporation’s Consolidated Financial Statements at any given time. Despite these inherent limitations, management believes that Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and the Consolidated Financial Statements, including the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, provide a meaningful and fair perspective of the Company.
A summary of Arconic Corporation’s significant accounting policies is included in Note B to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K. Management believes that the application of these policies on a consistent basis enables Arconic Corporation to provide the users of the Consolidated Financial Statements with useful and reliable information about Arconic Corporation’s operating results and financial condition.
Prior to the Separation Date, Arconic Corporation did not operate as a separate, standalone entity. Arconic Corporation’s operations were included in ParentCo’s financial results. Accordingly, for all periods prior to the Separation Date, the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements were prepared from ParentCo’s historical accounting records and were presented on a standalone basis as if the Arconic Corporation Businesses had been conducted independently from ParentCo. Such Consolidated Financial Statements include the historical operations that were considered to comprise the Arconic Corporation Businesses, as well as certain assets and liabilities that were historically held at ParentCo’s corporate level but were specifically identifiable or otherwise attributable to Arconic Corporation. The Critical Accounting Policies described below reflect any incremental judgments and assumptions made by management in the preparation of the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements prior to the Separation Date (see The Separation in Overview above for additional information).
Properties, Plants, and Equipment. Properties, plants, and equipment are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such assets may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets is determined by comparing the estimated undiscounted net cash flows of the related operations (asset group) to the carrying value of the associated assets. An impairment loss would be recognized when the carrying value of the assets exceeds the estimated undiscounted net cash flows of the asset group. The amount of the impairment loss to be recorded is calculated as the excess of the carrying value of the assets over their fair value, with fair value determined using the best information available, which generally is a discounted cash flow (DCF) model. The determination of what constitutes an asset group, the associated estimated undiscounted net cash flows, and the estimated useful lives of the assets also require significant judgments.
Goodwill. Goodwill is not amortized; it is reviewed for impairment annually (in the fourth quarter) or more frequently if indicators of impairment exist or if a decision is made to sell, exit, or realign a business. A significant amount of judgment is involved in determining if an indicator of impairment has occurred. Such indicators may include, among others, deterioration in general economic conditions, negative developments in equity and credit markets, adverse changes in the markets in which an entity operates, increases in input costs that have a negative effect on earnings and cash flows, or a trend of negative or declining cash flows over multiple periods. The fair value that could be realized in an actual transaction may differ from that used to evaluate goodwill for impairment.
Goodwill is allocated among and evaluated for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment. Arconic Corporation has three reporting units-the Rolled Products segment, the Building and Construction Systems segment, and the Extrusions segment-all of which contain goodwill. As of December 31, 2020, the carrying value of goodwill for Rolled Products, Building and Construction Systems, and Extrusions was $254, $71, and $65, respectively.
In reviewing goodwill for impairment, an entity has the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not (greater than 50%) that the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If an entity elects to perform a qualitative assessment and determines that an impairment is more likely than not, the entity is then required to perform a quantitative impairment test (described below), otherwise no further analysis is required. An entity also may elect not to perform the qualitative assessment and, instead, proceed directly to the quantitative impairment test. The ultimate outcome of the goodwill impairment review for a reporting unit should be the same whether an entity chooses to perform the qualitative assessment or proceeds directly to the quantitative impairment test.
Arconic Corporation determines annually, based on facts and circumstances, which of its reporting units will be subject to the qualitative assessment. For those reporting units where a qualitative assessment is either not performed or for which the conclusion is that an impairment is more likely than not, a quantitative impairment test will be performed. Arconic Corporation’s policy is that a quantitative impairment test be performed for each reporting unit at least once during every three-year period.
Under the qualitative assessment, various events and circumstances (or factors) that would affect the estimated fair value of a reporting unit are identified (similar to impairment indicators above). These factors are then classified by the type of impact they would have on the estimated fair value using positive, neutral, and adverse categories based on current business conditions. Additionally, an assessment of the level of impact that a particular factor would have on the estimated fair value is determined using high, medium, and low weighting. Furthermore, management considers the results of the most recent quantitative impairment test completed for a reporting unit and compares the weighted average cost of capital (WACC) between the current and prior years for each reporting unit.
Under the quantitative impairment test, the evaluation of impairment involves comparing the current fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value, including goodwill. Arconic Corporation uses a DCF model to estimate the current fair value of its reporting units when testing for impairment, as management believes forecasted cash flows are the best indicator of such fair value. Several significant assumptions and estimates are involved in the application of the DCF model to forecast operating cash flows, including sales growth (volumes and pricing), production costs, capital spending, working capital levels, and discount rate. Certain of these assumptions may vary significantly among the reporting units. Cash flow forecasts are generally based on approved business unit operating plans for the early years and historical relationships in later years. The WACC rate for the individual reporting units is estimated by management with the assistance of valuation experts. In the event the estimated fair value of a reporting unit per the DCF model is less than the carrying value, Arconic Corporation would recognize an impairment charge equal to the excess of the reporting unit’s carrying value over its fair value without exceeding the total amount of goodwill applicable to that reporting unit.
During the 2020 annual review of goodwill, management proceeded directly to the quantitative impairment test for all three of the Company's reporting units. The estimated fair value for each of the three reporting units was substantially in excess of the respective carrying value, resulting in no impairment.
The annual review in 2019 and 2018 indicated that goodwill was not impaired for any of Arconic Corporation’s reporting units and there were no triggering events that necessitated a quantitative impairment test for any of the reporting units. That said, in light of the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company did perform periodic qualitative assessments throughout 2020 as described below.
During the first quarter of 2020, the equity value of Arconic Corporation’s peer group companies, and the overall U.S. stock market declined significantly amid market volatility. In addition, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and measures designed to contain the spread, sales globally to customers in the ground transportation and aerospace industries that are impacted by COVID-19 have been and are expected to be negatively impacted as a result of disruption in demand. As a result of these macroeconomic factors, the Company performed a qualitative assessment to evaluate whether it was more likely than not that the fair value of any of its reporting units was less than the respective carrying value. As a result of this assessment, the Company concluded that no further analysis was required and no impairment existed. The Company revisited this assessment in both the second and third quarters of 2020 amid the continued widespread impact of COVID-19 and arrived at the same conclusion. If Arconic Corporation’s actual results or external market factors further decline significantly, future goodwill impairment charges may be necessary and could be material.
Environmental Matters. Expenditures for current operations are expensed or capitalized, as appropriate. Expenditures relating to existing conditions caused by past operations, which will not contribute to future revenues, are expensed. Liabilities are recorded when remediation costs are probable and can be reasonably estimated. The liability may include costs such as site investigations, consultant fees, feasibility studies, outside contractors, and monitoring expenses. Estimates are generally not discounted or reduced by potential claims for recovery, which are recognized when probable and as agreements are reached with third parties. The estimates may also include costs related to other potentially responsible parties to the extent that Arconic Corporation has reason to believe such parties will not fully pay their proportionate share. The liability is continuously reviewed and adjusted to reflect current remediation progress, prospective estimates of required activity, and other factors that may be relevant, including changes in technology or regulations.
Litigation Matters. For asserted claims and assessments, liabilities are recorded when an unfavorable outcome of a matter is deemed to be probable and the loss is reasonably estimable. Management determines the likelihood of an unfavorable outcome based on many factors such as, among others, the nature of the matter, available defenses and case strategy, progress of the matter, views and opinions of legal counsel and other advisors, applicability and success of appeals processes, and the
outcome of similar historical matters. Once an unfavorable outcome is deemed probable, management weighs the probability of estimated losses, and the most reasonable loss estimate is recorded. If an unfavorable outcome of a matter is deemed to be reasonably possible, the matter is disclosed and no liability is recorded. With respect to unasserted claims or assessments, management must first determine the probability an assertion will be made is likely; then a determination as to the likelihood of an unfavorable outcome and the ability to reasonably estimate the potential loss is made. Legal matters are reviewed on a continuous basis to determine if there has been a change in management’s judgment regarding the likelihood of an unfavorable outcome or the estimate of a potential loss.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits. For all periods prior to January 1, 2020 (see below), certain employees attributable to the Arconic Corporation Businesses participated in defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit plans sponsored by ParentCo (the “Shared Plans”), which also included participants attributable to non-Arconic Corporation Businesses. Arconic Corporation accounted for the portion of the Shared Plans related to its employees as multiemployer benefit plans. Accordingly, Arconic Corporation did not record an asset or liability to recognize any portion of the funded status of the Shared Plans. However, the related expense recorded by the Company was based primarily on pensionable compensation and estimated interest costs related to participants attributable to the Arconic Corporation Businesses.
Prior to the Separation Date, certain other ParentCo plans that were entirely attributable to employees of the Arconic Corporation Businesses (“Direct Plans”) were accounted for as defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit plans. Accordingly, the funded and unfunded position of each Direct Plan was recorded in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Actuarial gains and losses that have not yet been recognized in earnings were recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income, net of taxes, until they were amortized as a component of net periodic benefit cost. The determination of benefit obligations and recognition of expenses related to the Direct Plans is dependent on various assumptions, including discount rates, long-term expected rates of return on plan assets, and future compensation increases. ParentCo’s management developed each assumption using relevant company experience in conjunction with market-related data for each individual location in which such plans exist.
In preparation for the Separation, effective January 1, 2020, certain of the Shared Plans were separated into standalone plans for both Arconic Corporation (“New Direct Plans”) and ParentCo (see Note H to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K). Additionally, effective April 1, 2020, certain of the other remaining Shared Plans were assumed by Arconic Corporation (“Additional New Direct Plans”) (see Note H to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K). Accordingly, beginning on the respective effective dates, the New Direct Plans and the Additional New Direct Plans are accounted for as defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans. Additionally, the Direct Plans continue to be accounted for as defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans.
The following table summarizes the total expenses (excluding settlements and curtailments) recognized by Arconic Corporation related to the pension and other postretirement benefits described above:
__________________
* In 2020, 2019, and 2018, net periodic benefit cost for pension benefits was comprised of service cost of $21, $3, and $3, respectively, and non-service cost of $61, $2, and $2, respectively. In 2020, net periodic benefit cost for other postretirement benefits was comprised of service cost of $5 and non-service cost of $17.
Liabilities and expenses for pension and other postretirement benefits are determined using actuarial methodologies and incorporate significant assumptions, including the interest rate used to discount the future estimated liability, the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, and several assumptions relating to the employee workforce (compensation increases, health care cost trend rates, retirement age, and mortality).
The interest rate used to discount future estimated liabilities is determined using a Company-specific yield curve model (above-median) developed with the assistance of an external actuary. The cash flows of the projected benefit obligations are discounted using a single equivalent rate derived from yields on high quality corporate bonds, which represent a broad diversification of issuers in various sectors. The yield curve model parallels the projected plan cash flows, which have a weighted average duration of 11 years, and the underlying cash flows of the bonds included in the model exceed the cash flows needed to satisfy the plan obligations multiple times. If a deep market of high quality corporate bonds does not exist in a country, then the yield on government bonds is used. In 2020, the weighted average discount rate used to determine benefit obligations for pension plans was 2.45% and for other postretirement benefit plans was 2.61%. The impact on the combined pension and other postretirement liabilities of a change in the weighted average discount rate of 1/4 of 1% would be approximately $140 and either a charge or credit of approximately $1 to pretax earnings in the following year.
The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is generally applied to a five-year market-related value of plan assets (the fair value at the plan measurement date is used for certain non-U.S. plans). The process used by management to develop this assumption is one that relies on forward-looking investment returns by asset class. Management incorporates expected future investment returns on current and planned asset allocations using information from various external investment managers and consultants, as well as management’s own judgment. For 2020, management used 6.09% as its weighted-average expected long-term rate of return, which was based on the prevailing and planned strategic asset allocations, as well as estimates of future returns by asset class. For 2021, management anticipates that the weighted-average expected long-term rate of return will be in the range of 5.00% to 6.00%. A change in the assumption for the weighted average expected long-term rate of return on plan assets of 1/4 of 1% would impact pretax earnings by approximately $6 for 2021.
Stock-Based Compensation. For all periods prior to the Separation Date, eligible employees attributable to the Arconic Corporation Businesses participated in ParentCo’s stock-based compensation plan. The compensation expense recorded by Arconic Corporation included the expense associated with these employees, as well as the expense associated with an allocation of stock-based compensation expense for ParentCo's corporate employees (see Cost Allocations in The Separation under Overview above). From the Separation Date through December 31, 2020, Arconic Corporation recorded stock-based compensation expense for all of the Company's employees eligible to participate in Arconic Corporation's stock-based compensation plan. The following describes the manner in which stock-based compensation expense was initially determined for both Arconic Corporation and ParentCo.
Compensation expense for employee equity grants is recognized using the non-substantive vesting period approach, in which the expense is recognized ratably over the requisite service period based on the grant date fair value. The fair value of stock options is estimated on the date of grant using a lattice-pricing model. The fair value of performance stock units containing a market condition is valued using a Monte Carlo valuation model. Determining the fair value at the grant date requires judgment, including estimates for the average risk-free interest rate, dividend yield, volatility, and exercise behavior. These assumptions may differ significantly between grant dates because of changes in the actual results of these inputs that occur over time.
In 2020, 2019, and 2018, Arconic Corporation recognized stock-based compensation expense of $23 ($18 after-tax), $38 ($30 after-tax), and $22 ($17 after-tax), respectively.
Income Taxes. The provision for income taxes is determined using the asset and liability approach of accounting for income taxes. Under this approach, the provision for income taxes represents income taxes paid or payable (or received or receivable) for the current year plus the change in deferred taxes during the year. Deferred taxes represent the future tax consequences expected to occur when the reported amounts of assets and liabilities are recovered or paid, and result from differences between the financial and tax bases of Arconic Corporation’s assets and liabilities and are adjusted for changes in tax rates and tax laws when enacted.
For all periods prior to the Separation Date, the Arconic Corporation Businesses were included in the income tax filings of ParentCo. The provision for income taxes was determined in the same manner described above, but on a on a separate return methodology as if Arconic Corporation was a standalone taxpayer filing hypothetical income tax returns where applicable. Any additional accrued tax liability or refund arising as a result of this approach was assumed to be immediately settled with ParentCo as a component of Parent Company net investment. Deferred taxes were also determined in the same manner described above and were reflected in the Consolidated Balance Sheet for net operating losses, credits or other attributes to the extent that such attributes were expected to transfer to Arconic Corporation upon the Separation. Any difference from attributes generated in a hypothetical return on a separate return basis was adjusted as a component of Parent Company net investment.
Valuation allowances are recorded to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not (greater than 50%) that a tax benefit will not be realized. In evaluating the need for a valuation allowance, management considers all potential sources of taxable income, including income available in carryback periods, future reversals of taxable temporary differences, projections
of taxable income, and income from tax planning strategies, as well as all available positive and negative evidence. Positive evidence includes factors such as a history of profitable operations, projections of future profitability within the carryforward period, including from tax planning strategies, and Arconic Corporation’s experience with similar operations. Existing favorable contracts and the ability to sell products into established markets are additional positive evidence. Negative evidence includes items such as cumulative losses, projections of future losses, or carryforward periods that are not long enough to allow for the utilization of a deferred tax asset based on existing projections of income. Deferred tax assets for which no valuation allowance is recorded may not be realized upon changes in facts and circumstances, resulting in a future charge to establish a valuation allowance. Existing valuation allowances are re-examined under the same standards of positive and negative evidence. If it is determined that it is more likely than not that a deferred tax asset will be realized, the appropriate amount of the valuation allowance, if any, is released. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are also re-measured to reflect changes in underlying tax rates due to law changes and the grant and lapse of tax holidays.
Arconic Corporation applies a tax law ordering approach when considering the need for a valuation allowance on net operating losses expected to offset Global Intangible Low Taxed Income (GILTI) income inclusions. Under this approach, reductions in cash tax savings are not considered as part of the valuation allowance assessment. Instead, future GILTI inclusions are considered a source of taxable income that support the realizability of deferred tax assets.
Tax benefits related to uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken on a tax return are recorded when such benefits meet a more likely than not threshold. Otherwise, these tax benefits are recorded when a tax position has been effectively settled, which means that the statute of limitations has expired or the appropriate taxing authority has completed its examination even though the statute of limitations remains open. Interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions are recognized as part of the provision for income taxes and are accrued beginning in the period that such interest and penalties would be applicable under relevant tax law until such time that the related tax benefits are recognized.
Related Party Transactions
Transactions between the Arconic Corporation Businesses and the Howmet Aerospace Businesses have been presented as related party transactions on Arconic Corporation's Consolidated Financial Statements. In 2020, 2019, and 2018, sales to the Howmet Aerospace Businesses from the Arconic Corporation Businesses were $108, $183, and $206, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, outstanding receivables from the Howmet Aerospace Businesses were $12 and were included in Receivables from customers on Arconic Corporation's Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Recently Adopted Accounting Guidance
See the Recently Adopted Accounting Guidance section of Note B to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Recently Issued Accounting Guidance
See the Recently Issued Accounting Guidance section of Note B to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K.