Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our “Selected Financial Data” and our audited financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans, objectives, expectations, projections and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors identified below and those set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results and the timing of selected events could differ materially from the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Please also see the section entitled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a late-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on developing and commercializing treatments for dermatological diseases with high unmet medical needs. Our current portfolio is comprised of highly differentiated topical treatments with significant potential to treat immune-mediated dermatological diseases and conditions. We believe we have built the industry's leading platform for dermatologic product development. Our strategy is to focus on validated biological targets, and to use our platform and deep dermatology expertise to develop differentiated products that have the potential to address the major shortcomings of existing therapies in our targeted indications. We believe this strategy uniquely positions us to rapidly progress towards our goal of bridging the treatment innovation gap in dermatology, while maximizing our probability of technical success and financial resources.
Our lead product candidate, roflumilast cream, has successfully completed pivotal Phase 3 clinical trials in plaque psoriasis. We are currently preparing an NDA, with a submission to the FDA expected in the second half of 2021. Roflumilast cream is a highly potent and selective PDE4 inhibitor, an established biological target in dermatology, with multiple PDE4 inhibitors approved by the FDA for dermatological conditions. We are developing roflumilast cream for the treatment of plaque psoriasis, including psoriasis in intertriginous regions such as the groin, axillae, and inframammary areas, as well as atopic dermatitis. We have also successfully completed a long-term safety study of roflumilast cream in plaque psoriasis patients.
Additionally, we have completed a Phase 2 proof of concept study of roflumilast cream in atopic dermatitis and recently initiated Phase 3 clinical trials, with topline data expected in the second half of 2022.
We are also developing a topical foam formulation of roflumilast, and have successfully completed Phase 2 studies in both seborrheic dermatitis and scalp psoriasis. In seborrheic dermatitis, we had a successful End of Phase 2 meeting with the FDA and plan to initiate a single pivotal Phase 3 clinical trial in the second or third quarter of 2021, with topline data expected in the second or third quarter of 2022. Pending discussions with regulators, we expect to initiate our Phase 3 program in scalp psoriasis in the second half of 2021, with topline data anticipated in the second half of 2022.
Beyond this, we have completed enrollment in a Phase 2b clinical study of ARQ-252, a potent and highly selective topical JAK1 inhibitor for the treatment of chronic hand eczema, and expect topline data by mid-2021. We also plan to initiate a Phase 2 proof of concept study of ARQ-252 for the treatment of vitiligo in the first quarter of 2021. Additionally, we have formulation and preclinical efforts underway for ARQ-255, an alternative topical formulation of ARQ-252 designed to reach deeper into the skin in order to potentially treat alopecia areata.
Since our inception in 2016, we have invested a significant portion of our efforts and financial resources in clinical development activities. We have not generated any revenue from product sales and have funded our operations primarily with the net proceeds from our IPO completed in January and with the net proceeds from our follow-on equity offerings in October 2020 and February 2021 respectively, as well as with $162.5 million in net cash proceeds from private placements of our convertible preferred stock prior to IPO. On February 4, 2020, we closed our IPO of 10,781,250 shares of common stock at an offering price of $17.00 per share, which included the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase up to 1,406,250 additional shares of common stock. Our net proceeds, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering related transaction costs, were $167.2 million. In addition, on October 6, 2020, we closed our public offering of 4,000,000 shares of common stock and concurrent private placement of 1,400,000 shares of common stock, both at a price of $25.00 per share, receiving an aggregate of $128.4 million in net proceeds after deducting the underwriting discounts, commissions and offering related transaction costs. Also, on February 5, 2021, we closed our public offering of 6,325,000 shares of common stock at a price of $35.00 per share, including 825,000 shares sold pursuant to the underwriters' full exercise of their option to purchase additional shares, receiving approximately $207.4 million in aggregate net proceeds, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and estimated offering expenses. See Note 13 to the financial statements for additional information.
We have incurred net losses in each year since inception, including net losses of $135.7 million, $42.0 million and $19.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $202.0 million and cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash and marketable securities of $286.0 million.
We expect to continue to incur losses for the foreseeable future and expect to incur increased expenses as we advance our product candidates through clinical trials and regulatory submissions. We do not expect to generate revenue from product sales unless, and until, we obtain regulatory approval or clearance from the FDA or other foreign regulatory authorities for our product candidates. If we obtain regulatory approval or clearance for our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. In addition, we expect that our expenses will increase substantially as we continue preclinical studies and clinical trials for, and research and development of, our product candidates and maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio. As a result, we will need substantial additional funding to support our operating activities. Adequate funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. We currently anticipate that we will seek to fund our operations through equity or debt financings or other sources, such as future potential collaboration agreements. Our failure to obtain sufficient funds on acceptable terms as and when needed could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. See “-Liquidity, Capital Resources and Requirements” below and Note 1 to the financial statements for additional information. Based on our current planned operations, we expect that our current cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, along with the cash proceeds received in February 2021 related to our financing, will be sufficient to fund our operations into 2023.
We rely on third parties in the conduct of our preclinical studies and clinical trials and for manufacturing and supply of our product candidates. We have no internal manufacturing capabilities, and we will continue to rely on third parties, many of whom are single source suppliers, for our preclinical and clinical trial materials, as well as the commercial supply of our products. In addition, we do not yet have a sales organization or fully developed commercial infrastructure. Accordingly, we expect to incur significant expenses to fully develop a sales organization or commercial infrastructure in advance of generating any product sales.
COVID-19 Update
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared a pandemic related to the COVID-19 outbreak. COVID-19 has placed strains on the providers of healthcare services, including the sites where we conduct our clinical trials. These strains have resulted in some clinical sites slowing or halting enrollment in clinical trials and restricting the on-site monitoring of clinical trials. We follow FDA guidance on clinical trial conduct during the COVID-19 pandemic, including the remote monitoring of clinical data. We are monitoring the impact COVID-19 may have on the clinical development of our product candidates, including potential delays or modifications to ongoing and planned trials. Thus far, we have seen limited impact on our clinical trials including some disruptions in screening, enrollment and monitoring, however at this time, we do not expect delays to previously disclosed clinical timelines, including those for roflumilast cream, roflumilast foam and ARQ-252. We cannot, at this time, predict the specific extent, duration, or full impact that the COVID-19 outbreak will have on our ongoing and planned clinical trials and other business operations.
There have been no disruptions in our supply chain of drug manufacturers necessary to conduct our clinical trials and, given our drug inventories, we believe that we will be able to supply the drug needs of our ongoing clinical studies.
In alignment with public health guidance designed to slow the spread of COVID-19, we implemented a remote work plan for all employees as of mid-March 2020. We may need to undertake additional actions that could impact our operations as required by applicable laws or regulations, or which we determine to be in the best interests of our employees.
License Agreements
AstraZeneca License Agreement
In July 2018, we entered into the AstraZeneca License Agreement with AstraZeneca, granting us a worldwide exclusive license, with the right to sublicense through multiple tiers, under certain AstraZeneca-controlled patent rights, know-how and regulatory documentation, to research, develop, manufacture, commercialize and otherwise exploit products containing roflumilast in topical forms, as well as delivery systems sold with or for the administration of roflumilast, or collectively, the AZ-Licensed Products, for all diagnostic, prophylactic and therapeutic uses for human dermatological indications, or the Dermatology Field. Under this agreement, we have sole responsibility for development, regulatory, and commercialization activities for the AZ-Licensed Products in the Dermatology Field, at our expense, and we shall use commercially reasonable efforts to develop, obtain and maintain regulatory approvals for, and commercialize the AZ-Licensed Products in the Dermatology Field in each of the United States, Italy, Spain, Germany, the United Kingdom, France, China, and Japan.
We paid AstraZeneca an upfront non-refundable cash payment of $1.0 million and issued 484,388 shares of our Series B convertible preferred stock, valued at $3.0 million on the date of the AstraZeneca License Agreement. We subsequently paid AstraZeneca the first milestone cash payment of $2.0 million upon the completion of a Phase 2b study of roflumilast cream in plaque psoriasis in August 2019 for the achievement of positive Phase 2 data for an AZ-Licensed Product. We have agreed to make additional cash payments to AstraZeneca of up to an aggregate of $12.5 million upon the achievement of specific regulatory approval milestones with respect to the AZ-Licensed Products and payments up to an additional aggregate amount of $15.0 million upon the achievement of certain aggregate worldwide net sales milestones. With respect to any AZ-Licensed Products we commercialize under the AstraZeneca License Agreement, we will pay AstraZeneca a low to high single-digit percentage royalty rate on our, our affiliates’ and our sublicensees' net sales of such AZ-Licensed Products, until, as determined on an AZ-Licensed Product-by-AZ-Licensed Product and country-by-country basis, the later of the date of the expiration of the last-to-expire AstraZeneca-licensed patent right containing a valid claim in such country and ten years from the first commercial sale of such AZ-Licensed Product in such country. See Note 6 to the financial statements for additional information.
Hengrui Exclusive Option and License Agreement
In January 2018, we entered into the Hengrui License Agreement, with Hengrui, whereby Hengrui granted us an exclusive option to obtain certain exclusive rights to research, develop and commercialize products containing the compound designated by Hengrui as SHR0302, a JAK 1 inhibitor, in topical formulations for the treatment of skin diseases, disorders, and conditions in the United States, Canada, Japan, and the EU (including for clarity the United Kingdom). We made a $0.4 million upfront non-refundable cash payment to Hengrui upon execution of the Hengrui Option and License Agreement. In December 2019, we exercised our exclusive option under the agreement, for which we made a $1.5 million cash payment, and also contemporaneously amended the agreement to expand the territory to additionally include Canada. In addition, we have agreed to make cash payments of up to an aggregate of $20.5 million upon our achievement of specified clinical development and regulatory approval milestones with respect to the licensed products and cash payments of up to an additional aggregate of $200.0 million in sales-based milestones based on achieving certain aggregate annual net sales volumes with respect to a licensed product. With respect to any products we commercialize under the Hengrui License Agreement, we will pay tiered royalties to Hengrui on net sales of each licensed product by us, or our affiliates, or our sublicensees, ranging from mid single-digit to sub-teen percentage rates based on tiered annual net sales bands subject to specified reductions. We are obligated to pay royalties until the later of (1) expiration of the last valid claim of the licensed patent rights covering such licensed product in such country and (2) the expiration of regulatory exclusivity for the relevant licensed product in the relevant country, on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis. Additionally, we are obligated to pay Hengrui a specified percentage, ranging from the low-thirties to the sub-teens, of certain non-royalty sublicensing income we receive from sublicensees of our rights to the licensed products, such percentage decreasing as the development stage of the licensed products advance.
The agreement continues in effect until the expiration of our obligation to pay royalties as described above, unless earlier terminated in accordance with the following: (1) by either party upon written notice for the other party’s material breach or insolvency event if such party fails to cure such breach or the insolvency event is not dismissed within specified time periods; and (2) by us for convenience upon 90 days prior written notice to Hengrui and having discussed and consulted any potential cause or concern with Hengrui in good faith. See Note 6 to the financial statements for additional information.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Since our inception, we have focused significant resources on our research and development activities, including conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, manufacturing development efforts and activities related to regulatory filings for our product candidates. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. These costs include direct program expenses, which are payments made to third parties that specifically relate to our research and development, such as payments to clinical research organizations, clinical investigators, manufacturing of clinical material, preclinical testing and consultants. In addition, employee costs, including salaries, payroll taxes, benefits, stock-based compensation and travel, for employees contributing to research and development activities are classified as research and development costs. We allocate direct external costs to our product candidates; internal costs are not allocated to specific product candidates.
We expect to continue to incur substantial research and development expenses in the future as we develop our product candidates. In particular, we expect to incur substantial research and development expenses for the Phase 3 trials of roflumilast cream for atopic dermatitis and roflumilast foam for seborrheic dermatitis and scalp psoriasis, the preclinical studies and clinical trials for the continued development of ARQ-252 for hand eczema and vitiligo, and ARQ-255 for alopecia areata.
We have entered, and may continue to enter, into license agreements to access and utilize certain molecules for the treatment of dermatological diseases and disorders. We evaluate if the license agreement is an acquisition of an asset or a business. To date, none of our license agreements have been considered to be an acquisition of a business. For asset acquisitions, the upfront payments to acquire such licenses, as well as any future milestone payments made before product approval, are immediately recognized as research and development expense when due, provided there is no alternative future use of the rights in other research and development projects.
The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing or costs required to complete the remaining development of roflumilast cream, roflumilast foam, ARQ-252 and ARQ-255 or any future product candidates. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development of product candidates. See “Risk Factors” for a discussion of the risks and uncertainties associated with the development of our product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs, including payroll taxes, benefits, stock-based compensation and travel. Other general and administrative expenses include legal costs of pursuing patent protection of our intellectual property, insurance, and professional services fees for auditing, tax and general legal services. We expect our general and administrative expenses to continue to increase in the future as we expand our operating activities and prepare for potential commercialization of our product candidates, increase our headcount and support our operations as a public company, including increased expenses related to legal, accounting, insurance, regulatory and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements, directors and officers liability insurance premiums and investor relations activities.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net primarily consists of interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash and marketable securities.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods indicated:
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $78.8 million, or 216%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to an increase in clinical trial costs of $59.4 million, an increase in manufacturing costs of $9.9 million, an increase in compensation and personnel-related expenses of $9.2 million, and an increase of $3.8 million in other costs, including regulatory, research and clinical consulting costs, partially offset by a decrease in licensing milestones of $3.5 million. The increases in clinical trial and manufacturing costs relate primarily to new and ongoing studies, including Phase 3 studies of roflumilast cream for plaque psoriasis, Phase 2 studies of roflumilast foam in scalp psoriasis and seborrheic dermatitis, and the ARQ-252 Phase 2 study for hand eczema. The increase in compensation and personnel-related expenses, which includes stock compensation, was primarily due to an increase in headcount. Licensing milestones consisted of a $2.0 million cash milestone payment made to AstraZeneca in August 2019 and a $1.5 million cash option payment to Hengrui in December 2019.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $14.7 million, or 223%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase in compensation and personnel-related expenses of $7.6 million, an increase in professional services of $3.8 million, and an increase in insurance costs of $2.6 million. The increase in compensation and personnel-related expenses, which includes stock compensation, was primarily due to an increase in headcount. The increases in professional services and insurance costs were mainly due to overall Company growth and the costs associated with being a public company.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net decreased by $0.2 million, or 15%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a lower yield on our investment portfolio, partially offset by higher balances.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods indicated:
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $18.6 million, or 104%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was due to an increase in clinical trial costs of $14.6 million, an increase in compensation and personnel-related expenses of $3.0 million, and an increase in manufacturing costs of $1.0 million. The increases in clinical trial and manufacturing costs relate to the initiation of the Phase 2b and open label extension studies in roflumilast cream for plaque psoriasis in the second half of 2018 and the initiation of the Phase 2 study in roflumilast cream in atopic dermatitis in early 2019. The increase in compensation and personnel-related expenses, which includes stock compensation, was primarily due to an increase in headcount.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $4.8 million, or 268%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to an increase in professional services associate with the general growth of the business of $2.3 million, which includes legal, tax, audit, market research studies and various other administrative functions, as well as an increase of $2.1 million in compensation and personnel-related expenses, which includes stock compensation, due to an increase in headcount.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net increased by $0.7 million, or 137%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to interest earned on marketable securities, in which we had larger balances in 2019 than in 2018 due to the timing of issuances of our Series B and C convertible preferred stock.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Requirements
Sources of Liquidity
We have incurred operating losses since our inception and have an accumulated deficit as a result of ongoing efforts to develop our product candidates, including conducting preclinical and clinical trials and providing general and administrative support for these operations. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash and marketable securities of $286.0 million and $101.3 million, respectively, and an accumulated deficit of $202.0 million and $66.3 million, respectively. In addition, on February 5, 2021, we completed an equity offering and received approximately $207.4 million in aggregate net proceeds, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and estimated offering expenses. We anticipate that operating losses and net cash used in operating activities will increase over the next several years as we further develop roflumilast cream, roflumilast foam, ARQ-252 and ARQ-255, move into later and more costly stages of product development, develop new product candidates, hire personnel and prepare for regulatory submissions and the commercialization of our product candidates.
We have historically financed our operations primarily through private placements of preferred stock, as well as our IPO completed in January 2020 and our follow-on equity offerings in October 2020 and February 2021, and will continue to be dependent upon equity, debt financing, collaborations or other forms of capital at least until we are able to generate positive cash flows from our operations.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $113.0 million, which consisted of a net loss of $135.7 million, offset by a change in net operating assets and liabilities of $14.1 million and net non-cash charges of $8.5 million. The change in net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase of $17.6 million in accounts payable and accrued liabilities due to our operating expense growth and timing of payments. The net non-cash charges were primarily related to stock-based compensation expense of $7.9 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in operating activities was $42.8 million, which consisted of a net loss of $42.0 million, a change in net operating assets and liabilities of $1.5 million, partially offset by net non-cash charges of $0.7 million. The change in net operating assets and liabilities was due to an increase of $3.3 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets for advances made for clinical trial costs, partially offset by an increase of $1.9 million in accounts payable and accrued liabilities due to our overall growth, increased research and development spending and timing of payments. The net non-cash charges were primarily related to stock-based compensation expense of $0.8 million, and depreciation and right-of-use asset amortization of $0.2 million, partially offset by net amortization/accretion on marketable securities of $0.4 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash used in operating activities was $14.1 million and consisted primarily of a net loss of $19.3 million adjusted by non-cash charges of $3.1 million and a change of $2.1 million in our net operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges were primarily related to the issuance of convertible preferred stock in connection with the AstraZeneca License Agreement, which was expensed to research and development. The change in net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a net increase of $1.9 million in accounts payable and accrued liabilities due to our overall growth, increased research and development spending and timing of payments.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $181.8 million, which was comprised primarily of purchases of marketable securities of $279.1 million, partially offset by proceeds from the maturities of marketable securities of $97.6 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $26.3 million, which was comprised of purchases of marketable securities of $60.8 million and property and equipment of $0.3 million, partially offset by proceeds from the maturities of marketable securities of $34.8 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash used in investing activities was $11.5 million, which represented the purchase of marketable securities.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $298.1 million, which was comprised primarily of the net cash proceeds received from the IPO of $168.6 million and follow-on financing in October 2020 of $128.4 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $93.1 million, which was comprised of the net proceeds received from the issuance of Series C convertible preferred stock of $94.2 million as well as the proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $0.3 million, offset by deferred financing costs of $1.4 million paid in connection with the IPO.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash provided by financing activities was $61.6 million, which was comprised of $61.2 million in proceeds from the issuance of our Series A and Series B convertible preferred stock and $0.4 million from proceeds received from the exercise of stock options.
Funding Requirements
We have historically incurred significant losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception and had an accumulated deficit of $202.0 million and $66.3 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $284.4 million and $101.3 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In addition, on February 5, 2021, we received approximately $207.4 million in net proceeds from an equity offering, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and estimated offering expenses. Based on our current planned operations, we expect that our current cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, along with the cash proceeds from our financing in February 2021, will be sufficient to fund our operations into 2023. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to successfully secure sources of financing and ultimately achieve profitable operations.
We will need to raise substantial additional capital to fund our operations through the sale of our equity securities, incurring debt, entering into licensing or collaboration agreements with partners, grants or other sources of financing. There can be no assurance that sufficient funds will be available to us at all or on attractive terms when needed from these sources. If we are unable to obtain additional funding from these or other sources when needed it may be necessary to significantly reduce our current rate of spending through reductions in staff and delaying, scaling back, or stopping certain research and development programs. Insufficient liquidity may also require us to relinquish rights to product candidates at an earlier stage of development or on less favorable terms than we would otherwise choose.
We have based our projections of operating capital requirements on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect and we may use all our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our operating capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•the scope, progress, results and costs of researching and developing our lead product candidates or any future product candidates, and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, in particular our planned or ongoing clinical studies of roflumilast cream in plaque psoriasis and atopic dermatitis, roflumilast foam in seborrheic dermatitis and scalp psoriasis, ARQ-252 in hand eczema and vitiligo, and our formulation and preclinical efforts for ARQ-255 in alopecia areata.
•suspensions or delays in the enrollment or changes to the number of patients we decide to enroll in our ongoing clinical trials as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•the timing of, and the costs involved in, obtaining regulatory approvals for our lead product candidate or our other product candidates;
•the number and characteristics of any additional product candidates we develop or acquire;
•the cost of manufacturing our lead product candidates or any future product candidates and any products we successfully commercialize, including costs associated with building out our supply chain;
•the cost of commercialization activities if our lead product candidates or any future product candidates are approved for sale, including marketing, sales and distribution costs;
•the cost of building a sales force in anticipation of product commercialization;
•our ability to establish and maintain strategic collaborations, licensing or other arrangements and the financial terms of any such agreements that we may enter into;
•the costs related to milestone payments to AstraZeneca or Hengrui, upon the achievement of predetermined milestones;
•any product liability or other lawsuits related to our products;
•the expenses needed to attract and retain skilled personnel;
•the costs associated with being a public company;
•the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims, and the outcome of this and any other future patent litigation we may be involved in; and
•the timing, receipt and amount of sales of any future approved products, if any.
Contractual Obligations and Contingent Liabilities
The following summarizes our significant contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
In April 2020, we amended our lease agreement for our facility in Westlake Village, California to relocate to a new expanded space including 22,643 square feet. The lease payment term for the new space began on December 30, 2020 and will terminate 91 months thereafter, with a renewal option for a term of five years. We have a one-time option to cancel the lease after month 67.
The lease is subject to fixed rate escalation increases with an initial base rent of $76,000 per month and includes rent free periods aggregating approximately one year. The amended lease agreement provides for a leasehold improvement allowance up to $1.25 million. It also required that we deliver a letter of credit to the landlord of $1.5 million upon occupying the space, which is allowed to be reduced throughout the lease period as rent obligations are met. Accordingly, in November 2020, we entered into a letter of credit for $1.5 million, which is secured with a restricted cash account in the same amount.
Indemnification
In the normal course of business, we enter into contracts and agreements that contain a variety of representations and warranties and provide for general indemnifications. Our exposure under these agreements is unknown because it involves claims that may be made against us in the future, but have not yet been made. To date, we have not paid any claims or been required to defend any action related to our indemnification obligations. However, we may record charges in the future as a result of these indemnification obligations.
In accordance with our certificate of incorporation and bylaws, we have indemnification obligations to our officers and directors for specified events or occurrences, subject to some limits, while they are serving at our request in such capacities. There have been no claims to date, and we have director and officer insurance that may enable us to recover a portion of any amounts paid for future potential claims.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC rules.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses during the reporting periods. These items are monitored and analyzed by us for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results for the period in which they become known. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our financial statements and understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Preclinical and Clinical Accruals and Costs
We record accrued liabilities for estimated costs of research and development activities conducted by third-party service providers, which include the conduct of preclinical studies, clinical studies, clinical trials and contract manufacturing activities. These costs are a significant component of our research and development expenses. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred unless there is an alternative future use in other research and development projects. We accrue for these costs based on factors such as estimates of the work completed and in accordance with agreements established with third-party service providers under the service agreements. As it relates to clinical trials, the financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiations which vary from contract to contract and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided under such contracts. Payments made prior to the receipt of goods or services to be used in research and development are capitalized until the goods or services are received. Such payments are evaluated for current or long-term classification based on when they will be realized. Additionally, if expectations change such that we do not expect goods to be delivered or services to be rendered, such prepayments are charged to expense. Our objective is to reflect the appropriate expense in our financial statements by matching those expenses with the period in which the services and efforts are expended. We account for these expenses according to the progress of the trial as measured by patient progression and the timing of various aspects of the trial utilizing financial models taking into consideration discussions with applicable personnel and outside service providers. In this manner, our clinical trial accrual is dependent in part upon the timely and accurate reporting of progress and efforts incurred from CROs, contract manufacturers and other third-party vendors. Although we expect our estimates to be materially consistent with actual amounts incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in our reporting changes in estimates in any particular period. We make significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrued liabilities balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accrued liabilities. We have not experienced any material differences between accrued costs as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 and actual costs incurred.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for share-based payments at fair value. For share-based awards that vest subject to the satisfaction of a service requirement, the fair value measurement date for such awards is the date of grant and the expense is recognized on a straight-line basis, over the expected vesting period. For share-based awards that vest subject to a performance condition, we recognize compensation cost for awards if and when we conclude that it is probable that the awards with a performance condition will be achieved on an accelerated attribution method. We account for forfeitures as they occur.
We calculate the fair value measurement of stock options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and assumptions discussed below. Each of these inputs is subjective and generally requires significant judgement.
Fair value of common stock-see the subsection titled “Common Stock Valuation” below.
Expected Term-The expected term represents the period that we expect our stock-based awards to be outstanding. We used the simplified method (based on the mid-point between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term) to determine the expected term.
Expected Volatility-Since we do not have sufficient trading history for our common stock, the expected volatility was estimated based on the average historical volatilities for comparable publicly traded pharmaceutical companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies were chosen based on their similar size, stage in the life cycle and area of specialty. We will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our stock price becomes available.
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of option.
Dividend Yield-We have never paid dividends on common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
See Note 9 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information concerning certain of the specific assumptions we used in applying the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of our stock options. Certain of such assumptions involve inherent uncertainties and the application of significant judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our stock-based compensation could be materially different.
We recorded stock-based compensation expense of $7.9 million, $0.8 million, and $0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, there was $23.2 million of unrecognized compensation expense related to unvested options, which are expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of approximately 3.4 years. As of December 31, 2020, there was $3.6 million of unrecognized compensation expense related to restricted stock, which are expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of approximately 3.6 years. We expect to continue to grant stock options, restricted stock, and other equity-based awards in the future, and to the extent that we do, our stock-based compensation expense recognized in future periods will likely increase.
Common Stock Valuation
Prior to the completion of our public offering, there were significant assumptions and estimates required in determining the fair value of our common stock. Due to the absence of an active market for our common stock prior to our IPO, the fair value of our common stock for grants during that time period was determined in good faith by our board of directors, with the assistance and upon the recommendation of management and valuations of our common stock prepared by an unrelated third-party valuation firm, based on a number of objective and subjective factors consistent with the methodologies outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, referred to as the AICPA Practice Aid, including:
• contemporaneous valuations of our shares of common stock;
• the prices of each of our series of preferred stock sold by us to outside investors in arm’s length transactions, and the rights, preferences and privileges of each of these series of preferred stock relative to our common stock;
• our results of operations, financial position and the status of our research and development efforts;
• the composition of our management team and board of directors;
• the material risks related to our business;
• the market performance of publicly traded companies in the life sciences and biotechnology sectors;
• the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event for the holders of our shares of common stock, such as a sale of the company or an IPO, given prevailing market conditions;
• the lack of marketability of our common stock; and
• external market conditions affecting the life sciences and biotechnology industry sectors.
If we had made different assumptions than those described below, the fair value of the underlying common stock and amount of our stock-based compensation expense, net loss and net loss per share amounts would have differed. Following the closing of our IPO, the fair value per share of our common stock for purposes of determining stock-based compensation will be the closing price of our common stock as reported on the applicable grant date.
Historically, prior to our IPO, fair values of the shares of common stock underlying our share-based awards were estimated on each grant date by our board of directors. Our board of directors considered, among other things, valuations of our common stock which were prepared by an unrelated third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance provided by the AICPA Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation.
In 2019, we reassessed the determination of the fair value of the common shares underlying the grants made prior to August 2018 in connection with a valuation of the convertible preferred stock liability. This analysis revised our implied equity value, which was then allocated to each equity class using an option pricing method and the implied value of common stock was then reduced by a discount for lack of marketability. As a result of this reassessment, we determined that fair value of common stock increased to $0.46, $1.12 and $1.18 per share as of April 2017, December 2017 and March 2018, respectively. The increase to both recognized and unrecognized share-based compensation expense due to these higher share prices was approximately $0.1 million and $0.4 million, respectively, as of December 31, 2018.
Income Taxes
As of December 31, 2020, we had net deferred tax assets of $45.6 million. The deferred tax assets have been offset by a valuation allowance due to uncertainties surrounding our ability to realize these tax benefits. The deferred tax assets are primarily composed of NOL, tax carryforwards. As of December 31, 2020, we had federal, California and other state NOL carryforwards of $180.7 million, $180.8 million and $3.2 million, respectively, available to potentially offset future taxable income. As of December 31, 2020, we also had federal and California research and development tax credit carryforwards of approximately $6.4 million and $1.4 million, respectively, available to potentially offset future federal income taxes. The federal research and development tax carryforwards, if not utilized, will expire beginning in 2036. The California research and development tax credit carryforwards are available indefinitely. Federal and California tax law impose significant restrictions on the utilization of NOL carryforwards in the event of a change in ownership, as defined by Internal Revenue Code Section 382 and 383. We have not completed a formal study to determine any limitations on our tax attributes due to changes in ownership and may have limitations on the utilization of NOL carryforwards, credit carryforwards, or other tax attributes due to ownership changes.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our financial statements.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an emerging growth company as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date that we are (i) no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, these financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with the new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates. We early adopted ASU No. 016-01, Financial Instruments-Overall (Topic 825)-Recognition and Measurement of Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities, ASU 2016-09, Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718)-Improvements to Employee Share Based Payment Accounting, ASU No. 2018-07, Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting, ASU No. 2016-02, Leases, ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, ASU No. 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework-Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement, and ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740), as the JOBS Act does not preclude an emerging growth company from early adopting a new or revised accounting standard earlier than the time such standard applies to private companies. We expect to use the extended transition period for any other new or revised accounting standards during the period in which we remain an emerging growth company.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the last day of our fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the completion of our IPO. However, if certain events occur prior to the end of such five-year period, including if we become a “large accelerated filer,” our annual gross revenues exceed $1.07 billion or we issue more than $1.0 billion of non-convertible debt in any three year period, we will cease to be an emerging growth company prior to the end of such five year period.