ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this annual report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
OVERVIEW
We intend to engage a distribution partner that has a sufficient broker network and co-packer/manufacturer in order distribute our products through several channels. We believe there will be an increasing demand for enhanced and functional products in 2022 as consumers look for healthy alternatives to enhance their lifestyle. We expect our brand to capitalize on this and potential consumer demand.
CASH FLOWS
Our financial statements are prepared using generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America applicable to a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. We have not yet established an ongoing source of revenues sufficient to cover our operating costs. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent on our company obtaining additional capital to fund operating losses until we become profitable. If we are unable to obtain additional capital, we could be forced to significantly curtail or cease operations.
We have only realized nominal revenues from our business. In the next 12 months, we plan to identify business to whom we can license and/or distribute our brand and product(s) as well as seek additional opportunities to continue as a going concern.
COVID-19
In December 2019, a novel strain of COVID-19 was reported in China. Since then, the COVID-19 has spread globally including across North America and the United States. The spread of COVID-19 from China to other countries has resulted in the World Health Organization (WHO) declaring the outbreak of COVID-19 as a “pandemic,” or a worldwide spread of a new disease, on March 11, 2020.
Specifically, we caution that our business could be materially and adversely affected by the risks, or the public perception of the risks, related to the outbreak of COVID-19. To date, COVID has directly impacted the ability we have to participate in trade show events and other in-person marketing. Although retailers which may carry our products may be considered essential businesses and therefore be allowed to remain operational, they may experience significantly reduced demand. The risk of a pandemic, or public perception of the risk, could cause customers to avoid public places, including retail properties, and could cause temporary or long-term disruptions in our supply chains and/or delays in the delivery of our inventory to our customers. Further, such risks could also adversely affect retail customers’ financial condition, resulting in reduced spending on our products, which are marketed as premium products. “Shelter-in-place” or other such orders by governmental entities could also disrupt our operations, if our employees or the employees of our sourcing partners who cannot perform their responsibilities from home, are not able to report to work. Risks related to an epidemic, pandemic or other health crisis, such as COVID-19, could also lead to the complete or partial closure of one or more of our co-packing facilities or operations of our sourcing partners.
CRITICAL ACCOUTNING POLICIES
Please refer to Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview. We had no revenues for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. There was a net income of $15,344 after a return to the Company of $25,080 in stock-based compensation and a gain of $12,350 from extinguishment of debt and a net loss of $22,723 year ended June 30, 2020. The 37,067 decrease in net loss is attributable to the factors discussed below.
Revenues. We generated no revenues for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020.
Expenses. For the year ended June 30, 2021, we incurred total operating expenses of $(3,408), consisting of a return to the Company of stock-based compensation of ($25,080) offset by stock-based compensation of $560, professional fees of $20,490, and general and administrative expenses of $622. For the year period ended June 30, 2020, we incurred total operating expenses of $18,152, consisting of stock-based compensation of $910, professional fees of $15,744, and general and administrative expenses of $1,498.
Other Income (Expense). Our total other income (expense) was $11,936 and ($3,571) for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease of $15,507 was attributable to a gain of $12,350 from extinguishment of debt and a $3,157 decrease in other expense related to the change in market value of shares issued to Mr. Drury but not yet sold (See Note 3 - Related Party Transaction in the accompanying notes to the financial statements).
The following table provides selected financial data about our company for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020.
GOING CONCERN
Artisan Consumer Goods, Inc. currently has limited operations. Our independent auditor has issued an audit opinion for Artisan Consumer Goods, Inc. which includes a statement raising substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our cash balance at June 30, 2021 was $901 with $183,117 in outstanding liabilities. Total expenditures over the next 12 months are expected to be approximately $100,000. If we experience a shortage of funds prior to generating revenues from operations we may utilize funds from our directors, who have informally agreed to advance funds to allow us to pay for operating costs, however they have no formal commitment, arrangement or legal obligation to advance or loan funds to us. Management believes our current cash balance will not be sufficient to fund our operations for the next twelve months.
As at June 30, 2021, our total assets were $901 for cash.
As at June 30, 2021, our current liabilities of $183,117 were comprised of account payable of $32,349, accrued liabilities for $48,571 and related party loans of 102,497. As at June 30, 2021, our stockholders’ deficiency was $(182,216).
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
We have not generated positive cash flows from operating activities. Net cash used in operations was $(14,508) and $(14,591) for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, net cash flows provided by financing activities was $10,000 and $20,000, respectively from related party cash advances.
PLAN OF OPERATION
Our plan of operation for the following twelve months is as follows:
On July 15, 2021, we acquired the assets of Paleo Scavenger, LLC for $10,000. Paleo owns the Within / Without Granola (“WWG”) brand. The purchase price includes the WWG trademarks, brands, books, records, intellectual property, commercial sales channel, customer lists and manufacturing rights. Early in 2021, WWG ceased operations and we intend to restart the manufacturing process in the next six months.
We must raise at least $87,300 to commence our plan of operation, described above, and fund our ongoing operational expenses. We have no assurance that future financing will materialize. If that financing is not available, we may be unable to continue our operations. Management believes that if we are successful in raising $87,300, we will be able to generate sales revenue within the following twelve months thereof. However, if such financing is not available, we could fail to satisfy our future cash requirements. We have no assurance that future financing will materialize. Management believes that if subsequent private placements are successful, we will be able to generate sales revenue within the following twelve months thereof. However, additional equity financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all, and thus we could fail to satisfy our future cash requirements.
If we are unsuccessful in raising at least $100,000 through a private placement, we will then have to seek additional funds through debt financing, which would be highly difficult for a new, development stage business to obtain. Therefore, the Company is highly dependent upon the success of an anticipated private placement offering and failure thereof would result in the Company having to seek capital from other sources such as debt financing, which may not even be available to the Company. However, if such financing were available, because we are a development stage company with little in the way of operations to date, we would likely have to pay additional costs associated with high-risk loans and be subject to an above market interest rate. If and when these funds are obtained, management would evaluate the terms of such debt financing and determine whether the business could sustain operations and growth and manage the debt load. If we cannot raise additional proceeds via a private placement of our common stock or secure debt financing, we would be required to cease business operations and as a result, investors in our common stock would lose all of their investment.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.