Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results and timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under the sections of this Form 10-K captioned “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors.”
Overview
We are one of the world’s largest manufacturers of ground-mounting systems used in solar energy projects. Our principal product is an integrated system of steel supports, electric motors, gearboxes and electronic controllers commonly referred to as a single-axis “tracker.” Trackers move solar panels throughout the day to maintain an optimal orientation to the sun, which significantly increases their energy production. Solar energy projects that use trackers generate up to 25% more energy than projects that use “fixed tilt” mounting systems, which do not move.
Our trackers use a patented design that allows one motor to drive multiple rows of solar panels through articulated driveline joints. To avoid infringing on our U.S. patent, our competitors must use designs that we believe are inherently less efficient and reliable. For example, our largest competitor’s design requires one motor for each row of solar panels. As a result, we believe our products have greater reliability, lower installation costs, reduced maintenance requirements and competitive manufacturing costs. Our core U.S. patent on a linked-row, rotating gear drive system does not expire until February 5, 2030.
We sell our products to engineering, procurement and construction firms (“EPCs”) that build solar energy projects and to large solar developers, independent power producers and utilities, often under master supply agreements or multi-year procurement contracts. In 2020, we derived 92% and 8% of our revenues from customers in the U.S. and rest of the world, respectively.
We are a U.S. company and our headquarters and principal manufacturing facility are in Albuquerque, New Mexico. As of December 31, 2020, we had 389 full-time employees.
Impact of COVID-19
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, which causes coronavirus disease 2019, or COVID-19, surfaced in Wuhan, China. Since then, COVID-19 has spread to multiple countries, including the United States. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic. To date, we have maintained uninterrupted business operations with normal turnaround times for the delivery of solar tracking systems. We have implemented adjustments to our operations designed to keep employees safe and comply with federal, state and local guidelines, including those regarding social distancing. The extent to which COVID19 may further impact the Company’s business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence. In response to COVID-19, the United States government has passed legislation and taken other actions to provide financial relief to companies and other organizations affected by the pandemic.
Performance Measures
In managing our business and assessing financial performance, we supplement the information provided by the financial statements with other operating metrics. These operating metrics are utilized by our management to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business and formulate projections. The primary operating metric we use to evaluate our sales performance and to track market acceptance of our products from year to year is megawatts (“MWs”) shipped generally and the change in MW shipped from period to period specifically. MWs is measured for each individual project and is calculated based on the expected output of that project once installed and fully operational.
We also utilize metrics related to price and cost of goods sold per MW, including average selling price (“ASP”) and cost per watt (“CPW”). ASP is calculated by dividing total applicable revenues by total applicable MWs, whereas CPW is calculated by dividing total applicable costs of goods sold by total applicable MWs. These metrics enable us to evaluate trends in pricing, manufacturing cost and customer profitability.
Key Components of Our Results of Operations
The following discussion describes certain line items in our consolidated statements of operations.
Revenues
We generate revenue from the sale of solar tracking systems and parts. Our customers include EPCs, utilities, solar developers and independent power producers. For each individual solar project, we enter into a contract with our customers covering the price, specifications, delivery dates and warranty for the products being purchased, among other things. Our contractual delivery period for the tracker system and parts can vary from days to several months. Contracts can range in value from hundreds of thousands to tens of millions of dollars.
Our revenue is affected by changes in the volume and ASPs of solar tracking systems purchased by our customers. The quarterly volume and ASP of our systems is driven by the supply of, and demand for, our products, changes in product mix between module type and wattage, geographic mix of our customers, strength of competitors’ product offerings, and availability of government incentives to the end-users of our products.
Our revenue growth is dependent on continued growth in the amount of solar energy projects installed each year as well as our ability to increase our share of demand in each of the geographies where we compete, expand our global footprint to new evolving markets, grow our production capabilities to meet demand and to continue to develop and introduce new and innovative products that address the changing technology and performance requirements of our customers.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Profit
Cost of revenues consists primarily of product costs, including purchased components, as well as costs related to shipping, tariffs, customer support, product warranty, personnel and depreciation of test and manufacturing equipment. Personnel costs in cost of revenues includes both direct labor costs as well as costs attributable to any individuals whose activities relate to the transformation of raw materials or component parts into finished goods or the transportation of materials to the customer. Our product costs are affected by the underlying cost of raw materials, including steel and aluminum; component costs, including electric motors and gearboxes; technological innovation; economies of scale resulting in lower component costs, and improvements in production processes and automation. We do not currently hedge against changes in the price of raw materials. Some of these costs, primarily personnel and depreciation of test and manufacturing equipment, are not directly affected by sales volume.
Gross profit may vary from quarter to quarter and is primarily affected by our ASPs, product costs, product mix, customer mix, geographical mix, shipping method, warranty costs and seasonality.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses consist of general and administrative costs, contingent consideration, as well as depreciation and amortization expense. Personnel-related costs are the most significant component of our operating expenses and include salaries, benefits, payroll taxes and commissions. Our full-time employee headcount in our general and administrative departments has grown from approximately 150 as of December 31, 2019 to 177 at December 31, 2020, and we expect to continue to hire new employees to support our growth. The timing of these additional hires could materially affect our operating expenses in any particular period, both in absolute dollars and as a percentage of revenue. We expect to continue to invest substantial resources to support our growth and continued technological advancement and anticipate that general and administrative and depreciation expenses will increase in absolute dollar amounts for the foreseeable future.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, equity-based compensation, employee benefits and payroll taxes related to our executives, sales, finance, human resources, information technology, engineering and legal organizations, as well as travel, facilities costs, marketing, bad debt and fees for professional services. Professional services consist of audit, legal, tax, insurance, information technology and other costs. We expect an increase in the number of sales and marketing personnel in connection with the expansion of our global sales and marketing footprint, enabling us to penetrate new markets. The majority of our sales in 2020 were in the U.S.; however, during the year we expanded our international presence with additional global sales staff. We currently have a sales presence in the U.S., Australia, the U.K. and Brazil. We intend to continue to expand our sales presence and marketing efforts to additional countries. We also expect that as a public company we will incur additional audit, tax, accounting, legal and other costs related to compliance with applicable securities and other regulations, as well as additional insurance, investor relations and other costs associated with being a public company. We also anticipate an increase in our spend related to product innovation as we hire additional engineering resources and increase our external R&D spend.
Contingent Consideration
Contingent consideration consists of the changes in fair value of the earn-out and the TRA entered into with Ron P. Corio, our indirect stockholder, concurrent with Former Parent’s acquisition of Patent, LLC.
The earn-out liability was recorded at fair value at the acquisition date and subsequent changes in the fair value are recognized in earnings. Fair value of the earn-out liability is measured based upon the expected return of investment of Former Parent, among other things. Payments related to the earn-out liability are required to be evaluated upon the occurrence of certain events, including the consummation of an IPO; the sale, transfer, assignment, pledge, encumbrance, distribution or disposition of shares of Former Parent held by Oaktree Power and Oaktree Investors to a third party; the sale of equity securities or assets of Former Parent, ATI Investment Sub, Inc. or Array Technologies, Inc. to a third-party; or a merger, consolidation, recapitalization or reorganization of Former Parent, ATI Investment Sub, Inc. or the Company. The IPO, Special Distribution and our follow-on offering in December 2020 (the “Follow-on Offering”) required the Company to make a cash payment of $9.1 million in October 2020 and $15.9 million in December 2020. As a result of these payments our earn-out liability has been paid in full.
The TRA liability was recorded at fair value at the acquisition date and subsequent changes in the fair value are recognized in earnings. The TRA will generally provide for the payment by Array Tech, Inc. (f/k/a Array Technologies, Inc.) to Ron P. Corio for certain federal, state, local and non-U.S. tax benefits deemed realized in post-closing taxable periods by Array Tech, Inc. (f/k/a Array Technologies, Inc.) from the use of certain deductions generated by the increase in the tax value of the developed technology. Estimating fair value of the
TRA is by nature imprecise. The significant fair value inputs used to estimate the future expected TRA payments to Ron P. Corio include the timing of tax payments, a discount rate, book income projections, timing of expected adjustments to calculate taxable income and the projected rate of use for attributes defined in the TRA.
Depreciation
Depreciation in our operating expense consists of costs associated with property, plant and equipment (“PP&E”) not used in manufacturing of our products. We expect that as we continue to grow both our revenue and our general and administrative personnel we will require some additional PP&E to support this growth resulting in additional depreciation expense.
Amortization
Amortization of intangibles consist of developed technology, customer relationships and internal-use software modifications over their expected period of use.
Non-Operating Expenses
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest and other charges paid in connection with our Senior Secured Credit Facility (as defined below) and our Senior ABL Facility, interest on the Senior Secured Promissory Note (as defined below), and interest on our Prior Term Loan Facility (as defined below), which was fully repaid on February 2, 2020.
Income Tax Expense
We are subject to federal and state income taxes in the United States.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our consolidated statement of operations (in thousands):
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
Revenues increased by $224.8 million, or 35%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Total MW delivered increased by approximately 32% for the year ended December 31, 2020 driven by a higher number of projects delivered in 2020 compared to 2019. ASPs were up 2% year over year reflecting a change in the mix of our projects.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Profit
Cost of revenues increased by $172.7 million, or 35%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the increase in the number of MW delivered. Gross profit as a percentage of revenue remained relatively flat at 23.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 23.3% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cost Per Watt was up 2% year over year reflecting a change in the mix of our projects.
Operating Expenses:
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $14.4 million, or 35%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in general and administrative expense was due to a $4.1 million collection of an accounts receivable for which the allowance for bad debt was recorded in 2018, an increase in equity-based compensation of $4.0 million related to the Class B and C unit grants in November 2019 and May 2020. Equity-based compensation is amortized monthly over the vesting period resulting in more equity-based compensation as the grants were outstanding for more monthly periods in 2020. We also increased our internal headcount in 2020 to support our growth and business plan resulting in higher payroll and related costs. The increase in general and administrative expenses was partially offset from a reduction in third-party spend related to business process outsourcing, consulting costs, and other professional fees as a result of the completion of our ERP implementation as well as a reduction in travel expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Contingent Consideration
Contingent consideration expense increased by $25.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to an increase in the fair value of our earn-out obligation and a slight increase in the fair value of our TRA. The earn-out value was based upon the anticipated return of investment our sponsor expects to receive upon liquidation of its investment in Array. As a result of the IPO, Special Distribution and Follow-on Offering, we were required to pay the maximum amount of the earn-out ($25 million) during the fourth quarter of 2020 resulting in a change in the fair value of the earn-out of $24.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Depreciation
Depreciation expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was similar to the year ended December 31, 2019 as we did not add any significant capital assets.
Amortization of Intangibles
Amortization of intangibles for the year ended December 31, 2020 was similar to the year ended December 31, 2019 as we did not add any significant intangible assets.
Interest Expense
Interest expenses decreased by $3.7 million, or 20%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to lower interest on our Term Loan Facility (as defined below) as it was paid in full in February 2020 and our Senior Secured Promissory Note as it was paid in full in July 2020. During October 2020 we entered into our Senior Secured Credit Facility and borrowed $575 million. We used IPO proceeds to repay $105 million and made additional principal payments of $10.0 million in December 2020 resulting in a balance of $460.0 million outstanding at December 31, 2020. We anticipate an increase in interest expense as a result of our Senior Secured Credit Facility.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense decreased by $6.1 million, or 25% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Our effective tax rate was 24.0% for year ended December 31, 2020 and 38.5% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 was higher than the statutory rate as a result of a $9.3 million permanent difference from the settlement of an IRS examination which reduced the value of the developed technology from $210.0 million to $188.0 million for federal income tax purposes. The reduction in value increased our deferred tax liability related to the developed technology by $4.6 million. The settlement with the IRS also resulted in payments related to the TRA being non-deductible for tax purposes, resulting in the write-off of the deferred tax asset related to the TRA totaling $4.7 million. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 benefited from a $6.6 million income tax benefit received from the NOL carryback provision provided by the CARES Act. The benefit from the CARES Act was offset by a significant amount of permanent differences.
Net Income
As a result of the factors discussed above, our net income increased by $19.3 million, or 49%, in 2020 as compared to 2019.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
A discussion and analysis covering the comparison of the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2018 is included in our prospectus filed pursuant to Rule 424(b) with the Securities and Exchange Commission on December 4, 2020.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains the presentation of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income, which are not presented in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income are being presented because they provide the Company and readers of this Form 10-K with additional insight into our operational performance relative to earlier periods and relative to our competitors. We do not intend Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income to be substitutes for any GAAP financial information. Readers of this Form 10-K should use Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income only in conjunction with Net Income, the most comparable GAAP financial measure. Reconciliations of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income to Net Income, the most comparable GAAP measure to each, are provided in “-Non-GAAP Financial Measure.”
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income (Non-GAAP)
We present Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income as supplemental measures of our performance. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) plus (i) interest expense, (ii) other (income) expense, (iii) income tax expense (benefit), (iv) depreciation expense, (v) amortization of intangibles, (vi) equity based compensation, (vii) remeasurement of the fair value of contingent consideration, (viii) ERP implementation costs, (ix) certain legal expense, and (x) other costs. We define Adjusted Net Income as net income (loss) plus (i) amortization of intangibles, (ii) amortization of debt discount and issuance costs, (iii) equity based compensation, (iv) remeasurement of the fair value of contingent consideration, (v) ERP implementation costs, (vi) certain legal expense, (vii) other costs, and (viii) income tax (expense) benefit of adjustments.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income are intended as supplemental measures of performance that are neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, GAAP. We present Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income because we believe they assist investors and analysts in comparing our performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding items that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating performance. In addition, we use Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income: (i) as factors in evaluating management’s performance when determining incentive compensation; (ii) to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies; and (iii) because our credit agreement uses measures similar to Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income to measure our compliance with certain covenants.
Among other limitations, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income do not reflect our cash expenditures, or future requirements, for capital expenditures or contractual commitments; do not reflect the impact of certain cash charges resulting from matters we consider not to be indicative of our ongoing operations; do not reflect income tax expense or benefit; and other companies in our industry may calculate Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income differently than we do, which limits their usefulness as comparative measures.
Because of these limitations, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income should not be considered in isolation or as substitutes for performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income on a
supplemental basis. You should review the reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income below and not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
The following table reconciles net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA (in thousands):
(a) Represents consulting costs associated with our enterprise resource planning system implementation.
(b) Represents certain legal fees and other related costs associated with (i) a patent infringement action against a competitor for which a judgement has been entered in our favor and successful defense of a related matter and (ii) a pending action against a competitor in connection with violation of a non-competition agreement and misappropriation of trade secrets. We consider these costs not representative of legal costs that we will incur from time to time in the ordinary course of our business.
(c) For the year ended December 31, 2020, other costs represent (i) certain costs associated with our IPO and Follow-on Offering of $3.5 million and, (ii) costs associated with our initial Board of Directors search for $0.1 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, other costs represent (i) consulting fees for certain accounting, finance and IT services of $2.6 million and (ii) $0.2 million for the executive consulting costs. For the year ended December 31, 2018, other costs represent (i) consulting fees for certain accounting, finance and IT services of $3.6 million.
The following table reconciles net income to Adjusted Net Income (loss) (in thousands):
(a) Represents consulting costs associated with our enterprise resource planning system implementation.
(b) Represents certain legal fees and other related costs associated with (i) a patent infringement action against a competitor for which a judgement has been entered in our favor and successful defense of a related matter and (ii) a pending action against a competitor in connection with violation of a non-competition agreement and misappropriation of trade secrets. We consider these costs not representative of legal costs that we will incur from time to time in the ordinary course of our business.
(c) For the year ended December 31, 2020, other costs represent (i) certain costs associated with our IPO and Follow-on Offering of $3.5 million, (ii) $2.2 million to the former majority shareholder in connection with tax benefits received as part of the CARES act (this $2.2 million is reflected in the "Other Expense" line in Adjusted EBITDA) and (iii) costs associated with our initial Board of Directors search for $0.1 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, other costs represent (i) consulting fees for certain accounting, finance and IT services of $2.6 million and (ii) $0.2 million for the executive consulting costs. For the year ended December 31, 2018, other costs represent (i) consulting fees for certain accounting, finance and IT services of $3.6 million.
(d) Represents the estimated tax impact of all Adjusted Net Income add-backs, excluding those which represent permanent differences between book versus tax.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Historical Cash Flow
The following table compares the historical cash flow (in thousands):
We have historically financed our operations primarily with the proceeds from contributions, operating cash flows and short and long-term borrowings. Our ability to generate positive cash flow from operations is dependent on the strength our gross margins as well as our ability to quickly turn our working capital. Based on our past performance and current expectations, we believe that operating cash flows will be sufficient to meet our future cash needs. Our Senior Secured Credit Facility (see discussion below) provides an additional source of short and long-term liquidity to fund operations.
As of December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents was $108.4 million. Net working capital as of December 31, 2020 was $86.1 million.
As of December 31, 2020, we had outstanding borrowings of $460.0 million under the Term Loan Facility and $103.4 million available of our $150.0 million commitment under our Revolving Credit Facility.
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used by operating activities was $122.2 million primarily due to payments to our suppliers for products that were paid for by customers in 2019, but that we did not ship until 2020. In order for our customers to take advantage of the ITC credit, we received payment on these projects in the fourth quarter of 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2019 cash provided by operating activities was $386.1 million, due to an increase in deferred revenue of $307.0 million resulting from payments made by customers for products we did not ship until the first half of 2020. Additionally, there was a $94.6 million increase in inventory and a $105.5 million increase in accounts payable in preparation of expected volume increases in the first quarter of 2020.
Investing Activities
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $1.3 million and $1.7 million, respectively, primarily attributable to the purchase of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used by financing activities was $129.3 million. Net proceeds from the Term Loan Facility and IPO were $460.0 million and $139.1 million, respectively. The Company also paid a special distribution to its members prior to our IPO of $589.0 million (the “Special Distribution”) along with $57.7 million and $45.6 million payments of the Term Loan and Senior Secured Promissory Note, respectively.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used by financing activities was $63.9 million, of which $25.0 million and $39.1 million was attributable to the payment of the Prior Term Loan Facility and Senior ABL Facility.
Discussion of 2018 Historical Cash Flows
A discussion and analysis covering historical cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2018 is included in our prospectus filed pursuant to Rule 424(b) with the Securities and Exchange Commission on December 4, 2020.
Debt Obligations
Senior Secured Credit Facility
On October 14, 2020, the Company entered into a senior secured credit facility consisting of (i) a $575.0 million senior secured seven-year term loan facility (the “Term Loan Facility”) and (ii) a $150.0 million senior secured 5-year revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Credit Facility” and, together with the Term Loan Facility, the “Senior Secured Credit Facility”). On February 26, 2021, we entered into the incremental facility amendment No. 2 (the “Second Amendment”) to the Senior Secured Credit Facility. The Second Amendment increases the $150.0 million Revolving Credit Facility from $150.0 million to $200.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, the Term Loan Facility had a balance of $460.0 million. The Term Loan Facility accrued interest equal to applicable margin of 1% plus base rate (4% at December 31, 2020). On February 23, 2021 we entered into the first amendment (“First Amendment”) to our Senior Secured Credit Facility. The First Amendment, in the case of the Eurocurrency borrowings, lowers the London interbank offered rate floor to 50 basis points from 100 basis points and lowers the applicable margin to 325 basis points from 400 basis points per annum. This results in our current rate on the Term Loan Facility decreasing to 3.75% down from 5% prior to the First Amendment.The balance of the Term Loan Facility is presented in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets net of debt discount and issuance costs of $31.7 million at December 31, 2020. The debt discount and issuance costs are being amortized using the effective interest method and the rate as of December 31, 2020 is 6.08%. The Term Loan Facility has an annual excess cash flow calculation beginning with the year ended December 31, 2021 which could require the Company to make advance principal payments.
Letters of Credit
Under the Revolving Credit Facility, the Company had no outstanding balance, $46.6 million in standby letters of credit and availability of $103.4 million under the Revolving Credit Facility.
Interest Rate
The interest rates applicable to the loans under the Term Loan Facility equal, at our option, either, (i) in the case of ABR borrowings, the highest of (a) the Federal Funds Rate as of such day plus 50 basis points, (b) the prime rate and (c) the adjusted LIBOR rate as of such day for a deposit in U.S. dollars with a maturity of one month plus 100 basis points, provided that in no event shall the ABR be less than 150 basis points, plus, in each case, the applicable margin of 300 basis points per annum; or (ii) in the case of Eurocurrency borrowings, the greater of (a) the LIBOR for the relevant currency, adjusted for statutory reserve requirements, and (b) 100 basis points, plus, in each case, the applicable margin of 400 basis points per annum. Pursuant to the First Amendment, (i) the applicable margin (a) with respect to ABR borrowings was reduced to 225 basis points and (b) with respect to Eurocurrency borrowings was reduced to 325 basis points and (ii) the LIBOR floor referred to in clause (ii)(b) above was reduced from 100 to 50 basis points.
The interest rates applicable to the loans under the Revolving Facility equal, at our option, either, (i) in the case of ABR borrowings, the highest of (a) the Federal Funds Rate as of such day plus 50 basis points, (b) the prime rate and (c) the adjusted LIBOR rate as of such day for a deposit in U.S. dollars with a maturity of one month plus 100 basis points, provided that in no event shall the ABR be less than 150 basis points, plus, in each case, the applicable margin of 225 basis points per annum; or (ii) in the case of Eurocurrency borrowings, the greater of (a) the LIBOR for the relevant currency, adjusted for statutory reserve requirements, and (b) 50 basis points, plus, in each case, the applicable margin of 325 basis points per annum.
Guarantees and Security
The obligations under the Senior Secured Credit Facility are guaranteed by ATI Investment Sub, Inc. and its wholly owned domestic subsidiaries other than certain immaterial subsidiaries and other excluded subsidiaries. The obligations under the Senior Secured Credit Facility are secured by a first priority security interest in substantially all of Array Tech, Inc.’s and the guarantors’ existing and future property and assets, including accounts receivable, inventory, equipment, general intangibles, intellectual property, investment property, other personal property, material owned real property, cash and proceeds of the foregoing.
Prepayments and Amortization
Loans under the Revolving Credit Facility may be voluntarily prepaid in whole, or in part, in each case without premium or penalty. Loans under the Term Loan Facility may be voluntarily prepaid in whole, or in part, in each case without premium or penalty (other than a 1% premium with respect to prepayments on account of certain “repricing events,” subject to exceptions, occurring within 12 months of the closing date of the Senior Secured Credit Facility).
The Senior Secured Credit Facility requires mandatory prepayments, but not permanent reductions of commitments thereunder, for excess cash flow, asset sales, subject to a right of reinvestment, and refinancing facilities.
The Term Loan Facility amortizes in equal quarterly installments in aggregate annual amounts equal to 1.00% per annum of the original principal amount of the loans funded thereunder. There is no scheduled amortization under the Revolving Credit Facility.
Restrictive Covenants and Other Matters
The Senior Secured Credit Facility contains affirmative and negative covenants including covenants that restrict our incurrence of indebtedness, incurrence of liens, dispositions, investments, acquisitions, restricted payments, transactions with affiliates, as well as other negative covenants customary for financings of this type.
The Revolving Credit Facility also includes a springing financial maintenance covenant that is tested on the last day of each fiscal quarter if the outstanding loans and certain other credit extensions under the New Revolving Credit Facility exceed 35% of the aggregate amount of commitments thereunder. If the financial maintenance covenant is triggered, the first lien net leverage ratio will be tested for compliance not to exceed 7.10 to 1.00.
The Senior Secured Credit Facility also includes customary events of default, including the
occurrence of a change of control.
Senior ABL Facility
The Company had a Senior ABL Facility which, as amended on March 23, 2020, had maximum availability of $100.0 million and matures on March 23, 2025. The amount available to be borrowed under the Senior ABL Facility was determined by a borrowing base consisting of our eligible inventory, eligible accounts receivable and cash. On October 14, 2020, we repaid the entire outstanding balance of the Senior ABL Facility and closed this facility.
The interest rates applicable to the loans under the Senior ABL Facility were based on a fluctuating rate of interest determined by reference to a base rate plus an applicable margin ranging from 0.50% to 1.00% or a prime rate or Eurocurrency rate plus an applicable margin ranging from 1.50% to 2.00%. The applicable margin was adjusted after the completion of each full fiscal quarter based upon the pricing grid in the Senior ABL Facility.
The Senior ABL Facility contained a number of customary affirmative and negative covenants, including covenants that restricted our ability to borrow money, grant liens, pay dividends or dispose of assets, and events of default. Specifically, we were required to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio, measured as of the last day of each full fiscal quarter, of at least 1.10 to 1.00.
Letter of Credit Facility
On December 16, 2019, we entered into a letter of credit facility (the “LC Facility”) to provide customers with additional credit support in the form of a standby letter of credit to secure our performance obligations under contracts for which certain customers elected to prepay for the design and manufacture of tracker systems. The LC Facility has a commitment of $100.0 million in standby letters of credit which expired August 31, 2020.
Senior Secured Promissory Note
On August 22, 2018, High Desert Finance LLC, our wholly owned subsidiary, issued $38.6 million Senior Secured Promissory Note (the “Senior Secured Promissory Note”) in favor of Ron P. Corio, our indirect stockholder, that was secured by the outstanding common stock of ATI Investment Holdings, Inc. The maturity due date of the Senior Secured Promissory Note was originally February 22, 2020 but was subsequently amended to extend the due date to September 22, 2020.
The Company paid the remaining outstanding balance and accrued interest on July 31, 2020 to settle the obligation with respect to the Senior Secured Promissory Note.
Prior Term Loan Facility
On June 23, 2016, we entered into a term loan agreement with Jefferies Finance LLC, providing for a term loan in an aggregate amount of $200 million (the “Prior Term Loan Facility”). As of December 31, 2019, the Prior Term Loan Facility had a balance of $57.7 million. The balance of the Prior Term Loan Facility is presented in the accompanying consolidated balance sheet net of debt discount and issuance costs of $1.8 million at December 31, 2019. The Prior Term Loan Facility contains a provision under which a percentage of excess cash flow must be used to pay down the loan. As of December 31, 2019, the excess cash flow provision resulted in the Prior Term Loan Facility being classified as current on the accompanying consolidated balance sheet. On February 7, 2020, the Company repaid the Prior Term Loan Facility in full and settled all obligations with respect to the Prior Term Loan Facility.
Surety Bonds
As of December 31, 2020, we posted surety bonds in the total amount of approximately $121.2 million. We are required to provide surety bonds to various parties as required for certain transactions initiated during the ordinary course of business to guarantee the Company’s performance in accordance with contractual or legal obligations. These off-balance sheet arrangements do not adversely impact our liquidity or capital resources.
.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Management Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of consolidated financial statements also requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by our management. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates. Critical accounting policies and
estimates are those that we consider the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations because they require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain.
Revenue Recognition 2020 and 2019
The Company recognized revenues from the sale of solar tracking systems and parts and determines its revenue recognition through the following steps: (i) identification of the contract or contracts with a customer; (ii) identification of the performance obligations within the contract; (iii) determination of the transaction price; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations within the contract; and (v) recognition of revenue when, or as the performance obligation has been satisfied.
Performance Obligations
The Company’s contracts with customers are predominately accounted for as one performance obligation, as the majority of tasks and services is part of a single project or capability. As these contracts are typically a customized assembly for a customer-specific solution, the Company uses the expected cost-plus margin approach to estimate the standalone selling price of each performance obligation. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, the Company allocates the contract’s transaction price to each performance obligation using its best estimate of the standalone selling price of each distinct good or service in the contract. In assessing the recognition of revenue, the Company also evaluates whether two or more contracts should be combined and accounted for as one contract and if the combined or single contract should be accounted for as multiple performance obligations which could change the amount of revenue and profit (loss) recorded in a period. Change orders may include changes in specifications or design, manner of performance, equipment, materials, scope of work, and/or the period of completion of the project. The Company analyzes its changed orders to determine if they should be accounted for as a modification to an existing contract or a new stand-alone contract. The Company’s change orders are generally modifications to existing contracts and are included in the total estimated contract revenue when it is probable that the change order will result in additional value that can be reliably estimated and realized. The majority of the Company’s contracts do not contain variable consideration provisions as a continuation of the original contract.
The Company’s performance obligations are satisfied predominately over-time as work progresses for its custom assembled solar systems, utilizing an output measure of completed products and based on the timing of the product’s shipments considering the shipping terms described in the contract. In certain situations, when product is still in our custody, and title and risk of loss has passed to the customer (known as bill-and-hold arrangement), revenue will be recognized when all the specific requirements for transfer of control under a bill-and-hold arrangement have been met.
Revenue recognized for the Company’s part sales are recorded at a point in time and recognized when obligations under the terms of the contract with our customer are satisfied. Generally, this occurs with the transfer of control of the asset, which is in line with shipping terms.
Contract Estimates
Accounting for contracts utilizing the over-time method and their expected cost-plus margins is based on various assumptions to project the outcome of future events that can exceed a year. These assumptions include labor productivity and availability; the complexity of the work to be performed; the cost and availability of materials; and the availability and timing of funding from the customer. The Company reviews and updates its contract-related estimates each reporting period. The Company recognizes adjustments in estimated expected cost-plus on contracts under the cumulative catch-up method. Under this method, the impact of the adjustment on profit recorded to date is recognized in the period the adjustment is identified. Revenue and profit in future periods of contract performance is recognized using the adjusted estimate. If at any time the
estimate of contract profitability indicates an anticipated loss on the contract, the Company recognizes the total loss in the period it is identified.
Contract Balances
The timing of revenue recognition, billings and cash collections results in billed accounts receivable, unbilled receivables (contract assets), and deferred revenue (contract liabilities) on the consolidated balance sheet, recorded on a contract-by-contract basis at the end of each reporting period. The majority of the Company’s contract amounts are billed as work progresses in accordance with agreed-upon contractual terms, which generally coincide with the shipment of one or more phases of the project. Billing sometimes occurs subsequent to revenue recognition, resulting in contract assets. The changes in contract assets (i.e. unbilled receivables) and the corresponding amounts recorded in revenue relate to fluctuations in the timing and volume of billings for the Company’s revenue recognized over-time. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, contract assets consisting of unbilled receivables totaling $18.1 million and $16.1 million, respectively, were recorded within accounts receivable on the consolidated balance sheet. The Company also receives advances or deposits from its customers, before revenue is recognized, resulting in contract liabilities. The changes in contract liabilities (i.e. deferred revenue) relate to advanced orders and payments received by the Company and are the result of customers looking to take advantage of certain U.S. federal tax incentives set to decrease at the end of 2019. Based on the terms of the tax incentives the customer must pay for the goods prior to December 31, 2019 which accounts for the increase in the advanced orders and payments and the resulting deferred revenue. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, contract liabilities consisting of deferred revenue was presented separately on the consolidated balance sheets.
Product Warranty
The Company offers an assurance type warranty for its products against defects in design, materials and workmanship for a period ranging from five to twenty years from customer acceptance. For these assurance type warranties, a provision for estimated future costs related to warranty expense is recorded when they are probable and reasonably estimable, which is typically when products are delivered. This provision is based on historical information on the nature, frequency and average cost of claims for each product line. When little or no experience exists for an immature product line, the estimate is based on comparable product lines. These estimates are re-evaluated on an ongoing basis using best-available information and revisions to estimates are made as necessary.
Inventory Valuation
Inventories consist of raw materials and finished goods. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or estimated net realizable value using the weighted average method. Provisions are made to reduce excess or obsolete inventories to their estimated net realizable values which require estimates by management.
Contingent Consideration
Tax Receivable Agreement
Concurrent with Former Parent’s acquisition of Patent LLC, Array Tech, Inc. (f/k/a Array Technologies, Inc.) entered into the TRA with Ron P. Corio, our indirect stockholder. The TRA is accounted for as contingent consideration and subsequent changes in fair value of the contingent liability are recognized in general and administrative in the Company’s consolidated statement of operations. The TRA obligations were recorded at acquisition-date fair value at inception and is classified as a liability. The TRA will generally provide for the payment by Array Tech, Inc. (f/k/a Array Technologies, Inc.) to Ron P. Corio, our indirect stockholder, for certain federal, state, local and non-U.S. tax benefits deemed realized in post-closing taxable periods by Array Tech, Inc. (f/k/a Array Technologies, Inc.) from the use of certain deductions generated by the increase in the tax value of the developed technology. Estimating the amount of payments that may be made under the TRA is by nature imprecise. The significant fair value inputs used to estimate the future expected TRA payments to Ron P. Corio include the timing of tax payments, a discount rate, book income projections, timing of expected
adjustments to calculate taxable income and the projected rate of use for attributes defined in the TRA. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the estimated fair value of the TRA is $19.7 million and $17.8 million, respectively, which has been recorded as a liability. Subsequent changes in fair value of the TRA will be recognized in earnings.
Earn-Out Obligations
Under the Earn-Out Agreement, dated June 23, 2016, by and among ATI Investment Former Parent, LLC, ATI Investment Sub, Inc., Array Technologies, Inc., and the seller parties thereto (the “Earn-Out Agreement”), the Company is required to pay the former stockholders of Array Technologies, Inc., including Ron P. Corio, an indirect stockholder, future contingent consideration consisting of earn-out payments in the form of cash upon the occurrence of certain events, including the consummation of an IPO; the sale, transfer, assignment, pledge, encumbrance, distribution or disposition of shares of Former Parent held by Oaktree Power and Oaktree Investors to a third party; the sale of equity securities or assets of Former Parent, ATI Investment Sub, Inc. or Array Technologies, Inc. to a third-party; or a merger, consolidation, recapitalization or reorganization of Former Parent, ATI Investment Sub, Inc. or the Company. The maximum aggregate earn-out consideration is $25.0 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020 we were required to pay the maximum aggregate earn-out consideration as a result of our IPO, Special Distribution and Follow-on Offering. As a result of the $25.0 million payment we are no longer obligated under the earn-out agreement.
Equity-Based Compensation Expense
The Company accounts for equity grants to employees (Class B units of Former Parent) as stock-based compensation under ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation. The Class B units contain vesting provisions as defined in the agreement. Vested units do not forfeit upon termination and represent a residual interest in Former Parent. Equity-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date fair value and is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, including those units with graded vesting with a corresponding credit to additional paid-in capital as a capital contribution from Former Parent. However, the amount of equity-based compensation at any date is equal to the portion of the grant date value of the award that is vested.
The Class B units issued to employees are measured at fair value on the grant date using an option pricing model. The Company utilizes the estimated weighted average of the Company’s expected fund life dependent on various exit scenarios to estimate the expected term of the awards. Expected volatility is based on the average of historical and implied volatility of a set of comparable companies, adjusted for size and leverage. The risk-free rates are based on the yields of U.S. Treasury instruments with comparable terms. Actual results may vary depending on the assumptions applied within the model.
On November 19, 2019 and May 19, 2020, Former Parent issued 22,326,653 and 4,344,941, respectively, Class B units to certain employees of the Company. On March 28, 2020, Former Parent issued 1,000 Class C units to a member of the board of directors of Array Technologies, Inc.
Effective October 14, 2020, the Company granted an aggregate of 29,398 restricted stock units (RSU’s) to its non-employee directors in connection with their service on the board of directors and 470,608 RSU’s to certain executives and members of management. The RSU’s were granted under the 2020 Plan at the IPO price of $22.00 per share. Each share has a vesting commencement date of and is subject to a two to three-year vesting schedule, vesting annually on the anniversary date of the vesting commencement date.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company recognized $4.8 million and $0.8 million, respectively, in equity-based compensation. At December 31, 2020, the Company had $17.0 million of unrecognized compensation costs related to Class B units and restricted stock units which is expected to be recognized over a period of 3 years. There were no forfeitures during 2019 or 2020. Following the Corporate
Conversion, the Class B Units in Former Parent remained outstanding and were not converted into shares of common stock of the Company.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,’’ in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. An emerging growth company may take advantage of relief from certain reporting requirements and other burdens that are otherwise applicable generally to public companies. These provisions include:
•a requirement to present only two years of audited financial statements and only two years of selected financial data;
•an exemption from compliance with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, or the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
•reduced disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements in our periodic reports, proxy statements, and registration statements; and
•exemptions from the requirements of holding non-binding advisory votes on executive compensation or golden parachute arrangements.
In addition, under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have elected to avail ourselves of this exemption from new or revised accounting standards, and, therefore, we will not be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards at the same time as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies or those that have opted out of using such extended transition period, which may make comparison of our financial statements with such other public companies more difficult. We may take advantage of these reporting exemptions until we no longer qualify as an emerging growth company, or, with respect to adoption of certain new or revised accounting standards, until we irrevocably elect to opt out of using the extended transition period.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (i) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more; (ii) the last day of our fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the date of our IPO; (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1 billion in nonconvertible debt during the previous three years; and (iv) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the SEC. We may choose to take advantage of some but not all of these reduced reporting burdens.