ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Form 10-K . This discussion and analysis contains forward looking statements. We make forward-looking statements, as defined by the “safe harbor” provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, as amended, and in some cases, you can identify these statements by forward-looking words such as “if,” “will,” “may,” “might,” “will likely result,” “should,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “project,” “intend,” “goal,” “objective,” “predict,” “potential” or “continue,” or the negative of these terms and other comparable terminology. These forward-looking statements are based on various underlying assumptions and expectations and are subject to risks, uncertainties and other unknown factors, may include projections of our future financial performance based on our growth strategies and anticipated trends in our business and include risks and uncertainties relating to Arch’s current cash position and its need to raise additional capital in order to be able to continue to fund its operations; the stockholder dilution that may result from future capital raising efforts and the exercise or conversion, as applicable of Arch’s outstanding options and warrants; Arch’s limited operating history which may make it difficult to evaluate Arch’s business and future viability; Arch’s ability to timely commercialize and generate revenues or profits from our AC5 Advanced Wound System and product candidates; Arch’s ability to achieve the desired regulatory approvals in the United States or elsewhere; Arch’s ability to retain its managerial personnel and to attract additional personnel; the strength of Arch’s intellectual property, the intellectual property of others and any asserted claims of infringement; and other risk factors identified under the caption “Risk Factors” in this Form 10-K and in the documents Arch has filed, or will file with the SEC. We undertake no duty to update any of these forward-looking statements after the date of filing of this Form 10-K to conform such forward-looking statements to actual results or revised expectations, except as otherwise required by law.
AC5, AC5-G, AC5-V, AC5-P, Crystal Clear Surgery, NanoDrape and NanoBioBarrier and associated logos are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of Arch Therapeutics, Inc. and its subsidiary. For purposes herein, references to regulatory approval and marketing authorization may be used interchangeably.
Corporate Overview
Arch Therapeutics, Inc., (together with its subsidiary, the “Company” or “Arch”) was incorporated under the laws of the State of Nevada on September 16, 2009, under the name Almah, Inc. which was a company previously organized to pursue the business of distributing automobile spare parts online. Effective June 26, 2013, the Company completed a merger (“Merger”) with Arch Biosurgery, Inc. (formerly known as Arch Therapeutics, Inc.), a Massachusetts corporation (“ABS”), and Arch Acquisition Corporation (“Merger Sub”), the Company’s wholly owned subsidiary formed for the purpose of the transaction, pursuant to which Merger Sub merged with and into ABS and ABS thereby became the wholly owned subsidiary of the Company. As a result of the acquisition of ABS, the Company abandoned its prior business plan and changed its operations to the business of a biotechnology company. Our principal offices are located in Framingham, Massachusetts.
For financial reporting purposes, the Merger represented a “reverse merger.” ABS was deemed to be the accounting acquirer in the transaction and the predecessor of Arch. Consequently, the accumulated deficit and the historical operations that are reflected in the Company’s consolidated financial statements prior to the Merger are those of ABS. All share information has been restated to reflect the effects of the Merger. The Company’s financial information has been consolidated with that of ABS after consummation of the Merger on June 26, 2013, and the historical financial statements of the Company before the Merger have been replaced with the historical financial statements of ABS before the Merger in this report.
ABS was incorporated under the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts on March 6, 2006 as Clear Nano Solutions, Inc. On April 7, 2008, ABS changed its name from Clear Nano Solutions, Inc. to Arch Therapeutics, Inc. Effective upon the closing of the Merger, ABS changed its name from Arch Therapeutics, Inc. to Arch Biosurgery, Inc.
Liquidity
We have only recently commenced commercial sales of our first product, AC5® Advanced Wound System. We devote a significant amount of our efforts on fundraising, planning and conducting clinical trials, activities in connection with obtaining regulatory approval, and product research. For the year ended September 30, 2021, we had a net loss of $6,240,482 versus a net loss of $4,691,377 in the prior year. The losses for each of the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 can be attributable to research and development expenses, including regulatory approval and product research, and general and administrative costs, primarily relating to legal costs associated with intellectual property and patent application and after costs, general corporate legal expenses all of which were partially offset by adjustments to the derivative liabilities and, for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, a gain on the forgiveness of the PPP loan. Cash used in operating activities increased $913,873 during the year ended September 30, 2021 to $5,958,628, compared to $5,044,755 for the year ended September 30, 2020. Cash at September 30, 2021 increased by $1,307,330 to $2,266,639 compared to $959,309 as of September 30, 2020.
Business Overview
We are a biotechnology company marketing or developing a number of products based on our innovative AC5® self-assembling technology platform. We believe these products can be important advances in the field of stasis and barrier applications, which includes stopping bleeding (“hemostasis”), controlling leaking (“sealant”) and managing wounds created during surgery, trauma or interventional care or from disease. We have only recently commenced commercial sales of our first product, AC5® Advanced Wound System and have devoted substantially all of our operational effort to the research, development and regulatory programs necessary to turn our core technology into commercial products. Our goal is to make care faster and safer for patients with products for use in external wounds, which we refer to as Dermal Sciences applications, and products for use inside the body, which we refer to as Biosurgery applications.
Core Technology
Our flagship products and product candidates are derived from our AC5® self-assembling peptide (SAP) technology platform and are sometimes referred to as AC5 or the “AC5 Devices.” These include AC5® Advanced Wound System and AC5® Topical Hemostat, which have received marketing authorization as medical devices in the United States and Europe, respectively, and which are intended for skin applications, such as management of complicated chronic wounds or acute surgical wounds. Other products are in
development for use in minimally invasive or open surgical procedures and include, for example, AC5-GTM for gastrointestinal endoscopic procedures and AC5-V® and AC5® Surgical Hemostat for hemostasis inside the body, all of which are currently investigational devices limited by law to investigational use.
Products based on the AC5 platform contain a biocompatible peptide that is synthesized from proteogenic, naturally occurring L-amino acids. Unlike products that contain traditional peptide sequences, when applied to a wound, AC5-based products intercalate into the interstices of the connective tissue and self-assemble into a protective physical-mechanical nanoscale structure that can provide a barrier to leaking substances, such as blood, while also acting as a biodegradable scaffold that enables healing. Self-assembly is a central component of the mechanism of action of our technology. Individual AC5 peptide units readily build themselves, or self-assemble, into an ordered network of nanofibrils when in aqueous solution by the following process:
● Peptide strands line up with neighboring peptide strands, interacting via hydrogen bonds (non-covalent bonds) to form a ribbon-like structure called a beta sheet.
● This process continues such that hundreds of strands organize with charged and polar side chains oriented on one face and non-polar side chains oriented on the opposite face of the beta sheets.
● Interactions of the resulting structure with water molecules and ions results in formation nanofibrils, which extend in length and can join together to form larger nanofibers.
● This network of AC5 peptide nanofibers forms the physical-mechanical barrier that is responsible for sealant, hemostatic and other properties, regardless of the presence of antithrombotic agents, and which subsequently becomes the scaffold that supports the repair and regeneration of damaged tissue.
Based on the intended application, we believe that the underlying AC5 SAP technology can impart important features and benefits to our products that may include, for instance, stopping bleeding (hemostasis), mitigating contamination, modulating inflammation, donating moisture, and enabling an appropriate wound microenvironment conducive to healing. For instance, AC5 Advanced Wound System, which is indicated for the management of partial and full-thickness wounds, such as pressure sores, leg ulcers, diabetic ulcers, and surgical wounds, is shipped and stored at room temperature, is applied directly as a liquid, can conform to irregular wound geometry, and does not possess sticky or glue-like handling characteristics. We believe these properties enhance its utility in several settings and contribute to its user-friendly profile.
We believe that our technology lends itself to a range of potential applications in which there is a wound inside or on the body, and in which there is need for a hemostatic agent or sealant. For instance, the results of certain preclinical and clinical investigations that either we have conducted or others have conducted on our behalf have shown quick and effective hemostasis with the use of AC5 SAP technology, and that time to hemostasis (“TTH”) is comparable among test subjects regardless of whether such test subject had or had not been treated with therapeutic doses of anticoagulant or antiplatelet medications, commonly called “blood thinners.” Furthermore, the transparency and physical properties of certain AC5 Devices may enable a surgeon to operate through it in order to maintain a clearer field of vision and prophylactically stop or lessen bleeding as surgery starts, a concept that we call Crystal Clear Surgery (TM). An example of a product that contains related features and benefits is AC5 Topical Hemostat, which is indicated for use as a dressing and to control mild to moderate bleeding, each during the management of injured skin and the micro-environment of an acute surgical wound.
Operations
Much of our operational efforts to date, which we often perform in collaboration with partners, have included selecting compositions and formulations for our initial products; conducting preclinical studies, including safety and other tests; conducting a human trial for safety and performance of AC5; developing and conducting a human safety study to assess for irritation and sensitization potential; securing marketing authorization for our first product in the United States and in Europe; developing, optimizing, and validating manufacturing methods and formulations, which are particularly important components of self-assembling peptide development; developing methods for manufacturing scale-up, reproducibility, and validation; engaging with regulatory authorities to seek early regulatory guidance as well as marketing authorization for our products; sourcing and evaluating commercial partnering opportunities in the United States and abroad; and developing and protecting the intellectual property rights underlying our technology platform.
Our long-term business plan includes the following goals:
● conducting biocompatibility, pre-clinical, and clinical studies on our products and product candidates;
● obtaining additional marketing authorization for products in the United States, Europe, and other jurisdictions as we may determine;
● continuing to develop third party relationships to manufacture, distribute, market and otherwise commercialize our products;
● continuing to develop academic, scientific and institutional relationships to collaborate on product research and development;
● expanding and maintaining protection of our intellectual property portfolio; and
● developing additional product candidates in Dermal Sciences, Biosurgery, and other areas.
In furtherance of our long-term business goals, we expect to continue to focus on the following activities during the next twelve months:
● seek additional funding as required to support the milestones described previously and our operations generally;
● work with our manufacturing partners to scale up production of product compliant with current good manufacturing practices (“cGMP”), which activities will be ongoing and tied to our development and commercialization needs;
● further clinical development of our product platform;
● assess our technology platform in order to identify and select product candidates for potential advancement into development;
● seek regulatory input to guide activities related to expanded and new product marketing authorizations;
● continue to expand and enhance our financial and operational reporting and controls;
● pursue commercial partnerships; and
● expand and enhance our intellectual property portfolio by filing new patent applications, obtaining allowances on currently filed patent applications, and/or adding to our trade secrets in self-assembly, manufacturing, analytical methods and formulation, which activities will be ongoing as we seek to expand our product candidate portfolio.
In addition to capital required for operating expenses, depending upon additional input from EU and US regulatory authorities, as well as the potential for additional regulatory filings and approvals during the next 2 years, additional capital may be required.
The estimated capital requirements potentially could increase significantly if a number of risks relating to conducting these activities were to occur, including without limitation those set forth under the heading “RISK FACTORS” in this filing. We anticipate that our operating and other expenses will continue to increase as we continue to implement our business plan and pursue and achieve these goals. After giving effect to the funds received in past equity and debt financings and assuming our use of that funding at the rate we presently anticipate, as of December 16, 2021 we believe that our current cash on hand will meet our anticipated cash requirements into the second quarter of fiscal 2022. We could spend our financial resources much faster than we expect, in which case we would need to raise additional capital as our current funds may not be sufficient to operate our business for the entire duration of that period.
Preclinical Testing
We have engaged and continue to engage third parties in the United States and abroad to advise on and/or perform certain preclinical bench-top and animal research and development studies, typically with assistance from our team. These third parties can include contract research organizations, academic institutions, consultants, advisors, scientists, clinicians, and/or other collaborators.
We completed the biocompatibility studies required to receive marketing authorizations for AC5 Advanced Wound System in the United States and AC5 Topical Hemostat in Europe, and such test results support that the products are biocompatible. We will perform further biocompatibility testing that we deem necessary for additional indications, classifications, jurisdictions, and/or as required by regulatory authorities.
Acute and survival animal studies assessing safety and performance of our technology have also demonstrated favorable outcomes in Dermal Sciences and Biosurgical applications.
Clinical Testing
We have engaged and continue to engage third parties in the United States and abroad to advise on and/or perform certain clinical studies and related activities, typically with assistance from our team. These third parties can include contract research organizations, academic institutions, consultants, advisors, scientists, clinicians, and/or other collaborators.
We completed two clinical studies. The first study, which met its primary and secondary endpoints, assessed the safety and performance of our product candidate in 46 patients with bleeding skin wounds that resulted from excision of skin lesions and followed for 30 days. The second study assessed our product candidate on skin, determining that it was neither an irritant nor a sensitizer, and no immunogenic response or serious or other adverse events attributable to our product were reported in any of the
approximately 50 enrolled volunteers. The product candidate in these studies subsequently received marketing authorization and is presently known as AC5 Advanced Wound System in the United States and AC5 Topical Hemostat in Europe.
Commercialization
Our commercialization efforts are currently focused on our Dermal Sciences products, AC5 Advanced Wound System in the United States and AC5 Topical Hemostat in Europe. The indication for use, or purpose, for each product follows:
● Under the supervision of a health care professional, AC5 Advanced Wound System is a topical dressing used for the management of partial and full-thickness wounds, such as pressure sores, leg ulcers, diabetic ulcers, and surgical wounds.
● AC5® Topical Hemostat is intended for use locally as a dressing and to control mild to moderate bleeding, each during the management of injured skin and the micro-environment of an acute surgical wound.
In practice, we envision that both products will be used in comparable wounds, including, in particular, acute or chronic wounds that require surgical intervention. Examples include, surgical excision of dead, contaminated, or damaged tissue, otherwise known as debridement, in chronic wounds; complicated wounds created during an acute surgical procedure; failed acute surgical wounds; wounds requiring wound bed preparation in advance of other procedures; wounds in need of an advanced dressing that incorporates an initial protective barrier function followed by a scaffolding or lattice function that enables healing.
We announced receipt of 510(k) premarket notification clearances for AC5® Advanced Wound System on December 17, 2018, providing marketing authorization, and on March 23, 2020, clearing use of an additional supplier and additional manufacturing processes. We announced receipt of the CE mark for AC5 Topical Hemostat on April 13, 2020.
The Covid-19 pandemic environment has introduced new challenges related to product launch, marketing and sales, as clinicians and facilities are increasingly focused on managing resources, the disease, or its potential spread. We believe that these challenges may present an opportunity for our new technology to address certain poorly met needs.
Wound interventions are too often considered to be elective procedures instead of being treated essentially or emergently as National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel guidelines and others recommend, resulting in a projected increased risk to limb and life while elective procedures are delayed and not prioritized. Furthermore, the implications of these delays are a growing backlog of chronic wounds awaiting care and a worsening of such wounds, leading to greater morbidity, such as infection, necrosis, and amputation, and potentially mortality.
We expect our Dermal Sciences product commercialization to be gradual, initially, and moderately accelerate into new market channels. In addition to identifying and encouraging product use by key opinion leaders and early adopters, we will prioritize our focus on private and government facilities. Hospitals in the Veterans Health Administration (“VA Hospitals”), for example, tend to have many patients whose needs we believe we can help address. We prioritized the launch of AC5 Advanced Wound System in the United States over that of AC5 Topical Hemostat in Europe to maximize operational efficiencies in light of the Covid-19 pandemic.
We have engaged and continue to engage third parties in the United States and abroad to advise on and/or perform certain sales and marketing activities, typically with assistance from our team. These third parties can include contract organizations, consultants, advisors, scientists, clinicians, and/or other collaborators.
Manufacturing
We work with contract manufacturing and related organizations, including those operating under current good manufacturing practices (“cGMP”), as is required by applicable regulatory agencies for production of product that can be used for preclinical and human testing as well as for commercial use. We also have engaged and continue to engage other third parties in the United States and abroad to advise on and/or perform certain manufacturing and related activities, typically with assistance from our team. These third parties include academic institutions, consultants, advisors, scientists, and/or other collaborators. The activities include development of our primary product candidates, as well as generation of appropriate analytical methods, scale-up, and other procedures for use by manufacturers and/or other members of our supply chain to produce or process our products at current and/or larger scale quantities for preclinical and clinical testing and ultimately, as required marketing authorizations are obtained, commercialization.
Our products are regulated as medical devices, and as such, many of our activities have focused on optimizing traditional parameters to target specifications, biocompatibility, physical appearance, stability, and handling characteristics, among other metrics, in order to achieve the desired product. We and our partners intend to continue to monitor manufacturing processes and formulation methods
closely, as success or failure in establishing and maintaining appropriate specifications may directly impact our ability to conduct additional preclinical and clinical trials and/or deliver commercial product.
Merger with ABS and Related Activities
On June 26, 2013, the Company completed the Merger with ABS, pursuant to which ABS became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company. In contemplation of the Merger, effective May 24, 2013, the Company increased its authorized common stock, par value $0.001 per share (“Common Stock”), from 75,000,000 shares to 300,000,000 shares and effected a forward stock split, by way of a stock dividend, of its issued and outstanding shares of Common Stock at a ratio of 11 shares to each one issued and outstanding share. Also, in contemplation of the Merger, effective June 5, 2013, the Company changed its name from Almah, Inc. to Arch Therapeutics, Inc. and changed the ticker symbol under which its Common Stock trades on the OTC Bulletin Board from “AACH” to “ARTH”.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to stockholders.
Recent Developments
On November 6, 2020, the Company issued unsecured 10% Series 2 Convertible Notes (“Series 2 Notes”) in the aggregate principal amount of $1,050,000. The Series 2 Notes are convertible into the Company’s common stock at a per share price of $0.25. In lieu of repaying the Note Obligations outstanding on the Maturity Date, the conversion of the outstanding Note Obligations into common stock will be calculated by increasing by thirty-five percent (35%) the aggregate sum of the unpaid Principal Amount held by each Holder and the accrued interest at a rate of ten percent (10%) per annum.
On November 6, 2020, as consideration for an investment in the Convertible Notes, the Company entered into an Amendment to the Series J Warrant to Purchase Common Stock, with a holder of a Series J Warrant exercisable for up to 3,375,000 shares of Common Stock, to extend the term of the Series J Warrant from one (1) year to thirty (30) months.
During November 2020, the Company applied for forgiveness of the Paycheck Protection Program(“PPP”) loan. The PPP Loan has a two-year term and bears interest at a rate of 1.00% per annum. Monthly principal and interest payments are deferred until the SBA makes a decision on our loan forgiveness application. Unless the PPP Loan is forgiven, the Company will be required to make monthly payments of principal and interest of approximately $20,000 to the Lender. On May 28, 2021, the Company received notice that the SBA completed review and all principal and interest has been forgiven.
On December 31, 2020, the Company announced that the Company and Richard Davis, the Company’s current Chief Financial Officer, entered into a transition agreement, under which Mr. Davis agreed to continue in his current role as the Company’s Chief Financial Officer until the earlier of (i) when a successor is named and ready to perform the daily duties of Chief Financial Officer, and (ii) June 30, 2021 (such date, the “Transition End Date”), upon which date Mr. Davis will retire as Chief Financial Officer. Pursuant to the Agreement, for a period of six months following the Transition End Date, Mr. Davis will continue to work as an employee of the Company in a non-executive role to provide support and ensure a smooth and successful transition. On May 3, 2021, the Company appointed Michael S. Abrams as an employee and then, effective May 10, 2021, as its Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer.
On February 12, 2021, the Company announced that it had entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional and accredited investors as of February 11, 2021 to raise approximately $6.9 million through the issuance of an aggregate of 43,125,004 shares of its common stock and warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 32,343,753 shares of common stock, at a combined purchase price of $0.16 per share of common stock and associated warrant in a private placement (the “2021 Financing”). The Series K Warrants have an exercise price of $0.17 per share and are exercisable for a period of 5.5 years. The gross proceeds to Arch from the 2021 Financing, which closed on February 17, 2021, were approximately $6.9 million before deducting financing costs of approximately $700,000. The Company believes that its cash on hand, not including that which may be derived from any potential revenue generation, will meet its anticipated cash requirements into the second quarter of fiscal 2022.
The Company engaged H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC (the “Placement Agent”) as exclusive placement agent for the 2021 Financing. Pursuant to the Company’s engagement letter with the Placement Agent, the Company also agreed to issue to the Placement Agent, or
its designees, warrants to purchase up to 3,234,375 shares (the “Placement Agent 2 Warrants”). The Placement Agent 2 Warrants have substantially the same terms as the Series K Warrants, except that the exercise price of the Placement Agent Warrants is $0.20 per share.
During the second quarter of fiscal 2021, the Company completed the first sale of its first product, AC5(R) Advanced Wound System, to an early adopter who had devoted considerable time and resources to collecting and compiling clinical outcomes data for the purpose of publication. The sale price was discounted to $2,000 per unit in consideration of certain related services rendered to the Company through the date of sale. Our expectation that comparable sales would continue and increase in subsequent quarters proved incorrect, we believe, due to two factors. First, it took significantly longer than planned to secure and train a highly qualified internal and external sales team. Second, as the pandemic in the US began to wane, access to hospitals, clinics, and medical centers proved more challenging than anticipated. While uncertainty remains as to when or if Arch will achieve significant revenue, we remain excited about the size of the overall market opportunity as well as the early clinical results of our AC5(R) Advanced Wound System. To that end, Arch has invested further into its overall commercialization strategy, including the hiring of a national vice president of sales and two regional sales directors. Other key commercialization initiatives include i) the launch of a national pilot program to establish reimbursement and otherwise support our ongoing efforts to secure a permanent CPT code, and ii) ongoing efforts to secure inclusion on a government supply schedule to drive activity in the VA hospital system.
In August 2021, the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) filed a criminal complaint against Dr. Avtar Dhillon alleging his participation in a securities fraud scheme. DOJ alleged that Dr. Dhillon concealed his ownership of millions of shares in two microcap companies (including Arch), for which he served as the chairman of the board of directors, and that he then secretly directed the shares’ sale, generating approximately $2.19 million in proceeds. DOJ also alleged that Dr. Dhillon, when later giving sworn testimony before the U.S. Securities & Exchange Commission (SEC), twice withheld from investigators his beneficial interest in the accounts through which the shares were sold, and that he lied to investigators about his awareness of whether anyone had sold shares in Arch. Dr. Dhillon was charged with one count of conspiracy to commit securities fraud, one count of securities fraud, and two counts of obstructing a proceeding of the SEC.
At the same time, the SEC charged Dr. Dhillon with violations of the antifraud, registration, and reporting provisions of federal securities laws in connection with the sales of securities of certain public companies, including his sale of shares of common stock of Arch. The SEC is seeking permanent injunctions, conduct-based injunctions, disgorgement of allegedly ill-gotten gains plus interest, civil penalties, penny stock bars, and an officer and director bar for Dr. Dhillon.
Dr. Dhillon served as the Chairman of the Board of Arch from April 2013 through July 2018, and as an advisor to Arch from July 2018 through August 6, 2021. Arch has fully cooperated with the DOJ and SEC and has not been implicated in or charged with any wrongdoing.
Results of Operations
The following discussion of our results of operations should be read together with the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report and the notes thereto. Our historical results of operations and the period-to-period comparisons of our results of operations that follow are not necessarily indicative of future results.
Year Ended September 30, 2021 Compared to Year Ended September 30, 2020
Revenue
Revenue for the year ended September 30, 2021 was $11,565, which was the result of a single transaction with an established key opinion leader that has provided services for compensation in the past and expected to continue to provide services for compensation in the future and a single transaction into a Veterans Administration (“VA”) hospital through our new distribution partner, Lovell Government Services (“LGS”). We did not generate revenue during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020.
Cost of revenues
Cost of revenues during the year ended September 30, 2021 was $26,282, an increase of $26,282 compared to no cost of revenue for the year ended September 30, 2020. Cost of sales includes product costs, third party warehousing, overhead allocation and royalty expenses.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 were $5,009,323 an increase of $1,268,303 compared to $3,741,020 for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expense is primarily attributable to increases in payroll costs and corporate legal fees partially offset by a decrease in stock-based compensation, defense of patent and patent prosecution costs and consulting costs. General and administrative expenses are generally expected to increase during fiscal 2022 as a result of the establishment and execution of commercialization efforts, additional staffing, increased stock-based compensation as well as increased costs associated with the Company’s continued fundraising efforts.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 was $1,353,084, a decrease of $258,010 compared to $1,611,094 for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The decrease in research and development expense is primarily attributable to a decrease in product and development costs, preparation of regulatory filings and compensation costs. Research and development expenses are expected to increase during fiscal 2022 as a result of our plans for additional product development, clinical and regulatory programs.
Other Income/(Expense)
Other income during the year ended September 30, 2021 was $136,642, a decrease of $524,095 compared to total other income of $660,737 for the year ended September 30, 2020. The decrease in other income is attributable to a change in fair market value of the derivative liabilities and an increase in interest expense partially offset by the gain on the forgiveness of loan.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Working Capital
At September 30, 2021, we had total current assets of $3,667,639 (including cash of $2,266,639) and working capital of $1,940,198. Our working capital as of September 30, 2021 and September 30, 2020 is summarized as follows:
Total current assets as of September 30, 2021 were $3,667,745, an increase of $1,524,770 compared to $2,142,975 as of September 30, 2020. The increase in current assets is primarily attributable to net proceeds of approximately $6,200,000 raised from the issuance of common stock and warrants in the 2021 Financing, and $1,050,000 received from the issuance of convertible notes. This was partially offset by selling, general and administrative expenses and research and development expenses incurred in connection with activities to develop our primary product candidate. Our total current assets as of September 30, 2021 and September 30, 2020 were comprised primarily of cash, inventory and prepaid expenses and other current assets.
Total current liabilities as of September 30, 2021 were $1,727,547, an increase of $1,099,087 compared to $628,460 as of September 30, 2020. The increase is primarily due to the current portion of the derivative liability, and increases in accrued expense and other current liabilities and accounts payable partially offset by a decrease in the current portion of the PPP loan. Our total current liabilities as of September 30, 2021 were comprised of accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities and the current portion of derivative liabilities. Our total current liabilities as of September 30, 2020 were comprised of accounts payable and accrued expenses and other liabilities and the current portion of the PPP loan.
Cash Flow
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities increased $913,873 to $5,958,628 during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 compared to $5,044,755 for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The increase in cash used in operating activities is primarily attributable to increases in payroll costs and corporate legal fees.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities increased $820 to $3,275 during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, compared to $2,455 during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, cash used in investing activities is attributed to computer hardware purchases.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities increased $3,443,043, to $7,269,233 during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, compared to $3,826,190 during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. For the year ended September 30, 2021, the cash provided by financing activities resulted from net proceeds of $6,219,233 raised from issuance of common stock and warrants in the 2021 Financing and $1,050,000 from the issuance of Series 2 Convertible Notes. For the year ended September 30, 2020, the cash provided by financing activities resulted from $2,167,162 from the issuance of common stock and warrants in the October 2019 Financing, $176,300 received from the PPP loan, $550,000 received from the issuance of a convertible note and $932,728 from the exercise of Series D Warrants.
Cash Requirements
We anticipate that our operating and other expenses will increase significantly as we continue to implement our business plan and pursue our operational goals. As of December 16, 2021, we believe that our current cash on hand will meet our anticipated cash requirements into the second quarter of fiscal 2022. Notwithstanding this, depending upon additional input from EU and US regulatory authorities, we do not expect to generate sufficient revenues from operations before we need to raise additional capital. Further, our estimates regarding our use of cash could change if we encounter unanticipated difficulties or other issues arise, including without limitation those set forth under the heading “ RISK FACTORS” in this filing, in which case our current funds may not be sufficient to operate our business for the period we expect.
We have only recently commenced commercial sales of our first product, AC5(R) Advanced Wound System. We expect to generate revenue in the future. That revenue will not be sufficient to fund our business operations and we will need to obtain additional funding from external sources for the foreseeable future. We do not have any commitments for future capital. Significant additional financing will be required to fund our planned operations in the near term and in future periods, including research and development activities relating to our principal product candidate, seeking regulatory approval of that or any other product candidate we may choose to develop, commercializing any product candidate for which we are able to obtain regulatory approval or certification, seeking to license or acquire new assets or businesses, and maintaining our intellectual property rights and pursuing rights to new technologies. We may not be able to obtain additional financing on commercially reasonable or acceptable terms when needed, or at all. We are bound by certain contractual terms and obligations that may limit or otherwise impact our ability to raise additional funding in the
near-term including, but not limited to, provisions in the 2017 SPA and 2018 SPA restricting our ability to effect or enter into an agreement to effect any issuance by the Company or any of its subsidiaries of Common Stock or securities convertible, exercisable or exchangeable for Common Stock (or a combination of units thereof) involving a Variable Rate Transaction (as defined in the 2017 SPA and 2018 SPA) including, but not limited to, an equity line of credit or “At-the-Market” financing facility until the three lead investors in the 2017 Financing and the 2018 Financing collectively own less than 20% of the Series F Warrants and Series G Warrants purchased by them pursuant to the 2017 SPA and 2018 SPA. These restrictions and provisions could make it more challenging for us to raise capital through the incurrence of debt or through equity issuances. If we cannot raise the money that we need in order to continue to develop our business, we will be forced to delay, scale back or eliminate some or all of our proposed operations. If any of these were to occur, there is a substantial risk that our business would fail and our stockholders could lose all of their investments.
As previously noted, since inception we have funded our operations primarily through equity and debt financings and we expect to continue to seek to do so in the future. If we obtain additional financing by issuing equity securities, our existing stockholders’ ownership will be diluted. Additionally, the terms of securities we may issue in future capital-raising transactions may be more favorable for our new investors, and in particular may include preferences, superior voting rights and the issuance of warrants or other derivative securities, which may have additional dilutive effects. If we obtain additional financing by incurring debt, we may become subject to significant limitations and restrictions on our operations pursuant to the terms of any loan or credit agreement governing the debt. Further, obtaining any loan, assuming a loan would be available when needed on acceptable terms, would increase our liabilities and future cash commitments. We may also seek funding from collaboration or licensing arrangements in the future, which may require that we relinquish potentially valuable rights to our product candidates or proprietary technologies or grant licenses on terms that are not favorable to us. Moreover, regardless of the manner in which we seek to raise capital, we may incur substantial costs in those pursuits, including investment banking fees, legal fees, accounting fees, printing and distribution expenses and other related costs. In addition, as described in greater detail under the Risk Factor entitled “The terms of the 2017 Financing, 2018 Financing and 2021 Private Placement Financing could impose additional challenges on our ability to raise funding in the future,” included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the 2017 SPA, the 2018 SPA and the 2021 Private Placement Financing impose certain restrictions on our ability to issue equity or debt securities.
Going Concern
We have only recently commenced commercial sales of our first product, AC5(R) Advanced Wound System. From inception, we have had recurring losses from operations. While the Company anticipates that it will have cash on hand into the second quarter of fiscal 2022, the continuation of our business as a going concern is dependent upon raising additional capital and eventually attaining and maintaining profitable operations. As of September 30, 2021, there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K do not include any adjustments that might be necessary should operations discontinue.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Pursuant to certain disclosure guidance issued by the SEC, the SEC defines “critical accounting policies” as those that require the application of management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. We do not believe the company has any accounts or circumstances that carry a significant level of estimation uncertainty. Our critical accounting policies that we anticipate will require the application of our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments are as follows:
Derivative Liabilities
The Company accounts for its warrants and other derivative financial instruments as either equity or liabilities based upon the characteristics and provisions of each instrument, in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging. Warrants classified as equity are recorded at fair value as of the date of issuance on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets and no further adjustments to their valuation are made. Warrants classified as derivative liabilities and other derivative financial instruments that require separate accounting as liabilities are recorded on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets at their fair value on the date of issuance and will be revalued on each subsequent balance sheet date until such instruments are exercised or expire, with any changes in the fair value between reporting periods recorded as other income or expense. Management estimates the fair value of these liabilities using option pricing models and assumptions that are based on the individual characteristics of the warrants or instruments on the valuation date, as well as assumptions for future financings, expected volatility, expected life, yield, and risk-free interest rate.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. The cost of inventories comprises expenditures incurred in acquiring the inventories, the cost of conversion and other costs incurred in bringing them to their existing location and condition. The cost of raw materials, work-in-progress and finished goods and other products are determined on a First in First out (FiFo) basis. When determining net realizable value, appropriate consideration is given to obsolescence, excessive levels, deterioration, and other factors in evaluating net realizable value.
Recent Accounting Guidance
Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2018-13, “Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820) Disclosure Framework-Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement” was issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) in August 2018. The purpose of this amendment in this Update is to modify the disclosure requirements on fair value measurements in Topic 820. The amendments in this Update are effective for public business entities for fiscal years, and for interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2019. The Company adopted ASU 2018-13 during our first quarter of fiscal year 2021, and the impact was considered immaterial on our consolidated financial statements.
ASU 2020-06, “Debt with Conversion and other Options (subtopic 470-02) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)” was issued by the FASB in August 2020. The purpose of this amendment is to address issues identified as a result of the complexity associated with applying generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) for certain financial instruments with characteristics of liability and equity. The amendments in this Update are effective for public business entities for fiscal years, and for interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2023. Early adoption is permitted. The Company does not believe that this guidance will not have a material impact on its consolidated results of operations, financial position or disclosures.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to stockholders.