Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion, which focuses on our results of operations, contains forward-looking information and statements. Actual events or results may differ materially from those indicated or anticipated, as discussed in the section entitled “Forward Looking Statements.” The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should also be read in conjunction with our financial statements and notes to financial statements contained in “Item 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA” of this report.
Financial Condition
Our 2020 fiscal year provided never before seen challenges as the world battled an ongoing pandemic and businesses everywhere suffered. We began the year with a strong first quarter in our Agricultural Products segment with our sales up 13% for the quarter compared to the prior year. In mid-March businesses began going into lockdown to try and slow the spread of COVID-19. Our sales suffered and we ended the second quarter with sales down approximately 4% year to date compared to the prior year. We were not able to recover and ultimately ended the year with our sales down 3% in our Agricultural Products segment compared to the prior year. Despite these dire market conditions, we did continue to improve operational efficiency as evidenced by improved labor efficiency rates. When measuring gross profit in our Agricultural Products segment, absent aged inventory scrap, we showed improvement of approximately 7% from fiscal 2019. Troubling market conditions over the last decade have forced us to adapt and improve our operations which gives us optimism about our ability to perform in times of economic boom. Our Modular Buildings segment struggled in fiscal 2020 mainly due to unexpected losses on a large construction contract. This segment also struggled to get new projects under contract as COVID-19 caused business disruption throughout the world. Our Tools segment suffered in the pandemic as oil and gas prices plummeted. The addition of an OEM customer in 2019 helped supplant the lost business from oil and gas customers in 2020.
Our consolidated balance sheet indicates a stable financial position as of November 30, 2020 despite continued net losses. While fiscal 2020 brought a net loss of $2,103,000, we had approximately $1,000,000 of expense from non-cash inventory scrap as we continued to purge inventory from previous acquisitions. We also spent approximately $216,000 on pandemic expenses and $286,000 for the recruitment and training of key management positions. Our bottom lines have suffered in recent years as we have tried to streamline our operations by addressing prior year acquisitions that have not served us well in poor market conditions.
We expect to have access to capital as needed throughout fiscal 2021 through the sale of inventory and from the use our line of credit. On November 30, 2020 we had $2,640,470 available on our line of credit. In 2020, we were able to obtain $1,242,900 of funding from the Small Business Administration’s Paycheck Protection Program. These funds were fully forgiven in November 2020 and helped offset losses during the pandemic as we continued to employ our workforce in full. We also received three Economic Injury Disaster Loans for a total of $450,000. These loans have a 30 year payback period. Despite the continued losses, our banking relationship has remained positive through transparency and continued communication. Our ability to not overuse our line of credit in times of losses has provided us with the confidence that we can manage our cash use until market conditions improve and our product offering and dealer network grow. Our working capital remained strong at approximately $4,137,000 in fiscal 2020 with a current ratio of 1.67. We also continue to maintain a debt to equity ratio below 1. We continue to put emphasis on reducing our inventory to more manageable levels to decrease carrying costs, implementing lean manufacturing practices, improving our inventory turnover, focusing our product offering, increasing our dealer network reach, and improving customer service. We do not foresee liquidity issues within the next twelve months.
Impact of COVID-19
While the COVID-19 pandemic had very little impact on our results of operations for the first quarter of fiscal 2020, it did impact our results of operations for the rest of fiscal 2020 and we believe that it may continue to do so for the foreseeable future. From March 23, 2020 until May 18, 2020 the majority of our office staff in all three segments worked remotely with the exception of key operations support. At the height of the initial outbreak our workforce was down approximately 17% due to self-quarantine. By the end of May 2020 our entire workforce had returned and operations have continued as normal with additional safety precautions in place. As COVID-19 cases began to rise in November 2020, we allowed employees that could perform their job functions remotely do so at their discretion. At this time approximately 75% of our office staff is working remote at least part-time and this has had minimal effect on how we operate as a business. We expect that by the end of February 2021 remote employees will return full time to the office. Future outbreaks could have a material effect on our operations and we are taking precautions to mitigate the spread of COVID-19.
In our Agricultural Products segment, we did not experience any order cancellations; however, calls for new whole goods slowed significantly in the second quarter of fiscal 2020 and many dealers held off on the shipping or pickup of their completed units. Our sales levels were comparatively steady to the last few years in the third and fourth quarters of fiscal 2020 and we ultimately ended the year down 3.1% on sales. Prior to the initial lockdowns in March 2020, we were anticipating an uptick in sales from recent years. We believe 2021 will bring better economic conditions for farmers because of stimulus payments received in 2020. We also believe that farmers were conservative in 2020, using excess funds to pay down debt, and will be ready to spend in 2021.
Our Modular Buildings segment started fiscal 2020 with a more diverse backlog than we had at the beginning of fiscal 2019; however, we had some setbacks on site work as subcontractors were forced to quarantine after testing positive for COVID-19. Our workers have been hesitant to travel during the pandemic and, as a result, we have had some challenges completing site work in the third and fourth quarters of fiscal 2020. Because of COVID-19, many companies were hesitant to enter into long-term contracts in fiscal year 2020. As a result, our modular building rental fleet remained largely unused in fiscal 2020 which is evidenced by our decrease in lease revenue. Our sales outlook for fiscal 2021 reflects a continued decrease in demand, but sales activity saw a moderate increase near the end of fiscal 2020.
In our Tools segment, oil prices dropped significantly at the start of the pandemic, which caused our sales to drop significantly in the second quarter of fiscal 2020. The diversification of our business with our new OEM customer helped us get through the oil and gas industry lows during that time; however, since oil and gas prices have not yet reached their pre-pandemic levels, we have not seen our sales levels from these customers return. We are optimistic that we have passed the low point in our Tools segment and expect improved sales in fiscal 2021.
While our sales were affected in fiscal 2020 by the COVID-19 pandemic, government programs including the Paycheck Protection Program and Economic Injury Disaster Loan program helped protect our liquidity that may have otherwise been materially impacted. However, the COVID-19 pandemic could have a material impact on our operations in the future as suppliers lose access to labor and resources which could ultimately drive up prices. We are not currently able to measure this impact and at this time believe our operations will continue as normal. Travel restrictions and border closures have not had a major impact on our ability to operate and achieve business goals. While we did minimize our travel in 2020 our operations were not materially affected by the inability to travel. Many trade shows shifted to online and some canceled altogether, however, our sales volumes were not significantly affected by the cancellation of these shows. As vaccinations occur in 2021, we expect travel and trade show participation to pick up. While we are short of our pre-pandemic expectations, we believe the worst of the economic hardship has passed for us. We have built and improved our business over the last few years to help us better weather any economic storms that come our way.
CEO Transition
As previously announced, David King took over for Carrie Gunnerson as our Chief Executive Officer in the third quarter of fiscal 2020. Carrie Gunnerson’s final day as our Chief Executive Officer was July 21, 2020. Mr. King previously served as our Executive Vice President since March 30, 2020. Mr. King brings 25 years of agriculture industry experience in operations, marketing and business development. We look forward to Mr. King bringing Art’s Way new strategic business opportunities and providing a revitalized brand image.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our financial statements in “Item 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA” of this report. Critical accounting policies are those that we believe are both important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
We believe that the following represents the most critical accounting policies and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, and cost is determined using the standard costing method. Management monitors the carrying value of inventories using inventory control and review processes that include, but are not limited to, sales forecast review, inventory status reports, and inventory reduction programs. We record inventory write downs to net realizable value based on expected usage information for raw materials and historical selling trends for finished goods. If the assumptions made by management do not occur, we may need to record additional write downs.
Revenue Recognition
In accordance with ASC 606, revenue is measured based on consideration specified in a contract with a customer and recognized when we satisfy the performance obligation specified in each contract.
Our revenues primarily result from contracts with customers. The major sources of revenue for the Agricultural Products and Tools segments are farm equipment, service parts related to farm equipment and steel cutting tools and inserts. The Agricultural Products and Tools segments generally execute short-term contracts that contain a single performance obligation - the delivery of product to the common carrier. We recognize revenue for the production and sale of farm equipment, service parts and cutting tools upon shipment of the goods. Shipment of the goods is the point in time when risk of ownership and title pass to the customer. The Tools segment has an OEM agreement with one customer for which sales are recognized FOB destination - when the goods hit the customer’s dock. All sales are made to authorized dealers whose application for dealer status has been approved and who have been informed of general sales policies. Any changes in our terms are documented in the most recently published price lists. Pricing is fixed and determinable according to our published equipment and parts price lists. Title to all equipment and parts sold pass to the customer upon delivery to the carrier and is not subject to a customer acceptance provision. Proof of the passing of title is documented by the signing of the delivery receipt by a representative of the carrier. Post shipment obligations are limited to any claim with respect to the condition of the equipment or parts. The Agricultural Products and Tools segments each typically require payment in full 30 days after the ship date. To take advantage of program discounts, some customers pay deposits up front. Any deposits received are considered unearned revenue and increase contract liabilities.
In certain circumstances, upon the customer’s written request, we may recognize revenue when production is complete, and the goods are ready for shipment. At the customer’s request, we will bill the customer upon completing all performance obligations, but before shipment. The customer dictates that we ship the goods per their direction from our manufacturing facility, as is customary with this type of agreement, in order to minimize shipping costs. The written agreement with the customer specifies that the goods will be delivered on a schedule to be determined by the customer, with a final specified delivery date, and that we will segregate the goods from our inventory, such that they are not available to fill other orders. This agreement also specifies that the customer is required to purchase all goods manufactured under this agreement. Title of the goods will pass to the customer when the goods are complete and ready for shipment, per the customer agreement. At the transfer of title, all risks of ownership have passed to the customer, and the customer agrees to maintain insurance on the manufactured items that have not yet been shipped. We have operated using bill and hold agreements with certain customers for many years, with consistent satisfactory results for both the customers and us. The credit terms on this agreement are consistent with the credit terms on all other sales. All risks of loss are shouldered by the customer, and there are no exceptions to the customer’s commitment to accept and pay for these manufactured goods. Revenues recognized at the completion of production in fiscal 2020 and 2019 were approximately $0 and $16,000, respectively.
The Modular Buildings segment is in the construction industry with its major source of revenue arising from modular building sales. Sales of modular buildings are generally recognized using input methods to measure progress towards the satisfaction of a performance obligation using the percentage of completion method. Revenue and gross profit are recognized as work is performed based on the relationship between actual costs incurred and total estimated costs at completion. Contract costs consist of direct costs on contracts, including labor, materials, and amounts payable to subcontractors and those indirect costs related to contract performance, such as equipment costs, insurance and employee benefits. Contract cost is recorded as incurred, and revisions in contract revenues and cost estimates are reflected in the accounting period when known. Provisions for estimated losses on uncompleted contracts are made in the period in which such losses are determined. Contract losses are recognized when current estimates of total contract revenue and contract cost indicate a loss. Estimated contract costs include any and all costs appropriately allocable to the contract. The provision for these contract losses will be the excess of estimated contract costs over estimated contract revenues. Changes in job performance, job conditions and estimated profitability, including those changes arising from contract change orders, penalty provisions and final contract settlements may result in revisions to costs and income and are recognized in the period in which the revisions are determined. We use significant judgements in determining estimated contract costs and completion percentages throughout the life of the project. Stock modular building sales also occur and are recognized at a point in time when the performance obligation is fulfilled through substantial completion. Substantial completion is achieved through customer acceptance of the completed building. The Modular Buildings segment executes contracts with customers that can be short- or long-term in nature. These contracts can have multiple performance obligations and revenue from these can be recognized over time or at a point in time depending on the nature of the contracts. Payment terms for the Modular Buildings segment vary by contract, but typically utilize money down and progress payments throughout the life of the contract. The payment terms of the Modular Buildings segment have the most impact on our contract receivables, contract assets and contract liabilities. Project invoicing from the Modular Buildings segment increases contract receivables and has an effect on contract liabilities through billings in excess of costs and estimated gross profit and advanced payments. The balance of contract assets is typically made up of the balance of costs and estimated gross profit in excess of billings. Costs and profit in excess of amounts billed are classified as current assets and billings in excess of cost and profit are classified as current liabilities.
We also lease modular buildings to certain customers and account for these transactions as operating or sales-type leases. These leases have terms of up to 36 months and are collateralized by a security interest in the related modular building. On sales-type leases, the lessee has a bargain purchase option available at the end of the lease term. A minimum lease receivable is recorded net of unearned interest income and profit on sale at the time the building is substantially complete. Profit related to the sale of the building is recorded upon fulfillment of our obligation to the lessee. On operating leases, we recognize rent when the lessee has all the rights and benefits of ownership of the asset.
The Agricultural Products segment offers variable consideration in the form of discounts depending on participation in yearly early order programs. This variable consideration is allocated to the transaction price of all products in a sales arrangement and is not contingent on future outcomes. The Agricultural Products segment does not offer rebates or credits. The Tools segment offers quantity discounts that are allocated to the transaction price of each product once the quantity break is achieved. The Tools segment does not offer rebates or credits. The Modular Buildings segment does not offer discounts, rebates or credits.
Our returns policy allows for new and saleable parts to be returned, subject to inspection and a restocking charge, which is included in net sales. Whole goods are not returnable. Shipping costs charged to customers are included in net sales. Freight costs incurred are included in cost of goods sold. Customer deposits consist of advance payments from customers, in the form of cash, for revenue to be recognized in the following year.
For information on product warranty as it applies to ASC 606, refer to Note 8 “Product Warranty” contained in our financial statements in “Item 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA” of this report.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended November 30, 2020 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended November 30, 2019
Our consolidated net sales totaled $22,409,000 for the 2020 fiscal year, which represents a 2.1% decrease from our consolidated net sales of $22,889,000 for the 2019 fiscal year. The decrease in revenue is due to decreases in sales in our Modular Building and Agricultural Products segments. Our Tools segment reported a 9.9% increase in sales compared to the 2019 fiscal year. Our consolidated gross profit as a percentage of net sales decreased to 10.7% in the 2020 fiscal year when compared to 17.2% of net sales in the 2019 fiscal year. We saw decreased gross profit percentage in all three segments in fiscal 2020 due to varying circumstances discussed below. Our consolidated operating expenses increased by 16.3%, from $5,424,000 in the 2019 fiscal year to $6,309,000 in the 2020 fiscal year. Because the majority of our corporate general and administrative expenses are borne by our Agricultural Products segment, that segment represented $4,483,000 of our total consolidated operating expenses, while our Modular Buildings segment represented $1,034,000 and our Tools segment represented $792,000.
Our consolidated operating loss for the 2020 fiscal year was $(3,910,000) compared to $(1,497,000) for the 2019 fiscal year. Our Agricultural Products segment had an operating loss of $(2,318,000), our Modular Buildings segment had operating loss of $(1,295,000) and our Tools segment had an operating loss of $(297,000).
Consolidated net loss for the 2020 fiscal year was $(2,103,000) compared to net loss of $(1,420,000) in the 2019 fiscal year, an increase in loss of $683,000.
Our effective tax rate for the 2020 and 2019 fiscal years was 28.9% and 19.7%, respectively. The increase in the effective tax rate is due to the tax treatment of Paycheck Protection Program loan forgiveness as discussed in Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our financial statements in “Item 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA” of this report.
Agricultural Products. Our Agricultural Products segment’s net sales for the 2020 fiscal year were $13,085,000 compared to $13,508,000 during the 2019 fiscal year, a decrease of $423,000, or 3.1%. The decrease in sales can be primarily explained by a decrease in sales of our UHC reels year over year. In mid fiscal 2019, we lost our primary reel customer over disagreements on price, as we determined that the margins on reels weren’t enough to justify putting them into our production schedule and were only willing to produce them for an increased price. We expect further declines in our reel revenue as we discontinue production of this line and replace the production slots with products that provide us with greater margin. We also saw decreased demand for our beet equipment and forage and receiver boxes in the 2020 fiscal year compared to the 2019 fiscal year. We expect increased demand for these lines in fiscal 2021 as our backlog indicates we will have improved sales of beet equipment and we will be launching a new Art’s Way forage box. Sales of manure spreaders, dump boxes and grinders improved in fiscal 2020 over fiscal 2019. The improved success of these lines provides optimism for the future as we believe these are the core products we can market towards future growth.
Gross profit percentage for the 2020 fiscal year was 16.5% compared to 16.3% for the 2019 fiscal year. We attribute the increase in gross profit to a 4% improvement on standard gross profit margin due to favorable product mix and fewer liquidation sales in fiscal 2020. We also saw a 5% increase in our measurable labor efficiency metric, which tells us how productive our workforce is. After eliminating $996,000 of inventory obsolescence expense in fiscal 2020 and $315,000 of the same expense in fiscal 2019 we had an increase in gross profit percent of approximately 7% year over year. We believe that presenting gross profit percentage excluding inventory obsolescence expense is useful because it excludes a significant expense that we do not expect to continue to occur going forward and therefore facilitates a better comparison of gross profit percentage over multiple periods and is a clearer reflection of our ongoing operations. The $996,000 of inventory obsolescence expense in fiscal 2020 was related to increasing reserves on product lines we eliminated strategically from our offering including UHC reels, Miller Pro forage boxes, rakes and augers. Our core product offering going forward includes products that we feel have strong demand, favorable margins and flow through our facility efficiently. We believe the gross margin improvements are a strong indicator of our ability to succeed as agricultural conditions continue to improve.
Our Agricultural Products segment’s operating expenses for the 2020 fiscal year were $4,483,000 compared to $3,796,000 for the 2019 fiscal year, an increase of $687,000, or 18.1%. Approximately $115,000 of this increase is due to the hiring of a new territory development manager to increase sales and strengthen our dealer network. We also incurred $116,000 of additional recruitment expense in fiscal 2020 when compared to fiscal 2019 related to hiring a new CEO, supply chain manager and product manager. We incurred approximately $73,000 of expense paying dual salaries as we transitioned these new roles. We also incurred approximately $148,000 of pandemic expense as we increased employee incentives for working during the pandemic, conducted sitewide COVID-19 testing and provided supplies to help keep our employees safe. We also incurred approximately $300,000 of additional bonus expense in fiscal 2020 recruiting new management talent, rewarding retiring management, and accruing bonuses for operational improvements during this agricultural downturn. This segment’s operating expenses for the 2020 fiscal year were 34.3% of sales compared to 28.1% of sales for the 2019 fiscal year. Total loss from operations for our Agricultural Products segment during the 2020 fiscal year was $(2,318,000) compared to an operating loss of $(1,599,000) for the 2019 fiscal year, an increase in loss of $719,000.
Modular Buildings. Our Modular Buildings segment’s net sales for the 2020 fiscal year were $6,993,000 compared to $7,260,000 for the 2019 fiscal year, a decrease of $267,000, or 3.7%. The decrease in sales was attributable to decreased operating lease activity in fiscal 2020 and a large construction project nearing completion. Gross profit for the 2020 fiscal year was (3.7)% compared to 16.1% during the 2019 fiscal year. The decreased gross profit was due to margin deterioration on a large construction contract for expenses that were unforeseen. Operating expenses for the 2020 fiscal year were 14.8% of sales compared to 13.3% for the 2019 fiscal year. The increase in operating expenses was due to $35,000 of pandemic expense related to employee incentives during COVID-19 lockdowns and supplies needed to mitigate the spread of COVID-19. Total loss from operations from our Modular Buildings segment during the 2020 fiscal year was $(1,295,000) compared to an operating income of $208,000 in the 2019 fiscal year, an increase in loss of $1,503,000. Our expected profits on a large construction project eroded in fiscal 2020, but we look forward to a fresh start in fiscal 2021.
Tools. Our Tools segment’s net sales for the 2020 fiscal year were $2,330,000 compared to $2,121,000 for the 2019 fiscal year, an increase of $209,000, or 9.9%. The increase is primarily due to the addition of a large OEM customer in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2019. We had projected larger revenue increases; however, the COVID-19 pandemic had a negative effect on our existing customer base, mainly the oil and gas industries. These sales have not fully recovered to date and we have relied heavily on our OEM customer in recent months. We are focused on expanding our portfolio of customers to help us diversify our business as different industries experience booms and busts. Gross profit for the 2020 fiscal year was 21.3% compared to 26.4% for the 2019 fiscal year. Our decreased gross margin for the twelve months is attributable to the hiring of a floor supervisor to help us manage the higher volumes of sales we were expecting with the addition of our OEM customer. This position is a necessary one to manage increased volumes through our shop floor and we are continuing to find ways to increase volumes to cover the expenses of this position. Operating expenses were $792,000 for the 2020 fiscal year compared to $666,000 for the 2019 fiscal year, an increase of $126,000, or 18.9%. This increase in operating expenses is due primarily to approximately $79,000 of additional costs related to implementation of our OEM line and $33,000 of pandemic expense related to the retention of employees during the pandemic and supply costs associated with mitigating the spread of COVID-19.
Trends and Uncertainties
We are subject to a number of trends and uncertainties that may affect our short-term or long-term liquidity, sales revenues, and operations. Similar to other farm equipment manufacturers, we are affected by items unique to the farm industry, including fluctuations in farm income resulting from the change in commodity prices, crop damage caused by weather and insects, government farm programs, interest rate fluctuations, and other unpredictable variables. Other uncertainties include our OEM customers and the decisions they make regarding their current supply chain structure, inventory levels, and overall business conditions. Management believes that our business is dependent on the farming industry for the bulk of our sales revenues. As such, our business tends to reap the benefits of increases in farm net income, as farmers tend to purchase equipment in lucrative times and forgo purchases in less profitable years. Direct government payments have been increasing in the past two years and costs of agricultural production are increasing; therefore, we anticipate that further increases in the value of production will benefit our business, while any future decreases in the value of production will decrease farm net income and may harm our financial results.
As with other farm equipment manufacturers, we depend on our network of dealers to influence customers’ decisions, and dealer influence is often more persuasive than a manufacturer’s reputation or the price of the product.
Seasonality
Sales of our agricultural products are seasonal; however, we have tried to decrease the impact of this seasonality through the development of beet harvesting machinery coupled with private labeled products, as the peak periods for these different products occur at different times.
We believe that our tool sales are not seasonal. Our modular building sales are somewhat seasonal, and we believe that this is due to the budgeting and funding cycles of the universities that commonly purchase our modular buildings. We believe that this cycle can be offset by building backlogs of inventory and by increasing sales to other public and private sectors.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our main source of funds during the 2020 fiscal year was cash generated by financing activities. We received $1,242,900 of funding and forgiveness via a Paycheck Protection Program loan and also $450,000 of funding from the Economic Injury Disaster Loan program in fiscal 2020. We did use approximately $856,000 of cash in operations in fiscal 2020 which was largely from costs of production for the Agricultural Products and Modular Building segments. We used approximately $693,000 of cash to update facilities and equipment which includes software and hardware related to information technology advances, office space updates, and manufacturing equipment improvements that enhance our efficiency.
We have a Bank Midwest credit facility consisting of a $5,000,000 revolving line of credit, pursuant to which we had borrowed $2,359,530, with $2,640,470 remaining, as of November 30, 2020, and one term loan, which had an outstanding principal balance of $2,350,593 as of November 30, 2020. The revolving line of credit is being used for working capital purposes. We also have three Economic Injury Disaster Loans provided by the U.S. Small Business Administration with an aggregate principal balance of $450,000 as of November 30, 2020.
Our loans require us to comply with various covenants, including maintaining certain financial ratios and obtaining prior written consent from Bank Midwest for any investment in, acquisition of, or guaranty relating to another business or entity. We were out of compliance with our debt service coverage ratio and minimum working capital requirements covenants in place under the Bank Midwest loans as of November 30, 2020. Bank Midwest has issued a waiver forgiving the noncompliance as of November 30, 2020, and in turn waived the event of default. On January 12, 2021, Bank Midwest reduced our working capital requirement through an amendment to our covenants to a level that would put us in compliance at November 30, 2020.
For additional information about our financing activities, please refer to Note 9 “Loan and Credit Agreements” to our financial statements in “Item 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA” of this report.
The following table represents our working capital and current ratio as of the end of the past two fiscal years:
We believe that our current cash and financing arrangements will provide sufficient cash to finance operations for the next 12 months. We expect to continue to rely on cash from financing activities to supplement our cash flows from operations in order to meet our liquidity and capital expenditure needs in the near future. We expect to continue to be able to procure financing upon reasonable terms.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.