Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This section of the Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Overview
Arrow Electronics, Inc. (the “company”) is a global provider of products, services, and solutions to industrial and commercial users of electronic components and enterprise computing solutions. The company has one of the world's broadest portfolios of product offerings available from leading electronic components and enterprise computing solutions suppliers, coupled with a range of services, solutions and tools that help industrial and commercial customers introduce innovative products, reduce their time to market, and enhance their overall competitiveness. The company has two business segments, the global components business segment and the global enterprise computing solutions (“ECS”) business segment. The company distributes electronic components to original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”) and contract manufacturers (“CMs”) through its global components business segment and provides enterprise computing solutions to value-added resellers (“VARs”) and managed service providers (“MSPs”) through its global ECS business segment. For 2020, approximately 72% of the company's sales were from the global components business segment and approximately 28% of the company's sales were from the global ECS business segment.
The company's financial objectives are to grow sales faster than the market, increase the markets served, grow profits faster than sales, and increase return on invested capital. To achieve its objectives, the company seeks to capture significant opportunities to grow across products, markets, and geographies. To supplement its organic growth strategy, the company continually evaluates strategic acquisitions to broaden its product and value-added service offerings, increase its market penetration, and expand its geographic reach.
Executive Summary
Consolidated sales for 2020 decreased by 0.8% compared with the year-earlier period. The decrease for 2020 was driven by a 5.7% decrease in global ECS business segment sales offset by a 1.2% increase in the global components business segment sales. Adjusted for the change in foreign currencies, dispositions, and the closure of the company's personal computer and mobility asset disposition business (referred to as "impact of wind down"), non-GAAP consolidated sales decreased 0.4% in 2020 compared with the year-earlier period.
The company reported net income attributable to shareholders of $584.4 million in 2020 compared with a net loss of $204.1 million in the year-earlier period. The following items impacted the comparability of the company's results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (all amounts are before tax except for amounts related to the effects of tax changes):
•restructuring, integration, and other charges of $13.3 million in 2020 and $78.4 million in 2019;
•identifiable intangible asset amortization of $38.4 million in 2020 and $42.4 million in 2019;
•impairments of long-lived assets of $7.2 million in 2020 and impairments of goodwill and other long-lived assets of $623.8 million in 2019;
•income from wind down of business of $14.7 million in 2020 and losses from wind down of business of $162.4 million, inclusive of $74.9 million of impairments of long-lived assets in 2019;
•Arrow Financing Solutions ("AFS") notes receivable recoveries of $1.8 million in 2020 and AFS notes receivable reserves and inventory write-downs of $18.0 million in 2019;
•net gain on investments of $5.3 million in 2020 and $11.8 million in 2019;
•tax benefit of $1.3 million in 2020 and tax expense of $1.7 million in 2019 related to legislation changes and other non-recurring tax adjustments;
•pension settlement gain of $1.8 million in 2020 and pension settlement loss of $20.1 million in 2019;
•Digital inventory write-downs, net of $22.3 million in 2019;
•loss on disposition of businesses, net of $1.9 million in 2019;
•income tax expense of $20.0 million in 2019 related to the wind down of business; and
•interest expense of $0.7 million in 2019 related to an uncertain tax position related to legislation changes.
Excluding the aforementioned items, non-GAAP net income attributable to shareholders decreased to $609.7 million in 2020 compared with $636.5 million in the year-earlier period. Net income in 2020 also included charges of approximately $32.7 million, net of tax, primarily related to foreign tax and other loss contingencies within the Global ECS business.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
On March 10, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of the COVID-19 coronavirus to be a pandemic. COVID-19 has caused substantial disruption to travel, business activities, and global supply chains, significant volatility in global financial markets, and has resulted in a dramatic increase in unemployment, particularly in the U.S.
To date, the company has experienced some limitations in employee resources resulting from travel restrictions and “stay at home” orders. Despite these restrictions, the company continues to efficiently manage the global supply chain requirements of our customers and suppliers. Throughout 2020, the company experienced strong demand for solutions that enable business continuity and work from home capabilities. Management is actively monitoring the impact of the global situation on its financial condition, liquidity, operations, suppliers, industry and workforce.
The extent to which COVID-19 will continue to impact the company’s results will depend primarily on future developments, including the severity and duration of the crisis, the speed and effectiveness of vaccine and treatment developments and deployment, potential mutations of COVID-19, and the impact of actions taken and that will be taken to contain COVID-19 or treat its impact, among others. These future developments are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence. The global economic impact from COVID-19 may adversely affect the company's results of operations in the future and may affect the credit condition of some of our customers, which could increase delays in customer payments and credit losses.
Certain Non-GAAP Financial Information
In addition to disclosing financial results that are determined in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”), the company also discloses certain non-GAAP financial information, including:
•Non-GAAP sales for the consolidated company, global components, and global ECS, non-GAAP gross profit, and non-GAAP operating expenses exclude the impact of changes in foreign currencies (referred to as "changes in foreign currencies") by re-translating prior period results at current period foreign exchange rates, the impact of dispositions by adjusting the company's operating results for businesses disposed, as if the dispositions had occurred at the beginning of the earliest period presented (referred to as "dispositions"), the impact of the company's personal computer and mobility asset disposition business (referred to as "wind down"), the impact of inventory write-downs and recoveries related to the digital business (referred to as “digital inventory write-downs, net”), and the impact of notes receivable reserves and recoveries and inventory write-downs related to the AFS business (referred to as “AFS notes receivable reserves and recoveries” and “AFS inventory write-downs”, respectively).
•Non-GAAP operating income excludes identifiable intangible asset amortization, restructuring, integration, and other charges (credits), loss on disposition of businesses, net, AFS notes receivable reserves and recoveries and inventory write-downs, digital inventory write-downs, net, the impact of non-cash charges related to goodwill, trade names, and long-lived assets, and the impact of wind down.
•Non-GAAP net income attributable to shareholders excludes identifiable intangible asset amortization, restructuring, integration, and other charges (credits), loss on disposition of businesses, net, AFS notes receivable reserves and recoveries and inventory write-downs, digital inventory write-downs, net, gains and losses on investments, net, the impact of non-cash charges related to goodwill, trade names, and long-lived assets, certain tax adjustments, pension settlement (gain) loss, and the impact of wind down.
Management believes that providing this additional information is useful to the reader, as a supplement to the GAAP measures, to better assess and understand the company's operating performance, especially when comparing results with previous periods. Management typically monitors these non-GAAP measures in addition to GAAP results to understand and compare operating results across accounting periods for forecasting purposes, operating plans, and evaluating our financial performance. However, analysis of results on a non-GAAP basis should be used as a complement to, and in conjunction with, data presented in accordance with GAAP.
Sales
Substantially all of the company’s sales are made on an order-by-order basis, rather than through long-term sales contracts. As such, the nature of the company’s business does not provide for the visibility of material forward-looking information from its customers and suppliers beyond a few months.
Following is an analysis of net sales by reportable segment for the years ended December 31 (in millions):
* The sum of the components for sales, as reported, and non-GAAP sales may not agree to totals, as presented, due to rounding.
Consolidated sales for 2020 decreased by $243.5 million, or 0.8%, compared with the year-earlier period. The decrease in 2020 was driven by a decrease in global ECS business segment sales of $495.4 million, or 5.7%, partially offset by an increase in global components business segment sales of $252.0 million, or 1.2%, compared with the year-earlier period. Non-GAAP consolidated sales decreased 0.4% in 2020, compared with the year-earlier period.
Compared with the year-earlier period, global components business segment sales for 2020 increased $252.0 million, or 1.2%, as reported. Increases were primarily due to stronger demand in the Asia-Pacific region, offset by lower sales volumes in the Americas and Europe, the Middle East, and Africa ("EMEA") regions, as well as the impact of wind down. Non-GAAP global components sales increased 2.1% in 2020, compared with the year-earlier period.
Compared with the year-earlier period, global ECS business segment sales for 2020 decreased $495.4 million, or 5.7%, as reported. Decreases in sales were primarily due to lower sales volumes driven by softer demand for proprietary server solutions and networking, offset partially by stronger demand in the infrastructure software, industry standard servers, security and storage verticals. Non-GAAP global components sales decreased 6.1% in 2020, compared with the year-earlier period.
Gross Profit
Following is an analysis of gross profit for the years ended December 31 (in millions):
* The sum of the components for non-GAAP gross profit may not agree to totals, as presented, due to rounding.
The company recorded gross profit of $3.2 billion for 2020 compared with $3.3 billion in the year-earlier period. Non-GAAP gross profit decreased 4.7% in 2020 compared with the year-earlier period. Non-GAAP gross profit margins in 2020 decreased by approximately 50 bps compared with the year-earlier period primarily due to regional mix with Asia-Pacific components contributing 46% of global components sales for 2020 compared with 38% of global components sales for the year-earlier period. These decreases were offset partially by growing demand in services offerings globally.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses and Depreciation and Amortization
Following is an analysis of operating expenses for the years ended December 31 (in millions):
* The sum of the components for selling, general, and administrative expenses and depreciation and amortization, as reported, and non-GAAP operating expenses may not agree to totals, as presented, due to rounding.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses decreased by $104.6 million, or 4.8%, in 2020, on a sales decrease of 0.8%, compared with the year-earlier period, primarily due to cost savings related to the operating expense reduction program (see Note 9), the impact of dispositions and wind down and decreases in travel related expenses. Selling, general, and administrative expenses, as a percentage of sales, was 7.3% and 7.6% for 2020 and 2019, respectively. Depreciation and amortization expense as a percentage of operating expenses was 8.3% for 2020 compared with 8.0% in the year-earlier period. Included in depreciation and amortization expense is identifiable intangible asset amortization of $38.4 million for 2020 compared to $48.1 million for the year earlier period.
Non-GAAP operating expenses decreased 1.2% compared with the year-earlier period. Non-GAAP operating expense, as a percentage of non-GAAP sales, remained flat for 2020 compared with the year-earlier periods.
Impairments
During the second quarter of 2019, the company committed to a plan to close its personal computer and mobility asset disposition business within the global components business segment. In light of the plan, the company performed an impairment analysis of the long-lived assets of the personal computer and mobility asset disposition business in accordance
with Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") topic 360 and recorded a pre-tax impairment charge of $74.9 million to write-down certain assets of the personal computer and mobility asset disposition business to estimated fair value in the second quarter of 2019.
During the second quarter of 2019, as a result of the company's downward revision of forecasted future earnings and the decision to wind down the company's personal computer and mobility asset disposition business, the company determined that it was more likely than not that an impairment may exist within the Americas components and Asia-Pacific components reporting units. The company evaluated its other four reporting units and concluded an interim impairment analysis was not required based on the results of those reporting units and historical levels of headroom in each of those reporting units. The interim goodwill impairment analysis resulted in a partial goodwill impairment charge of $509.0 million ($457.8 million net of tax) with approximately $600.0 million of goodwill remaining within the Americas components reporting unit and a full impairment charge of $61.2 million ($61.2 million net of tax) within the Asia-Pacific components reporting unit.
The company estimated the fair value of these reporting units using the income approach. For the purposes of the income approach, fair value was determined based on the present value of estimated future cash flows, discounted at an appropriate risk adjusted rate. The fair value conclusion as of June 29, 2019 for the Americas components reporting unit is highly sensitive to changes in the assumptions used in the income approach which include forecasted revenues, gross profit margins, operating income margins, working capital cash flow, perpetual growth rates, and long-term discount rates, among others, all of which require significant judgments by management.
During the second quarter of 2019, the company initiated actions to further integrate two global components businesses. These businesses held indefinite-lived trade names with a carrying value of $101.0 million. As a result of the company's decision to integrate these brands, we determined the useful lives of the trade names were no longer indefinite. The company began amortizing these trade names over their estimated remaining useful life. The trade names were tested for impairment during the second quarter of 2019 as a result of the change in estimated useful lives. The company estimated the fair value of the trade names to be $55.0 million using the relief from royalty method and recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $46.0 million ($34.7 million net of tax). The drivers of the impairment were primarily due to the shortened useful lives of the asset and a decline of the forecasted revenues attributable to the trade name as integration to the Arrow brand occurs over the estimated remaining useful life.
Restructuring, Integration, and Other Charges
2020 Charges
The company recorded restructuring, integration, and other charges of $13.3 million, which includes $13.4 million related to initiatives taken by the company during 2020 to improve operating efficiencies and personnel charges of $3.4 million related to the operating expense reduction program previously disclosed in July 2019.
2019 Charges
The company recorded restructuring, integration, and other charges of $89.8 million, which includes $22.3 million related to initiatives taken by the company during 2019 to improve operating efficiencies and personnel charges of $46.0 million related to the operating expense reduction program previously disclosed in July 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, the company does not anticipate there will be any material adjustments relating to the aforementioned restructuring and integration plans. Refer to Note 9, “Restructuring, Integration, and Other Charges” of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of the company's restructuring and integration activities.
Loss on Disposition of Businesses, Net
During 2019, the company recorded a loss on disposition of businesses, net of $21.3 million primarily related to the reclassification of cumulative translation adjustment to earnings upon the sale of three businesses which were part of the company's personal computer and mobility asset disposition business.
Operating Income
Following is an analysis of operating income for the years ended December 31 (in millions):
* Amounts presented for restructuring, integration, and other charges, goodwill and other impairments, loss on disposition of businesses, net, and identifiable intangible amortization exclude amounts related to the personal computer and mobility asset disposition business, which are reported within the impact of wind down.
** The sum of the components for non-GAAP consolidated operating income may not agree to totals, as presented, due to rounding.
The company recorded operating income of $894.5 million, or 3.1% of sales, in 2020 compared with operating income of $107.7 million, or 0.4% of sales, in the year-earlier period. Non-GAAP operating income was $936.9 million, or 3.3% of sales, in 2020 compared with non-GAAP operating income of $1.1 billion, or 3.7% of sales, in the year-earlier period. Non-GAAP operating income decreased 11.3% compared with the year-earlier period, on a sales decrease of 0.8%. Non-GAAP operating income, as a percentage of sales, decreased 40 bps for 2020 primarily due to the decreases in sales across both the global components and global ECS businesses, the impact to gross profit resulting from a shift in regional mix, and reserves and other adjustments related to foreign tax and other loss contingencies within the global ECS business. These reserves are principally associated with transactional taxes on activity from several prior years, not significant to any one year. These operating margin declines were partially offset by a reduction in operating costs and corporate overhead due to the operating expense reduction program (refer to Note 9), as well as a reduction in travel related expenses in 2020.
Pension Settlements
In 2019, the company entered into a settlement for the remaining portion of its Wyle defined benefit plan under which participants received benefits through lump sum payments and an insurance annuity contract. The settlement of $59.3 million was completed during October 2019, at which time the company recorded settlement expense of $20.1 million in the “Employee benefit plan expense, net” line item in the company's consolidated statements of operations.
Prior to terminating the plan, the company adopted an amendment to the plan that provided eligible plan participants with the option to receive an early distribution of their pension benefits. The company has terminated the plan to reduce administrative burdens.
Interest and Other Financing Expense, Net
The company recorded net interest and other financing expense of $137.2 million for 2020, compared with $203.7 million in the year-earlier period. The decrease for 2020 primarily relates to lower borrowings and interest rates on short term credit facilities, offset partially by decreased interest income. The decrease in interest income is primarily attributable to lower average cash balances and lower interest rates within the company's cash pooling arrangements.
Income Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the company recorded provision for income taxes of $172.8 million, an effective tax rate of 22.8%. The company's provision for income taxes and effective tax rates are impacted by the previously discussed identifiable intangible asset amortization, restructuring, integration, and other charges, gain on investment, net, AFS notes receivable recoveries, impairments of long-lived assets, the impact of wind down, pension settlement gain, and the impact of
tax legislation changes and other non-recurring tax adjustments. Excluding the impact of the aforementioned items, the company's non-GAAP effective tax rate for 2020 was 22.9%. Included in the 2020 effective tax rate are approximately $7.4 million in discrete tax items related to the foreign tax and other loss contingencies.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the company recorded provision for income taxes of $88.3 million, equivalent to an effective tax rate of (79.0)%. The company's provision for income taxes and effective tax rates are impacted by the previously discussed restructuring, integration, and other charges, identifiable intangible asset amortization, loss on disposition of businesses, net, the impact of tax legislation changes and other non-recurring tax adjustments, gain on investments, net, AFS reserves and recoveries, digital inventory write-downs, net, impairments of goodwill and other long-lived assets, pension settlement loss, certain other tax adjustments, and the impact of the wind down. Excluding the impact of the aforementioned items, the company's non-GAAP effective tax rate for 2019 was 24.3%.
The company’s effective tax rate deviates from the statutory U.S. federal income tax rate mainly due to the mix of foreign taxing jurisdictions in which the company operates and where its foreign subsidiaries generate taxable income, among other things. The increase in the effective tax rate from (79.0)% for 2019 to 22.8% for 2020 is primarily driven by discrete items such as the nondeductible portion of goodwill impairments and changes in U.S. tax rules, as well as changes in the mix of tax jurisdictions where taxable income is generated.
Net Income (Loss) Attributable to Shareholders
Following is an analysis of net income attributable to shareholders for the years ended December 31 (in millions):
* Amounts presented for restructuring, integration, and other charges, goodwill and other impairments, loss on disposition of businesses, net, and identifiable intangible amortization exclude amounts related to the personal computer and mobility asset disposition business, which are reported within the impact of wind down. Identifiable intangible asset amortization also excludes amortization related to the noncontrolling interest.
The company recorded net income (loss) attributable to shareholders of $584.4 million for 2020, compared with $(204.1) million in the year-earlier period. Non-GAAP net income attributable to shareholders was $609.7 million for 2020, compared with $636.5 million in the year-earlier period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the company had cash and cash equivalents of $373.6 million and $300.1 million, respectively, of which $140.1 million and $277.7 million, respectively, were held outside the United States. Liquidity is affected by many factors, some of which are based on normal ongoing operations of the company's business and some of which arise from fluctuations related to global economics and markets. Cash balances are generated and held in many locations throughout the world.
To achieve greater cash management agility and to further advance business objectives, during the fourth quarter of 2019, the
company reversed its assertion to indefinitely reinvest a certain portion of its foreign earnings, of which approximately $2.4 billion are available for distribution in future periods as of December 31, 2020, after distributions of $349.0 million and $761.0 million during 2020 and 2019, respectively. The company continues to indefinitely reinvest the residual $1.6 billion of undistributed earnings of its foreign subsidiaries. If the indefinitely reinvested earnings were to be distributed to the United States, the company would be required to pay withholding and other taxes. Additionally, local government regulations may restrict the company’s ability to move cash balances to meet cash needs under certain circumstances. However, the company currently does not expect such regulations and restrictions to impact its ability to make acquisitions or to conduct operations throughout the global organization.
During 2020, the net amount of cash provided by the company's operating activities was $1.4 billion, the net amount of cash used for investing activities was $138.8 million, and the net amount of cash used for financing activities was $1.2 billion. The effect of exchange rate changes on cash was an increase of $79.6 million.
During 2019, the net amount of cash provided by the company's operating activities was $858.0 million, the net amount of cash used for investing activities was $173.6 million, and the net amount of cash used for financing activities was $906.4 million. The effect of exchange rate changes on cash was an increase of $12.7 million.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
The company maintains a significant investment in accounts receivable and inventories. As a percentage of total assets, accounts receivable and inventories were approximately 73.3% and 72.9% at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The net amount of cash provided by the company's operating activities during 2020 was $1.4 billion and was primarily due to earnings from operations adjusted for non-cash items. The net amount of cash provided by the company's operating activities during 2019 was $858.0 million and was primarily due to earnings from operations adjusted for non-cash items and a reduction in working capital.
The change in cash provided by operating activities during 2020, compared to the year earlier period, relates primarily to the timing of payments, slowing growth in customer demand in certain regions, and a corresponding reduction in working capital, including inventory, which is consistent with the company's historical counter-cyclical cash flow in which the company generates strong cash flow in periods of decreased demand. Sales of accounts receivables under the EMEA asset securitization program, entered into by the company in the first quarter of 2020, was another contributor to the reduction in working capital and corresponding increase in operating net cash inflow. During 2020, sales of accounts receivables under the EMEA asset securitization program resulted in a $397.9 million operating net cash inflow (see Note 5).
Working capital, as a percentage of sales, which the company defines as accounts receivable, net, plus inventory, net, less accounts payable, divided by annualized sales, was 13.5% and 16.7% in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
The net amount of cash used for investing activities during 2020 was $138.8 million. The primary use of cash for investing activities included $123.6 million for capital expenditures which primarily related to the build out of the company's distribution centers and investments in internally developed software.
The net amount of cash used for investing activities during 2019 was $173.6 million. The primary use of cash for investing activities included $143.2 million for capital expenditures, $13.1 million of cash payments related to the disposition of businesses, and $7.6 million related to the acquisition of a customer relationship intangible asset. Capital expenditures for 2019 are primarily related to investments in internally developed software and website functionality related to the digital business and the build out of a new distribution center within the EMEA region.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
The net amount of cash used for financing activities during 2020 was $1.2 billion. The uses of cash from financing activities included $483.7 million of repurchases of common stock, $411.5 million of net payments for long-term borrowings, $209.4 million of repayments of the principal amount of the company's 6.00% notes due April 2020, $95.0 million of net payments for short-term borrowings, and $48.4 million of payments upon the settlement of forward starting interest rate swaps. The primary source of cash from financing activities during 2020 was $21.0 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
The net amount of cash used for financing activities during 2019 was $906.4 million. The uses of cash from financing activities included $405.0 million of net payments for long-term borrowings, $404.2 million of repurchases of common stock, and $113.9 million of net payments for short-term borrowings. The primary source of cash from financing activities during 2019 was $16.9 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
The company has a $2.0 billion revolving credit facility maturing in December 2023. This facility may be used by the company for general corporate purposes including working capital in the ordinary course of business, letters of credit, repayment, prepayment or purchase of long-term indebtedness, acquisitions, and as support for the company's commercial paper program, as applicable. Interest on borrowings under the revolving credit facility is calculated using a base rate or a Eurocurrency rate plus a spread (1.18% at December 31, 2020), which is based on the company's credit ratings, or an effective interest rate of 1.26% at December 31, 2020. The facility fee, which is based on the company's credit ratings, was .20% of the total borrowing capacity at December 31, 2020. The company had no outstanding borrowings under the revolving credit facility at December 31, 2020 and $10.0 million in outstanding borrowings under the revolving credit facility at December 31, 2019. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the average daily balance outstanding under the revolving credit facility was $20.6 million and $32.1 million, respectively.
The company has a commercial paper program and the maximum aggregate balance of commercial paper outstanding may not exceed the borrowing capacity of $1.2 billion. The company had no outstanding borrowings under this program as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the average daily balance outstanding under the commercial paper program was $47.9 million and $690.2 million, respectively. The program had a weighted-average effective interest rate of 0.30% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The company has a North American asset securitization program collateralized by accounts receivable of certain of its subsidiaries, which matures in June 2021. The company has the intent and ability to refinance the North American asset securitization program on a long-term basis and intends to refinance the program in 2021 prior to the maturity date. The company may borrow up to $1.2 billion under the North American asset securitization program. The program is conducted through Arrow Electronics Funding Corporation (“AFC”), a wholly-owned, bankruptcy remote subsidiary. The program does not qualify for sale treatment. Accordingly, the accounts receivable and related debt obligation remain on the company's consolidated balance sheets. Interest on borrowings is calculated using a base rate, or a commercial paper rate, plus a spread (.40% at December 31, 2020), or an effective interest rate of .56% at December 31, 2020. The facility fee is .40% of the total borrowing capacity. The company had no outstanding borrowings under the North American asset securitization program at December 31, 2020 and $400.0 million in outstanding borrowings under the North American asset securitization program at December 31, 2019. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the average daily balance outstanding under the North American asset securitization program was $429.9 million and $1.0 billion, respectively.
Both the revolving credit facility and North American asset securitization program include terms and conditions that limit the incurrence of additional borrowings and require that certain financial ratios be maintained at designated levels. As of December 31, 2020, the company was in compliance with all such financial covenants.
The company has $200.0 million in uncommitted lines of credit. There were no outstanding borrowings under the uncommitted lines of credit at December 31, 2020. There were $60.0 million of outstanding borrowings under the uncommitted lines of credit at December 31, 2019. These borrowings were provided on a short-term basis and the maturity is agreed upon between the company and the lender. The lines had a weighted-average effective interest rate of 1.53% at December 31, 2020. During 2020 and 2019, the average daily balance outstanding under the uncommitted lines of credit was $7.4 million and $22.8 million, respectively.
In May 2019, the company entered into a series of ten-year forward-starting interest rate swaps (the “2019 swaps”) which locked in an average treasury rate of 2.33% on a total aggregate notional amount of $300.0 million. The 2019 swaps were designated as cash flow hedges managing the risk of variability in interest rates of future expected debt issuance by June 2020. In February 2020, the company determined that certain of the forecasted cash flows were no longer probable and de-designated the hedging relationship. In February 2020, the company re-designated the 2019 swaps in a new cash flow hedge managing the risk of variability in interest rates of future expected debt issuance by June 2023. In May 2020, the company cash settled and terminated the 2019 swaps for a total of $48.4 million.
In April 2020, the company entered into a series of ten-year forward-starting interest rate swaps (the “April 2020 swaps”) which locked in an average swap rate of 0.97% on a total aggregate notional amount of $300.0 million and expire in December 2024. The April 2020 swaps were designated as cash flow hedges managing the risk of variability in interest rates of future expected debt issuance by December 2025.
In May 2020, the company entered into a series of ten-year forward-starting interest rate swaps (the “May 2020 swaps”) which locked in an average swap rate of 0.90% on a total aggregate notional amount of $300.0 million and expire in June 2022. The May 2020 swaps were designated as cash flow hedges managing the risk of variability in interest rates of future expected debt issuance by June 2023.
In the normal course of business, certain of the company’s subsidiaries have agreements to sell, without recourse, selected trade receivables to financial institutions. The company does not retain financial or legal interests in these receivables, and, accordingly, they are accounted for as sales of the related receivables and the receivables are removed from the company’s consolidated balance sheets.
The global economic impact from COVID-19 may adversely affect the company’s ability to access capital markets. Management believes that the company’s current cash availability, its current borrowing capacity under its revolving credit facility and asset securitization programs, and its expected ability to generate future operating cash flows are sufficient to meet its projected cash flow needs for the foreseeable future. The company's current committed and undrawn liquidity stands at over $3.2 billion in addition to $373.6 million of cash on hand at December 31, 2020. The company also may issue debt or equity securities in the future and management believes the company will have adequate access to the capital markets, if needed. The company continually evaluates its liquidity requirements and would seek to amend its existing borrowing capacity or access the financial markets as deemed necessary.
Contractual Obligations
Payments due under contractual obligations at December 31, 2020 are as follows (in thousands):
(a)Amounts represent an estimate of non-cancelable inventory purchase orders and other contractual obligations related to information technology and facilities as of December 31, 2020.
(b)Includes amounts relating to the Tax Act transition tax payable, personnel and certain other costs resulting from restructuring and integration activities, and other miscellaneous contractual obligations.
Under the terms of various joint venture agreements, the company is required to pay its pro-rata share of the third party debt of the joint ventures in the event that the joint ventures are unable to meet their obligations. There were no outstanding borrowings under the third party debt agreements of the joint ventures as of December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2020, the company had a liability for unrecognized tax positions of $62.2 million. The timing of the resolution of these uncertain tax positions is dependent on the tax authorities' income tax examination processes. Material changes are not expected; however, it is possible that the amount of unrecognized tax benefits with respect to uncertain tax positions could increase or decrease during 2021. Currently, the company is unable to make a reasonable estimate of when tax cash settlement would occur and how it would impact the effective tax rate.
Share-Repurchase Programs
The following table shows the company's Board of Directors (the “Board”) approved share-repurchase programs as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the first quarter of 2020, the company entered into an EMEA asset securitization program under which it will continuously sell its interest in designated pools of trade accounts receivables of certain of its subsidiaries in the EMEA region, at a discount, to a special purpose entity, which in turn sells certain of the receivables to unaffiliated financial institutions and conduits administered by such unaffiliated financial institutions ("unaffiliated financial institutions") on a monthly basis. The company may sell up to €400.0 million under the EMEA asset securitization program, which matures in January 2023, subject to extension in accordance with its terms. The program is conducted through Arrow EMEA Funding Corp B.V., an entity structured to be bankruptcy remote. The company is deemed the primary beneficiary of Arrow EMEA Funding Corp B.V. as the company has both the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact the entity’s economic performance and the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive the benefits that could potentially be significant to the entity from the transfer of the trade accounts receivables into the special purpose entity. Accordingly, Arrow EMEA Funding Corp B.V. is included in the company’s consolidated financial statements.
Receivables sold to unaffiliated financial institutions under the program are excluded from “Accounts receivable, net” on the company’s consolidated balance sheets and cash receipts are reflected as cash provided by operating activities on the consolidated statements of cash flows. The purchase price is paid in cash when the receivables are sold. Certain unsold receivables held on Arrow EMEA Funding Corp B.V. are pledged as collateral to unaffiliated financial institutions. These unsold receivables are included in “Accounts receivable, net” in the company’s consolidated balance sheets.
The company continues servicing the receivables which were sold and in exchange receives a servicing fee under the program. The company does not record a servicing asset or liability on the company’s consolidated balance sheets as the company estimates that the fee it receives to service these receivables approximates the fair market compensation to provide the servicing activities.
During 2020, the company sold approximately €1.7 billion, or $1.9 billion, of accounts receivables to unaffiliated financial institutions under the EMEA asset securitization program. There were €323.6 million, or $397.9 million, of receivables sold to unaffiliated financial institutions that were uncollected as of December 31, 2020. Total collateralized accounts receivables of approximately €448.8 million, or $551.8 million, were held by Arrow EMEA Funding Corp B.V. at December 31, 2020. Any accounts receivables held by Arrow EMEA Funding Corp B.V. would likely not be available to other creditors of the company in the event of bankruptcy or insolvency proceedings if there are outstanding balances under the EMEA asset securitization program. The assets of the special purpose entity cannot be used by the company for general corporate purposes. Additionally, the financial obligations of Arrow EMEA Funding Corp B.V. to the unaffiliated financial institution under the program are limited to the assets it owns and there is no recourse to the Arrow Electronics, Inc. for receivables that are uncollectible as a result of the insolvency or inability to pay of the account debtors.
The EMEA asset securitization program includes terms and conditions that limit the incurrence of additional borrowings and require that certain financial ratios be maintained at designated levels. As of December 31, 2020, the company was in compliance with all such financial covenants.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The company's consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires the company to make significant estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. The company evaluates its estimates on an ongoing basis. The company bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed reasonable under the circumstances; the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The company believes the following critical accounting policies involve the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of its consolidated financial statements:
Revenue Recognition
The company recognizes revenue as control of products is transferred to customers, which generally happens at the point of shipment. Sales are recorded net of discounts, rebates, and returns, which historically have not been material. The company allows its customers to return product for exchange or credit in limited circumstances. A liability is recorded at the time of sale for estimated product returns based upon historical experience. The company also provides volume rebates and other discounts to certain customers which are considered variable consideration. A provision for customer rebates and other discounts is recorded as a reduction of revenue at the time of sale based on an evaluation of the contract terms and historical experience. Tariffs are included in sales as the company has enforceable rights to additional consideration to cover the cost of tariffs. Other taxes imposed by governmental authorities on the company's revenue producing activities with customers, such as sales taxes and value added taxes, are excluded from net sales.
Products sold by the company are generally delivered via shipment from the company's facilities, drop shipment directly from the vendor, or by electronic delivery of keys for software products. A portion of the company's business involves shipments directly from its suppliers to its customers, in these transactions, the company is generally responsible for negotiating price both with the supplier and customer, payment to the supplier, establishing payment terms with the customer, product returns, and has risk of loss if the customer does not make payment. As the principal with the customer, the company recognizes revenue upon receiving notification from the supplier that the product was shipped.
The company has contracts with certain customers where the company's performance obligation is to arrange for the products or services to be provided by another party. In these arrangements, as the company assumes an agency relationship in the transaction, revenue is recognized in the amount of the net fee associated with serving as an agent. These arrangements relate to the sale of supplier service contracts to customers where the company has no future obligation to perform under these contracts or the rendering of logistics services for the delivery of inventory for which the company does not assume the risks and rewards of ownership.
No single customer accounted for more than 2% of the company's 2020 consolidated sales. One supplier accounted for approximately 14% of the company's consolidated sales in 2020. No other single supplier accounted for more than 7% of the company's consolidated sales in 2020. The company believes that many of the products it sells are available from other sources at competitive prices. However, certain parts of the company's business, such as the company's global ECS business segment, rely on a limited number of suppliers with the strategy of providing focused support, extensive product knowledge, and customized service to suppliers, MSPs, and VARs. Most of the company's purchases are pursuant to distributor agreements, which are typically non-exclusive and cancelable by either party at any time or on short notice.
Trade Accounts and Notes Receivable
On January 1, 2020, the company adopted Topic 326 using a modified retrospective approach with a cumulative effect adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings, which increased the allowance for credit losses by $47.0 million ($35.9 million net of tax). Increases in the allowance for credit losses relate to the required change from an incurred loss model to an expected loss model, and the related change in timing of loss recognition where an allowance for credit losses is now applied to all receivables, at a rate dependent on the credit characteristics of the collective pool each customer is in. Refer to Notes 1 and 5.
Trade accounts and notes receivable are reported at amortized cost, net of the allowance for credit losses in the consolidated balance sheets. The allowance for credit losses is a valuation account that is deducted from the receivables' amortized cost basis
to present the net amount expected to be collected. Receivables are written off against the allowance when management believes the receivable balance is confirmed to be uncollectible.
Management estimates the allowance for credit losses using relevant available information about expected credit losses and an age-based reserve model. Inputs to the model include information about historical credit losses, customer credit ratings, past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. Adjustments to historical loss information are made for differences in current receivable-specific risk characteristics such as changes in the economic and industry environment, or other relevant factors.
Expected credit losses are estimated on a collective (pool) basis, when similar risk characteristics exist, based on customer credit ratings, which include both externally acquired as well as internally determined credit ratings. Receivables that do not share risk characteristics are evaluated on an individual basis.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Write-downs of inventories to market value are based upon contractual provisions governing price protection, stock rotation rights, and obsolescence, as well as assumptions about future demand and market conditions. If assumptions about future demand change and/or actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected by the company, additional write-downs of inventories may be required. Due to the large number of transactions and the complexity of managing the process around price protections and stock rotations, estimates are made regarding adjustments to the book cost of inventories. Actual amounts could be different from those estimated.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the consolidated financial statements. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined on the basis of differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their financial reporting amounts using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
The carrying value of the company's deferred tax assets is dependent upon the company's ability to generate sufficient future taxable income in certain tax jurisdictions. Should the company determine that it is more likely than not that some portion or all of its deferred tax assets will not be realized, a valuation allowance to reduce the deferred tax assets is established in the period such determination is made. The assessment of the need for a valuation allowance requires considerable judgment on the part of management with respect to the benefits that could be realized from future taxable income, as well as other positive and negative factors.
It is also the company's policy to provide for uncertain tax positions and the related interest and penalties based upon management's assessment of whether a tax benefit is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by tax authorities. To the extent the company prevails in matters for which a liability for an unrecognized tax benefit is established, or is required to pay amounts in excess of the liability, or when other facts and circumstances change, the company's effective tax rate in a given financial statement period may be materially affected.
Contingencies and Litigation
The company is subject to proceedings, lawsuits, and other claims related to environmental, regulatory, labor, product, tax, and other matters and assesses the likelihood of an adverse judgment or outcome for these matters, as well as the range of potential losses. A determination of the reserves required, if any, is made after careful analysis. The reserves may change in the future due to new developments impacting the probability of a loss, the estimate of such loss, and the probability of recovery of such loss from third parties.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the cost of an acquisition over the fair value of the net assets acquired. The company tests goodwill for impairment annually as of the first day of the fourth quarter and/or when an event occurs or circumstances change such that it is more likely than not that an impairment may exist. Examples of such events and circumstances that the company would consider include the following:
•macroeconomic conditions such as deterioration in general economic conditions, limitations on accessing capital, fluctuations in foreign exchange rates, or other developments in equity and credit markets;
•industry and market considerations such as a deterioration in the environment in which the company operates, an increased competitive environment, a decline in market-dependent multiples or metrics (considered in both absolute terms and relative to peers), a change in the market for the company's products or services, or a regulatory or political development;
•cost factors such as increases in inventory, labor, or other costs that have a negative effect on earnings and cash flows;
•overall financial performance such as negative or declining cash flows or a decline in actual or planned revenue or earnings compared with actual and projected results of relevant prior periods;
•other relevant entity-specific events such as changes in management, key personnel, strategy, or customers, contemplation of bankruptcy, or litigation;
•events affecting a reporting unit such as a change in the composition or carrying amount of its net assets, a more likely than not expectation of selling or disposing all, or a portion, of a reporting unit, the testing for recoverability of a significant asset group within a reporting unit, or recognition of a goodwill impairment loss in the financial statements of a subsidiary that is a component of a reporting unit; and
•a sustained decrease in share price (considered in both absolute terms and relative to peers).
Goodwill is tested at a level of reporting referred to as “the reporting unit.” The company's reporting units are defined as each of the three regional businesses within the global components business segment, which are the Americas, EMEA, and Asia-Pacific, each of the two regional businesses within the global ECS business segment, which are North America and EMEA, and eInfochips which was acquired in 2018 and is part of the global components business segment.
An entity has the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not (that is, a likelihood of more than 50%) that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, an entity determines it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then the quantitative goodwill impairment test is unnecessary. The company has elected not to perform the qualitative assessment and performed the quantitative goodwill impairment test. The quantitative goodwill impairment test, used to identify both the existence of impairment and the amount of impairment loss, compares the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit is less than its fair value, no impairment exists. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss shall be recognized in an amount equal to that excess, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
The company estimates the fair value of a reporting unit using the income approach. For the purposes of the income approach, fair value is determined based on the present value of estimated future cash flows, discounted at an appropriate risk-adjusted rate. The assumptions included in the income approach include forecasted revenues, gross profit margins, operating income margins, working capital cash flow, perpetual growth rates, income tax rates, and long-term discount rates, among others, all of which require significant judgments by management. Actual results may differ from those assumed in the company's forecasts. The company also reconciles its discounted cash flow analysis to its current market capitalization allowing for a reasonable control premium.
While there is ongoing uncertainty related to COVID-19, the company has observed continued improvements in macroeconomic conditions and equity valuations, and market conditions related to our components business, along with improvements in working capital in certain reporting units. As of the first day of the fourth quarters of 2020, 2019, and 2018, the company's annual impairment testing did not indicate impairment at any of the company's reporting units.
A decline in general economic conditions or global equity valuations could impact the judgments and assumptions about the fair value of the company's businesses, and the company could be required to record an impairment charge in the future, which could impact the company's consolidated balance sheets, as well as the company's consolidated statements of operations. If the company was required to recognize an impairment charge in the future, the charge would not impact the company's consolidated cash flows, current liquidity, capital resources, and covenants under its existing revolving credit facility, North American asset securitization program, other outstanding borrowings, and EMEA asset securitization program.
During the first quarter of 2020, as a result of significant declines in macroeconomic conditions and equity valuations, and the implementation of regulatory restrictions brought forth by the COVID-19 pandemic, and due to historically low head-room, the company determined that it was more likely than not that an impairment may exist within the Americas components and eInfochips reporting units. The company performed a quantitative goodwill impairment test for these reporting units and determined goodwill was not impaired (see Note 3).
During the second quarter of 2019, the company recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $570.2 million and $61.2 million within the Americas components and Asia-Pacific components reporting units, respectively (see Note 3).
As of December 31, 2020, the company has $2.1 billion of goodwill, of which approximately $607.3 million and $90.5 million was allocated to the Americas and EMEA reporting units within the global components business segment, respectively, $787.7 million and $432.8 million was allocated to the North America and EMEA reporting units within the global ECS business segment, respectively, and $197.2 million was allocated to the eInfochips reporting unit. As of the date of the company's latest impairment test, the fair value of the EMEA components reporting unit, within the global components business segment, and the Americas ECS and EMEA ECS reporting units, within the global ECS business segment, exceeded their carrying values by more than 175%. The Americas components and eInfochips reporting units, within the global components business segment, exceeded their carrying values by less than 10% (see Note 3).
Impact of Recently Issued Accounting Standards
In March 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") issued Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") No. 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848) Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting ("ASU No. 2020-04"). ASU No. 2020-04 provides optional expedients and exceptions for applying GAAP to contract modifications and hedging relationships, subject to meeting certain criteria, that reference LIBOR or another rate that is expected to be discontinued. In January 2021, the FASB issued ASU No. 2021-01, Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848). This ASU provides supplemental guidance and clarification to ASU No. 2020-04, and these updates must be adopted concurrently, cumulatively referred to as “Topic 848.” The amendments in Topic 848 are effective for all entities as of March 12, 2020 through December 31, 2022. The company adopted the provisions of Topic 848 on a prospective basis in March 2020, and the adoption had no impact on the consolidated financial statements.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses ("Topic 326"). Topic 326 revises the methodology for measuring credit losses on financial instruments and the timing of when such losses are recorded. On January 1, 2020, the company adopted Topic 326 using a modified retrospective approach with a cumulative effect adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings, which increased the allowance for credit losses by $47.0 million ($35.9 million net of tax). Increases in the allowance for credit losses relate to the required change from an incurred loss model to an expected loss model, and the related change in timing of loss recognition where an allowance for credit losses is now applied to all receivables, at a rate dependent on the credit characteristics of the collective pool each customer is in. Refer to Note 5.
Information Relating to Forward-Looking Statements
This report includes "forward-looking statements," as the term is defined under the federal securities laws. Forward-looking statements are those statements which are not statements of historical fact. These forward-looking statements can be identified by forward-looking words such as “expects,” “anticipates,” “intends,” “plans,” “may,” “will,” “believes,” “seeks,” “estimates,” and similar expressions. These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous assumptions, risks, and uncertainties, which could cause actual results or facts to differ materially from such statements for a variety of reasons, including, but not limited to: potential adverse effects of the ongoing global COVID-19 coronavirus pandemic, including actions taken to contain or treat COVID-19, the speed and effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccine and treatment developments and deployment, potential mutations of COVID-19, industry conditions, changes in product supply, pricing and customer demand, competition, other vagaries in the global components and global ECS markets, changes in relationships with key suppliers, increased profit margin pressure, changes in legal, tax and regulatory matters, non-compliance with certain regulations, such as export, anti-trust, and anti-corruption laws, foreign tax and other loss contingencies, and the company's ability to generate cash flow. For a further discussion of these and other factors that could cause the company’s future results to differ materially from any forward-looking statements, see the section entitled “Risk Factors” in this Form 10-K. Shareholders and other readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date on which they are made. The company undertakes no obligation to update publicly or revise any of the forward-looking statements.