Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the section titled “Selected Consolidated Financial Data” and the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. As described in the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” this discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included above in this report. Our fiscal year ends on January 31.
Overview
Asana is a work management platform that helps teams orchestrate work, from daily tasks to cross-functional strategic initiatives. Over 93,000 paying customers use Asana to manage everything from product launches to marketing campaigns to organization-wide goal setting. Our platform adds structure to unstructured work, creating clarity, transparency, and accountability to everyone within an organization-individuals, team leads, and executives-so they understand exactly who is doing what, by when.
Asana is flexible and applicable to virtually any use case across departments and organizations of all sizes. We designed our platform to be easy to use and intuitive to all users, regardless of role or technical proficiency. Users can start a project within minutes and onboard team members seamlessly without outside support. We allow users to work the way they want with the interface that is right for them, using tasks, lists, calendars, boards, timelines, and Workload.
We have experienced rapid growth in recent periods. Our revenues were $227.0 million, $142.6 million, and $76.8 million for fiscal 2021, fiscal 2020, and fiscal 2019, respectively, representing growth of 59% and 86% for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively. As of January 31, 2021, we had 1,080 employees, representing growth of 54% since January 31, 2020. We had a net loss of $211.7 million, $118.6 million, and $50.9 million for fiscal 2021, fiscal 2020, and fiscal 2019, respectively.
Key Business Metrics
We believe that our growth and financial performance are dependent upon many factors, including the key factors described below.
Paying Customers
We are focused on continuing to grow the number of customers that use our platform. Our operating results and growth opportunity depend, in part, on our ability to attract new customers. We believe we have significant greenfield opportunities among addressable customers worldwide and we will continue to invest in our research and development and our sales and marketing organizations to address this opportunity.
As of January 31, 2021, we had over 93,000 paying customers, compared to over 75,000 as of January 31, 2020. We define a customer as a distinct account, which could include a team, company, educational or government institution, organization, or distinct business unit of a company, that is on a paid subscription plan, a free version, or a free trial of one of our paid subscription plans. A single organization may have multiple customers. We define a paying customer as a customer on a paid subscription plan. No single customer accounts for more than 1% of our revenues, and our top 100 customers accounted for approximately 11% and 9% of our revenues for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Customers Spending Over $5,000 and $50,000
We focus on growing the number of customers spending over $5,000 and $50,000 on an annualized basis as a measure of our ability to scale within organizations. We define customers spending over $5,000 and $50,000 as those organizations on a paid subscription plan that contributed to $5,000 or more or $50,000 or more in annualized
GAAP revenues in a given quarter, respectively, inclusive of discounts. As customers realize the productivity benefits we provide, our platform often becomes critical to managing their work and achieving their objectives, which drives further adoption and expansion opportunities, and results in higher annualized contract values. We believe that our ability to increase the number of these customers is an important indicator of the components of our business, including: the continued acquisition of new customers, retaining and expanding our user base within existing customers, our continued investment in product development and functionality required by larger organizations, and the growth of our direct sales force.
As of January 31, 2021, we had 10,174 customers spending over $5,000 on an annualized basis contributing approximately 58% of revenues for the fiscal year then ended. As of January 31, 2020, we had 6,555 customers spending over $5,000 on an annualized basis contributing approximately 50% of revenue for the fiscal year then ended.
As of January 31, 2021 and 2020, we had 397 and 207 customers, respectively, spending over $50,000 on an annualized basis.
Dollar-based Net Retention Rate
We expect to derive a significant portion of our revenue growth from expansion within our customer base, where we have an opportunity to expand adoption of Asana across teams, departments, and organizations. We believe that our dollar-based net retention rate demonstrates our opportunity to further expand within our customer base, particularly those that generate higher levels of annual revenues.
Our reported dollar-based net retention rate equals the simple arithmetic average of our quarterly dollar-based net retention rate for the four quarters ending with the most recent fiscal quarter. We calculate our dollar-based net retention rate by comparing our revenues from the same set of customers in a given quarter, relative to the comparable prior-year period. To calculate our dollar-based net retention rate for a given quarter, we start with the revenues in that quarter from customers that generated revenues in the same quarter of the prior year. We then divide that amount by the revenues attributable to that same group of customers in the prior-year quarter. Current period revenues include any upsells and are net of contraction or attrition over the trailing 12 months, but exclude revenues from new customers in the current period. We expect our dollar-based net retention rate to fluctuate in future periods due to a number of factors, including the expected growth of our revenue base, the level of penetration within our customer base, and our ability to retain our customers.
As of January 31, 2021 and 2020, our dollar-based net retention rate was over 115% and over 120%, respectively. Our dollar-based net retention rate has declined year over year as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which had a disproportionate impact on smaller businesses and industries that were particularly affected by the pandemic.
As of January 31, 2021 and 2020, our dollar-based net retention rate for customers spending over $5,000 with us on an annualized basis was 125% and over 125%, respectively. Our dollar-based net retention rate for customers spending over $50,000 with us on an annualized basis for the same periods was over 140%.
Impact of COVID-19
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we temporarily closed our headquarters and other physical offices, required our employees and contractors to work remotely, and implemented travel restrictions, all of which represent a significant disruption in how we operate our business. The operations of our partners and customers have likewise been disrupted, with a disproportionate impact on smaller businesses that were particularly affected by the pandemic. This impact is most evident in the decline of our overall dollar-based net retention rate for the year ended January 31, 2021 over the same period last year, while our dollar-based net retention rates remained steady for customers who spent over $50,000. While the duration and extent of the COVID-19 pandemic depends on future developments that cannot be accurately predicted at this time, such as the extent and effectiveness of containment actions and the development of a vaccine, it has already had an adverse effect on the global economy and the ultimate societal and economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic remains unknown. In particular, the conditions caused by this pandemic could affect the rate of global IT spending and could adversely affect demand for our
platform, lengthen our sales cycles, reduce the value or duration of subscriptions, negatively impact collections of accounts receivable, reduce expected spending from new customers, cause some of our paying customers to go out of business, limit the ability of our direct sales force to travel to customers and potential customers, and affect contraction or attrition rates of our customers, all of which could adversely affect our business, results of operations, and financial condition during future periods.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The following tables present certain non-GAAP financial measures for each period presented below. In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe these non-GAAP financial measures are useful in evaluating our operating performance. See below for a description of the non-GAAP financial measures and their limitations as an analytical tool.
Non-GAAP Loss From Operations and Non-GAAP Net Loss
We define non-GAAP loss from operations as loss from operations plus stock-based compensation expense and the related employer payroll tax associated with RSUs as well as non-recurring costs, such as direct listing expenses. The amount of employer payroll tax-related items on employee stock transactions is dependent on our stock price and other factors that are beyond our control and that do not correlate to the operation of the business. When evaluating the performance of our business and making operating plans, we do not consider these items (for example, when considering the impact of equity award grants, we place a greater emphasis on overall stockholder dilution rather than the accounting charges associated with such grants). We believe it is useful to exclude these expenses in order to better understand the long-term performance of our core business and to facilitate comparison of our results to those of peer companies and over multiple periods.
We define non-GAAP net loss as net loss plus stock-based compensation expense and the related employer payroll tax associated with RSUs, amortization of discount and non-cash contractual interest expense related to our senior mandatory convertible promissory note, and non-recurring costs such as direct listing expenses.
We use non-GAAP loss from operations and non-GAAP net loss in conjunction with traditional GAAP measures to evaluate our financial performance. We believe that non-GAAP loss from operations and non-GAAP net loss provide our management and investors consistency and comparability with our past financial performance and facilitates period-to-period comparisons of operations.
Free Cash Flow
We define free cash flow as net cash used in operating activities less cash used for purchases of property and equipment and capitalized internal-use software costs, plus non-recurring expenditures such as capital expenditures from the purchases of property and equipment associated with the build-out of our corporate headquarters in San Francisco, and direct listing expenses. We believe that free cash flow is a useful indicator of liquidity that provides information to management and investors, even if negative, about the amount of cash used in our operations other than that used for investments in property and equipment and capitalized internal-use software costs, adjusted for non-recurring expenditures.
Limitations and Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Non-GAAP financial measures have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation or as substitutes for financial information presented under GAAP. There are a number of limitations related to the use
of non-GAAP financial measures versus comparable financial measures determined under GAAP. For example, other companies in our industry may calculate these non-GAAP financial measures differently or may use other measures to evaluate their performance. In addition, free cash flow does not reflect our future contractual commitments and the total increase or decrease of our cash balance for a given period. All of these limitations could reduce the usefulness of these non-GAAP financial measures as analytical tools. Investors are encouraged to review the related GAAP financial measures and the reconciliations of these non-GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measures and to not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
The following tables reconcile the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure to each of these non-GAAP financial measures.
Non-GAAP Loss From Operations
Non-GAAP Net Loss
Free Cash Flow
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
We generate subscription revenues from paying customers accessing our cloud-based platform. Subscription revenues are driven primarily by the number of paying customers, the number of paying users within the customer base, and the level of subscription plan. We recognize revenues ratably over the related contractual term beginning on the date that the platform is made available to a customer.
Due to the ease of implementation of our platform, revenues from professional services have been immaterial to date.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues consists primarily of the cost of providing our platform to free users and paying customers and is comprised of third-party hosting fees, personnel-related expenses for our operations and support personnel, credit card processing fees, and amortization of our capitalized internal-use software costs.
As we acquire new customers and existing customers increase their use of our cloud-based platform, we expect that our cost of revenues will continue to increase in dollar amount.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit, or revenues less cost of revenues, and gross margin, or gross profit as a percentage of revenues, has been and will continue to be affected by various factors, including the timing of our acquisition of new customers, renewals of and follow-on sales to existing customers, costs associated with operating our cloud-based platform, and the extent to which we expand our operations and customer support organizations. We expect our gross profit to increase in dollar amount and our subscription gross margin to remain relatively consistent over the long term.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses. Personnel-related expenses are the most significant component of operating expenses and consist of salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation expense, and, in the case of sales and marketing expenses, sales commissions. Operating expenses also include an allocation of overhead costs for facilities and shared IT-related expenses, including depreciation expense.
In the fiscal years ended January 31, 2020 and 2019, our personnel-related expenses have been significantly impacted by stock-based compensation expense associated with tender offers.
In April 2018, our board of directors approved a plan for a private trust whose sole trustee and grantor is our co-founder, President, Chief Executive Officer, or CEO, and Chair to purchase shares of our Class A and Class B common stock from certain current and former employees. A total of approximately 1.5 million shares were tendered in the offer. The tender offer closed in May 2018, at which time we recorded $3.8 million in stock-based compensation expense related to the excess of the selling price per share paid to our employees and former employees over the fair value of each tendered share.
In October 2019, certain of our stockholders conducted a tender offer for shares of our outstanding Class A and Class B common stock and purchased an aggregate of 4,647,127 shares of our outstanding Class A and Class B common stock from certain other stockholders at a purchase price of $15.82 per share, for an aggregate purchase price of $73.5 million, resulting in stock-based compensation expense of $38.7 million for the excess of the selling price per share over the fair value of the tendered shares.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses. These expenses also include product design costs, third-party services and consulting expenses, software subscriptions and expensed computer equipment used in research and development activities, and allocated overhead costs. A substantial portion of our research and development efforts are focused on enhancing our software architecture and adding new features and functionality to our platform. We anticipate continuing to invest in innovation and technology development, and as a result, we expect research and development expenses to continue to increase in dollar amount but to decrease as a percentage of revenues over time.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses and expenses for performance marketing and lead generation, brand marketing, and sponsorship activities. These expenses also include allocated overhead costs and travel-related expenses. Sales commissions earned by our sales force that are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a subscription with a customer are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected period of benefit of three years.
We continue to make investments in our sales and marketing organization, and we expect sales and marketing expenses to remain our largest operating expense in dollar amount. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to continue to increase in dollar amount but to decrease as a percentage of revenues over time, although the percentage may fluctuate from quarter to quarter depending on the extent and timing of our marketing initiatives.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses for our finance, human resources, information technology, and legal organizations. These expenses also include non-personnel costs, such as outside legal, accounting, and other professional fees, software subscriptions and expensed computer equipment, certain tax, license, and insurance-related expenses, and allocated overhead costs.
We have recognized and will continue to recognize certain expenses as part of our transition to a publicly traded company, consisting of professional fees and other expenses. In the quarters leading up to the listing of our Class A common stock on the NYSE, we incurred professional fees and expenses, and in the quarter of our listing we incurred fees paid to our financial advisors in addition to other professional fees and expenses related to such listing. We expect to continue to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including costs to comply with the rules and regulations of the NYSE and costs related to compliance and reporting obligations pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC. In addition, as a public company, we expect to continue to incur additional costs associated with accounting, compliance, insurance, and investor relations. As a result, we expect our general and administrative expenses to continue to increase in dollar amount for the foreseeable future but to generally decrease as a percentage of our revenues over the longer term, although the percentage may fluctuate from period to period depending on the timing and amount of our general and administrative expenses.
Interest Income and Other Income (Expense), Net and Interest Expense
Interest income and other income (expense), net consists of income earned on our marketable securities and foreign currency transaction gains and losses.
Interest expense consists of contractual interest expense and amortization of the debt discount on the senior mandatory convertible promissory notes we issued in January and June 2020 to a trust affiliated with our CEO, and interest expense from our term loan.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes consists primarily of income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. To date, we have not recorded any U.S. federal income tax expense, and our state and foreign income tax expenses have not been material. We have recorded deferred tax assets for which we provide a full valuation allowance, which primarily include net operating loss carryforwards and research and development tax
credit carryforwards. We expect to maintain this full valuation allowance for the foreseeable future as it is more likely than not the deferred tax assets will not be realized based on our history of losses.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented and as a percentage of our revenues for those periods. The period-to-period comparison of financial results is not necessarily indicative of financial results to be achieved in future periods.
__________________
(1)Amounts include stock-based compensation expense as follows:
Stock-based compensation expense for fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 includes $38.7 million and $3.8 million, respectively, of compensation expense related to tender offers described above and in Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The following table sets forth the components of our statements of operations data, for each of the periods presented, as a percentage of revenues.
________________
* Less than 1%
Note: Certain figures may not sum due to rounding.
Comparison of the Fiscal Years Ended January 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
Revenues increased $84.4 million, or 59%, during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in revenues was primarily due to the addition of new paying customers, a continued shift in our sales mix toward our higher priced subscription plans, such as Enterprise and Business plans, and revenues generated from our existing paying customers expanding their use of our solution as reflected by our dollar-based net retention rate of over 115% as of January 31, 2021.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin
Cost of revenues increased $8.9 million, or 45%, during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $2.8 million in personnel-related costs due to increased headcount, $2.3 million in third-party hosting costs as we increased capacity to support customer usage and growth of our customer base,
$1.8 million in credit card processing fees and $1.3 million in allocated overhead costs as a result of increased overall costs to support the growth of our business and related infrastructure.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased $31.5 million, or 35%, during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $40.8 million in personnel-related expenses driven by higher headcount, an increase of $7.8 million in allocated overhead costs as a result of increased overall costs to support the growth of our business and related infrastructure, partially offset by a decrease of $19.3 million in stock-based compensation expense related to a tender offer in October 2019.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased $70.6 million, or 67%, during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $36.2 million in personnel-related expenses as a result of higher headcount, an increase of $27.4 million in third-party advertising expenses for our marketing programs, an increase of $9.0 million in allocated overhead costs as a result of increased overall costs to support the growth of our business and related infrastructure, and an increase of $3.4 million in fees to marketing vendors, partially offset by a decrease of $7.7 million in stock-based compensation expense related to a tender offer in October 2019.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $29.4 million, or 63%, during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $18.1 million in fees for professional services associated with preparing to be a public company, including direct listing expenses, an increase of $15.2 million in personnel-related expenses driven by higher headcount to support our continued growth, an increase of $3.7 million in allocated overhead costs as a result of increased overall costs to support the growth of our business and related infrastructure, an increase of $2.1 million related to increased premiums for director and officer insurance incurred as a result of becoming a public company, partially offset by a decrease of $11.4 million in stock-based compensation expense related to a tender offer in October 2019.
Interest Income, Interest Expense, and Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest expense increased $36.1 million during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to the issuance of the senior mandatory convertible promissory notes to a trust affiliated with our CEO in January 2020 and June 2020. Other income (expense), net increased $0.2 million during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 due primarily to an increase in gains on foreign currency transactions.
Comparison of the Fiscal Years Ended January, 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
Revenues increased $65.8 million, or 86%, for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. The increase in revenues was primarily due to a shift in our sales mix toward our higher priced subscription plans, such as Enterprise and Business plans, the addition of new paying customers, and revenues generated from our existing paying customers as reflected by our dollar-based net retention rate of over 120% as of January 31, 2020.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin
Cost of revenues increased $6.0 million, or 44%, for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $3.6 million in third-party hosting costs as we increased capacity to support customer usage and growth of our customer base, $1.6 million in personnel-related costs due to increased headcount, and $1.5 million in credit card processing fees, partially offset by a $0.7 million decrease in amortization of capitalized internal-use software costs.
Our gross margin increased for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 as we increased our revenues and more efficiently managed third-party hosting costs, realized benefits due to economies of scale resulting from increased efficiency with our technology and infrastructure, and experienced a decrease in amortization of capitalized internal-use software costs.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased $47.1 million, or 111%, for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $40.5 million in personnel-related expenses driven by higher headcount and $16.6 million in higher tender offer-related stock-based compensation expense, an increase of $3.9 million in allocated overhead costs as a result of increased overall costs to support the growth of our business and related infrastructure, and an increase of $1.5 million related to software subscriptions and expensed computer equipment used in research and development activities.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased $53.7 million, or 103%, for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $26.1 million in personnel-related expenses as a result of higher headcount and sales commissions for our sales personnel and $7.0 million in higher tender offer-related stock-based compensation expense, an increase of $13.7 million in advertising expenses for our marketing programs, an increase of $7.2 million in fees to marketing vendors, and an increase of $3.6 million in allocated overhead costs as a result of increased overall costs to support the growth of our business and related infrastructure.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $26.6 million, or 131%, for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $17.6 million in personnel-related expenses driven by higher headcount to support our continued growth and $11.2 million in higher tender offer-related stock-based compensation expense, an increase of $2.8 million in fees for professional services associated with preparing to be a public company, including direct listing expenses, an increase of $1.6 million in fees paid to external consultants, and an increase of $1.3 million in software subscriptions and expensed computer equipment to support the growth of our business and related infrastructure.
Interest Income, Interest Expense, and Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest income and other income (expense), net increased $0.3 million, or 23%, for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 primarily due to increased income from our investments in marketable securities as a result of our higher investment balances in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. Interest expense increased $0.1 million for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 due to the issuance of the senior mandatory convertible promissory note to a trust affiliated with our CEO.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, we have financed operations primarily through the net proceeds we have received from the sales of our preferred stock and common stock, the issuance of senior mandatory convertible promissory notes in January and June 2020 to a trust affiliated with our CEO, and cash generated from the sale of subscriptions to our platform. We have generated losses from our operations as reflected in our accumulated deficit of $541.4 million as of January 31, 2021 and negative cash flows from operating activities for fiscal 2021, fiscal 2020, and fiscal 2019. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including revenue growth and costs incurred to support customer usage and growth in our customer base, increased research and development expenses to support the growth of our business and related infrastructure, and increased general and administrative expenses to support being a publicly traded company.
As of January 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities of $386.3 million.
In April 2020, we entered into a five-year $40.0 million term loan agreement with Silicon Valley Bank. The agreement provides for a senior secured term loan facility, in an aggregate principal amount of up to $40.0 million, to be used for the construction of our new corporate headquarters. Interest will accrue on any outstanding balance at a floating rate per annum equal to the prime rate (as publicly announced from time to time by the Wall Street Journal) plus an applicable margin equal to either (a) 0% if our unrestricted cash at the lender is equal to or less than $80.0 million, or (b) (0.5)% if our unrestricted cash at the lender is between $80.0 million and $100.0 million, or (c)
(1.0)% if our unrestricted cash balance at the lender is equal to or greater than $100.0 million. Interest shall be payable monthly. As of January 31, 2021, $31.0 million was drawn and outstanding under this term loan.
A substantial source of our cash provided by operating activities is our deferred revenue, which is included on our consolidated balance sheets as a liability. Deferred revenue consists of the unearned portion of billed fees for our subscriptions, which is recorded as revenues over the term of the subscription agreement. As of January 31, 2021 and January 31, 2020, we had $105.9 million and $64.1 million, respectively, of deferred revenue of which $103.9 million and $62.7 million, respectively, were recorded as a current liability. This deferred revenue will be recognized as revenues when all of the revenue recognition criteria are met.
We assess our liquidity primarily through our cash on hand as well as the projected timing of billings under contract with our paying customers and related collection cycles. We believe our current cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities, and amounts available under our senior secured term loan facility will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months.
Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Our largest source of operating cash is cash collection from sales of subscriptions to our paying customers. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are for personnel-related expenses, marketing expenses, and third-party hosting-related and software expenses. In the last several years, we have generated negative cash flows from operating activities and have supplemented working capital requirements through net proceeds from the sale of equity and equity-linked securities.
Net cash used in operating activities of $92.9 million for fiscal 2021 reflects our net loss of $211.7 million, adjusted by non-cash items such as stock-based compensation expense of $34.2 million, amortization of discount on convertible notes and term loan issuance costs of $22.4 million, non-cash lease expense of $16.4 million, non-cash interest expense of $13.7 million, amortization of deferred contract acquisition costs of $4.1 million, depreciation and amortization of $3.5 million, provision for doubtful accounts of $0.9 million, and net cash inflows of $23.3 million from changes in our operating assets and liabilities. The net cash inflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily consisted of a $41.8 million increase in deferred revenue resulting from increased billings for subscriptions, a $17.9 million increase in accrued liabilities and other liabilities primarily from an increase in accrued advertising, and a $7.3 million increase in operating lease liabilities. These amounts were partially offset by a $20.5 million increase in accounts receivable due to higher customer billings, a $17.2 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets related to an increase in deferred contract acquisition costs, a $3.4 million increase in other assets, and a $2.9 million decrease in accounts payable not related to the purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash used in operating activities of $40.1 million for fiscal 2020 reflects our net loss of $118.6 million, adjusted by non-cash items such as stock-based compensation expense of $48.4 million, non-cash lease expense of $8.2 million, depreciation and amortization of $2.2 million, amortization of deferred contract acquisition costs of $1.6 million, and net accretion of discount on marketable securities of $1.0 million, and net cash inflows of $18.2 million from changes in our operating assets and liabilities. The net cash inflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily consisted of a $32.2 million increase in deferred revenue, resulting from increased billings for subscriptions, and an $8.3 million increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities, resulting primarily
from increases in accrued professional services, marketing, accrued payroll, and benefits, and a $3.5 million increase in accounts payable. These amounts were partially offset by an $8.7 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets related to an increase in prepayments made in advance for future services and an increase in deferred contract acquisition costs, a $7.7 million increase in accounts receivable due to higher customer billings, and a $7.6 million decrease in operating lease liabilities.
Net cash used in operating activities of $30.2 million for fiscal 2019 reflects our net loss of $50.9 million, offset by non-cash items such as stock-based compensation expense of $8.5 million and depreciation and amortization of $4.2 million, and net cash inflows of $8.3 million from changes in our operating assets and liabilities. The net cash inflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily consisted of a $15.1 million increase in deferred revenue, resulting from increased billings for subscriptions, and a $4.0 million increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities, resulting primarily from increases in accrued payroll related to commissions and bonuses. These amounts were partially offset by a $4.5 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets related to prepayments made in advance for future services, a $3.7 million increase in other assets related to deferred contract acquisition costs resulting from the adoption of Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606, Revenue From Contracts With Customers, or ASC 606, and a $3.4 million increase in accounts receivable due to higher customer billings.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities of $158.9 million for fiscal 2021 consisted of $191.6 million in purchases marketable securities, $57.3 million in purchases of property and equipment from an increase in construction in progress and $1.0 million in capitalized internal-use software costs, partially offset by $53.8 million in maturities of marketable securities and $37.1 million in sales of marketable securities.
Net cash provided by investing activities of $12.7 million for fiscal 2020 consisted of $19.9 million in net purchases, sales, and maturities of marketable securities, partially offset by $6.9 million in purchases of property and equipment from an increase in construction in progress and leasehold improvements, and $0.4 million in capitalized internal-use software costs.
Net cash used in investing activities of $44.7 million for fiscal 2019 consisted of $41.3 million in net purchases and maturities of marketable securities, $2.9 million in purchases of property and equipment from an increase in leasehold improvements and furniture and fixtures associated with supporting higher headcount, and $0.6 million in capitalized internal-use software costs.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $201.0 million for fiscal 2021 consisted of $150.0 million of proceeds from the issuance of a senior mandatory convertible promissory note in June 2020 to a trust affiliated with our CEO, $30.9 million in net proceeds from our term loan, and $20.5 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by $0.4 million in taxes paid related to the net share settlement of equity awards.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $311.6 million for fiscal 2020 consisted of $300.0 million of proceeds from the issuance of a senior mandatory convertible promissory note in January 2020 to a trust affiliated with our CEO and $11.7 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by $0.1 million in repurchases of common stock.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $55.3 million for fiscal 2019 consisted of $51.0 million in net proceeds from the sale and issuance of Series E preferred stock and $4.3 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The contractual commitment amounts in the table below are associated with agreements that are enforceable and legally binding. Purchase orders issued in the ordinary course of business are not included in the table below, as our purchase orders represent authorizations to purchase rather than binding agreements.
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of January 31, 2021:
________________
(1)Consists of future non-cancelable minimum rental payments under operating leases for our offices.
(2)In January 2021, we entered into a 60-month contract with Amazon Web Services for hosting-related services. Pursuant to the terms of the contract, we are required to spend a minimum of $103.5 million over the term of the agreement, including $18.0 million within the first year. As of January 31, 2021, we had $103.5 million remaining on the commitment.
(3)During the year ended January 31, 2021, we entered into multiple agreements with a construction company related to the build-out of our new corporate headquarters (see Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements). The cumulative contract value is $71.1 million, and as of January 31, 2021, $32.3 million remains unpaid under these agreements, of which $9.5 million has been recorded on our consolidated balance sheets within accounts payable or accrued expenses and other liabilities.
In February 2019, we entered into a new lease agreement for office space in San Francisco, which commenced in May 2020 and expires in October 2033. As part of the agreement, we were required to issue a $17.0 million letter of credit upon access to the office space, which occurred in the year ended January 31, 2021. We participated in the construction of the office space and have incurred construction costs to prepare the office space for our use, which will be partially reimbursed by the landlord. During the year ended January 31, 2021, all three phases of this lease commenced, and as a result, we recognized total ROU assets of $175.5 million, with corresponding operating lease liabilities of $173.4 million, on the consolidated balance sheet as of the respective commencement dates of the three phases. We expect to incur a total of approximately $404.1 million of future minimum payments and capital commitments, net of tenant improvement receivables as of January 31, 2021, inclusive of $363.7 million of net lease payments and the remaining capital commitments related to the build-out of the Company’s new corporate headquarters referenced above. Our CEO acts as a personal guarantor to the lease for the full rent payments over the entire term of the lease should we default on our obligations.
Additionally, in April 2020, we amended the lease arrangement to include a fee for access to additional shared space, for which future payments total $3.9 million.
For further information on our commitments and contingencies, refer to Note 8 in the condensed consolidated financial statements contained within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In January and June 2020, we issued two unsecured senior mandatory convertible promissory notes for an aggregate principal amount of $450.0 million, or the 2020 Notes, to a trust affiliated with our CEO. The 2020 Notes are senior, unsecured obligations of the Company. The 2020 Notes bear interest at a fixed rate of 3.5% per annum that will be compounded annually and payable in-kind, resulting in an aggregate $534.5 million being due upon settlement. The 2020 Notes consist of a note that matures on January 30, 2025 and a note that matures on June 26, 2025. The 2020 Notes mature, and would be converted into shares of our Class B common stock, on the applicable maturity date, unless earlier converted into shares of our Class B common stock or redeemed in connection with our bankruptcy, insolvency, or other similar events. The holder of the 2020 Notes is not entitled to convert the 2020 Notes at any time. The 2020 Notes are only convertible into shares of our Class B common stock at our option under certain scenarios, as discussed in Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In April 2020, we entered into a $40.0 million term loan agreement with Silicon Valley Bank, as discussed in Liquidity and Capital Resources above.
Indemnification Agreements
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into agreements of varying scope and terms pursuant to which we agree to indemnify customers, vendors, lessors, business partners, and other parties with respect to certain matters, including, but not limited to, losses arising out of the breach of such agreements, services to be provided by us, or from intellectual property infringement claims made by third parties. Additionally, in connection with the listing of our Class A common stock on the NYSE, we have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and certain officers and employees that will require us, among other things, to indemnify them against certain liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors, officers, or employees. No demands have been made upon us to provide indemnification under such agreements, and there are no claims that we are aware of that could have a material effect on our financial position, results of operations, or cash flows.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
For all periods presented, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated organizations or financial partnerships, such as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, as well as related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
The critical accounting estimates, assumptions, and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Revenue Recognition
We derive our revenues from monthly and annual subscription fees earned from paying customers accessing the platform. Our policy is to exclude sales and other indirect taxes when measuring the transaction price of our subscription agreements. We account for revenue contracts with customers by applying the requirements of ASC 606, which includes the following steps:
•identification of the contract, or contracts, with the customer;
•identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
•determination of the transaction price;
•allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
•recognition of the revenues when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
Our subscription agreements generally have monthly or annual contractual terms. We recognize revenues ratably over the related contractual term beginning on the date that the platform is made available to a customer, as the customer receives and consumes the benefits of the platform throughout the contractual period. Access to the platform represents a series of distinct services that comprise a single performance obligation that is satisfied over time. Our contracts are generally non-cancelable and do not provide for refunds to paying customers in the event of cancellations.
Deferred Contract Acquisition Costs
Deferred contract acquisition costs represent gross deferred contract acquisition costs less accumulated amortization. Sales commissions earned by our sales force and bonuses earned by executives, as well as related payroll taxes, are considered to be incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. As a
result, these amounts have been capitalized as deferred contract acquisition costs within prepaid and other current assets and other assets on the consolidated balance sheets.
We amortize deferred contract acquisition costs over a period of benefit of three years. We estimated the period of benefit by considering factors such as historical customer attrition rates, the useful life of our technology, and the impact of competition in the software-as-a-service industry.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
We record stock-based compensation expense for all stock-based awards made to employees, non-employees, and directors based on estimated fair values recognized over the requisite service period. We estimate the fair value of options granted to employees for purposes of calculating stock-based compensation expense on the grant date using the Black-Scholes pricing model. The Black-Scholes pricing model requires us to make assumptions and judgments about the inputs used in the calculation, including the expected term (weighted-average period of time that the options granted are expected to be outstanding), the volatility of our common stock, risk-free interest rate, and expected dividend yield. The expected term represents the period that we expect our stock-based awards to be outstanding. We determine the expected term assumptions based on the vesting terms, exercise terms, and contractual lives of the options. The volatility is based on an average of the historical volatilities of the common stock of comparable public companies with characteristics similar to ours. The risk-free rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected life of the option. Our expected dividend yield input is zero as we have not historically paid, nor do we expect in the future to pay, cash dividends.
We measure stock-based compensation expense related to our restricted stock units, or RSUs, based on the fair value of the underlying shares on the date of grant. RSUs are subject to time-based vesting, which generally occurs over a period of four years.
We recognize stock-based compensation expense over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. We use the straight-line method for expense attribution. We account for forfeitures as they occur.
The assumptions are based on the following for each of the years presented:
•Fair value of common stock- Prior to our direct listing, we estimated the fair value of common stock; see “Common Stock Valuations” below.
•Expected volatility-Expected volatility is a measure of the amount by which the stock price is expected to fluctuate. Since we do not have sufficient trading history of our common stock, we estimate the expected volatility of our stock options at the grant date by taking the average historical volatility of a group of comparable publicly traded companies over a period equal to the expected life of the options.
•Expected term-Expected term represents the period that our stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. The expected term assumptions are determined based on the vesting terms, exercise terms, and contractual lives of the options.
•Risk-free rate-We use the U.S. Treasury yield for our risk-free interest rate that corresponds with the expected term.
•Dividend yield-We utilize a dividend yield of zero, as we do not currently issue dividends, nor do we expect to do so in the future.
Common Stock Valuations
Prior to our direct listing, the fair value of our common stock underlying our stock-based awards was historically determined by our board of directors, in accordance with the guidelines outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation guide. Each fair value estimate was based on a variety of factors, which included the following:
•contemporaneous valuations performed by an unrelated third-party valuation firm;
•the prices, rights, preferences, and privileges of our preferred stock relative to those of our common stock;
•the lack of marketability of our common stock;
•our operating and financial performance;
•current business conditions and outlook;
•hiring of key personnel and the experience of our management;
•our history and the timing of the introduction of new applications and capabilities;
•our stage of development;
•the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or a merger or acquisition of our business given prevailing market conditions;
•the market performance of comparable publicly traded companies; and
•U.S. and global capital market conditions.
In valuing our common stock, our board of directors determined the equity value of our business using valuation methods they deemed appropriate under the circumstances applicable at the valuation date.
One method, the market approach, estimates value based on a comparison of our company to comparable public companies in a similar line of business. To determine our peer group of companies, we considered public enterprise cloud-based application providers and selected those that are similar to us in size, economic drivers, and operating characteristics. From the comparable companies, a representative market value multiple was determined, which was applied to our operating results to estimate the enterprise value of our company. When applicable, we also used the option pricing model to backsolve the value of the security from our most recent round of financing, which implies a total equity value as well as a per share common stock value.
For valuations prior to January 31, 2020, once the enterprise value was determined under the market approach, we used the option pricing model to allocate that value among the various classes of securities to arrive at the fair value of the common stock.
For valuations as of and subsequent to January 31, 2020 and before our direct listing, we used a hybrid method utilizing a combination of the option pricing model and the probability-weighted expected return method, or the PWERM, in estimating the fair value of our common stock. Using the PWERM, the value of our common stock is estimated based upon a probability-weighted analysis of varying values for our common stock assuming possible future events for our company, including a scenario assuming we become a publicly traded company and a scenario assuming we continue as a privately held company.
In addition, we also considered any secondary transactions involving our capital stock. In our evaluation of those transactions, we considered the facts and circumstances of each transaction to determine the extent to which they represented a fair value exchange. Factors considered include transaction volume, timing, whether the transactions occurred among willing and unrelated parties, and whether the transactions involved investors with access to our financial information.
For valuations after our direct listing, our board of directors determined the fair value of each share of underlying Class A common stock based on the closing price of our Class A common stock as reported on the date of grant.
Lease Obligations
We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception by determining if the contract conveys the right to control the issue of an identified asset for a period of time in exchange for consideration and other facts and circumstances. Right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and lease liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of remaining lease payments over the lease term. For this purpose, we consider only payments that are fixed and determinable at the time of commencement. As our leases do not provide an implicit rate, we use the incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at commencement date in determining the present value of lease payments. The incremental borrowing rate is a hypothetical rate based on our understanding of what its credit rating would be. The ROU assets also include any lease payments made prior to commencement and are recorded net of any lease incentives received. The lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise such options. The lease agreements may contain variable costs such as common area maintenance, insurance, real estate taxes or other costs. Variable lease costs are expensed as incurred on the consolidated statements of operations. Our lease agreements generally do not contain any residual value guarantees, restrictions, or covenants.
We have lease agreements with lease and non-lease components. We have elected to combine lease and non-lease components as a single lease component for all classes of underlying assets. We have also elected to keep leases with an initial term of 12 months or less off the balance sheet and recognize the associated lease payments in the consolidated statements of operations on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Operating leases are included in operating lease ROU assets, operating lease liabilities, current, and operating lease liabilities, noncurrent on the consolidated balance sheets.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding recent accounting pronouncements.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. The JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This provision allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of some accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period under the JOBS Act until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.