Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Dollar amounts in this discussion are expressed in thousands, except as otherwise noted. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect future plans, estimates, beliefs and expected performance. The forward-looking statements are dependent upon events, risks and uncertainties that may be outside of our control. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed elsewhere in this Form 10-K, particularly in Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors. Waitr does not undertake any obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements except as otherwise required by applicable law.
Overview
Waitr operates an online ordering technology platform, including the Waitr and Bite Squad mobile applications (the “Platforms”), providing delivery, carryout and dine-in options, connecting local restaurants, drivers and diners in cities across the United States. Our strategy is to bring delivery, carryout and dine-in infrastructure to underserved populations of restaurants, grocery stores and diners and establish strong market presence or leadership positions in the markets in which we operate. Our business has been built with a restaurant-first philosophy by providing differentiated and brand additive services to the restaurants on the Platforms. Our Platforms allow consumers to browse local restaurants and menus, track order and delivery status, and securely store previous orders for ease of use and convenience. Restaurants benefit from the online Platforms through increased exposure to consumers for expanded business in the delivery market and carryout sales. In October 2020, we diversified our product offering beyond restaurant food delivery with the launch of tableside service technology for restaurants.
As of December 31, 2020, we had over 20,000 restaurants, in over 700 cities, on the Platforms. Average Daily Orders for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were approximately 39,071, 51,156 and 21,860, respectively. Revenues totaled $204,328 in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $191,675 in the year ended December 31, 2019 and $69,273 in the year ended December 31, 2018.
During the first half of 2020, we implemented various strategic initiatives, with a focus on improving revenue per order, costs per order, operating cash flow, profitability and liquidity, including the successful completion of a switch to an independent contractor model for delivery drivers. We focused efforts on operational improvements through the streamlining of operations, support and sales and marketing functions and offered new and enhanced service offerings to our restaurant partners. During the remainder of 2020, we continued to work with both new and existing restaurant partners to boost delivery potential by providing value-added marketing and support services. Despite impacts from hurricanes and the ongoing pandemic, our results during 2020 continued to reflect the implementation of our strategic initiatives around service and profitability. We achieved profitability and positive operating cash flow for the first time in February 2020 and for the year ended December 31, 2020. Additionally, during 2020, we expanded into new delivery verticals such as same-day groceries and alcohol delivery services, as well as diversifying our product offering beyond restaurant food delivery with the introduction of our tableside service technology for restaurants.
In March 2020 and May 2020, the Company entered into open market sale agreements with respect to an at-the-market offering program (the “ATM Program”) under which the Company could offer and sell, from time to time at its sole discretion, shares of its common stock up to a certain aggregate offering price (see Part II, Item 8, Note 14 - Stockholders’ Equity). Sales of our common stock pursuant to our ATM Program, along with the implementation of the initiatives discussed above, resulted in increases in our working capital and liquid assets as of December 31, 2020. At the completion of our ATM Program on July 10, 2020, we had sold a total of 23,698,720 shares of common stock for net proceeds of approximately $47,574. We continue to evaluate additional opportunities to further strengthen our liquidity position in order to fund growth initiatives to complement our operating cash flows as we pursue our long-term growth plans.
Management Appointments
In January 2020, the Board appointed Carl A. Grimstad to the position of Chief Executive Officer of the Company, and a member of the Board. In May 2020, the board appointed Leonid (Leo) Bogdanov to the position of Chief Financial Officer. Mr. Bogdanov previously had been serving as director of financial planning & analysis of the Company. Additional management appointments made during 2020 included the appointment in May 2020 of Mark D’Ambrosio to the position of Chief Sales Officer and the appointments in July 2020 of Thomas C. Pritchard to the position of General Counsel and David Cronin to the position of Chief Engagement Officer.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
In March 2020, as the COVID-19 pandemic became more widespread in the United States, we launched several initiatives to help protect and support our restaurant partners, diners, independent contractor drivers and our employees during these unprecedented times, including offering no-contact delivery for certain restaurant delivery orders; offering no-contact grocery delivery in select markets; working with certain restaurant partners to waive diner delivery fees; deploying free marketing programs for certain restaurants; and providing masks, gloves and hand sanitizer to drivers. Additionally, in early April 2020, we expanded our delivery areas to further support our restaurant partners and diners. We experienced a significant increase in the number of independent contractor driver applications from April through December 2020, providing us sufficient capacity to satisfy additional delivery and carryout demand from restaurant partners and diners.
We have thus far been able to operate effectively during the COVID-19 pandemic. Restrictions on in-restaurant dining resulted in more restaurants utilizing delivery services, which in turn had a positive impact on our order volumes. The lifting of restrictions on in-restaurant dining could have a negative impact on our order volumes.
The potential short and long-term impacts and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy and on the Company’s business, in particular, are uncertain and may be difficult to assess or predict at this time. The pandemic has resulted in, and may continue to result in, significant disruption of global financial markets, which may reduce the Company’s ability to access capital and continue to operate effectively. The COVID-19 pandemic could also reduce the demand for the Company’s services. In addition, a prolonged recession or additional financial market corrections resulting from the spread of COVID-19, including an increase in the number of COVID-19 cases, could adversely affect demand for the Company’s services. To the extent that the COVID-19 pandemic adversely impacts the Company’s business, results of operations, liquidity or financial condition, it may also have the effect of heightening many of the other risks described in the risk factors in this Form 10-K. Management continues to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak and the possible effects on its financial position, liquidity, operations, industry and workforce.
Significant Accounting Policies and Critical Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period, along with related disclosures. We regularly assess these estimates and record changes to estimates in the period in which they become known. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Changes in the economic environment, financial markets, and any other parameters used in determining these estimates could cause actual results to differ from estimates. Significant estimates and judgements relied upon in preparing these consolidated financial statements affect the following items:
•
incurred loss estimates under our insurance policies with large deductibles or retention levels;
•
loss exposure related to claims such as the Medical Contingency (see Part II, Item 8, Note 11 - Correction of Prior Period Error);
•
income taxes;
•
useful lives of tangible and intangible assets;
•
equity compensation;
•
contingencies;
•
goodwill and other intangible assets, including the recoverability of intangible assets with finite lives and other long-lived assets; and
•
fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed as part of a business combination.
For a description of our significant accounting policies, see Part II, Item 8, Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K.
For a description of accounting standards adopted during the year ended December 31, 2020, see Part II, Item 8, Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K. Also described in Note 2 are pending standards and their estimated effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Through year-end 2020, we qualified as an “emerging growth company” pursuant to the provisions of the JOBS Act. As an emerging growth company, we were able to take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not “emerging growth companies”, including not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. Effective January 1, 2021, we are no longer an emerging growth company. Accordingly, for fiscal year 2021, we will be required to include an opinion from our independent registered public accounting firm on the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting.
Factors Affecting the Comparability of Our Results of Operations
Bite Squad Merger. The Bite Squad Merger was considered a business combination in accordance with ASC 805, and has been accounted for using the acquisition method. Under the acquisition method of accounting, total merger consideration, acquired assets and assumed liabilities are recorded based on their estimated fair values on the acquisition date. The excess of the fair value of merger consideration over the fair value of the assets less liabilities acquired has been recorded as goodwill. The results of operations of Bite Squad are included in our consolidated financial statements beginning on the acquisition date, January 17, 2019.
In connection with the Bite Squad Merger, we incurred direct and incremental costs during the year ended December 31, 2019, of approximately $6,956, consisting of legal and professional fees, which are included in general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statement of operations in such year.
Changes in Fee Structure. Since 2017, our fee structure evolved gradually from a per transaction fee plus a percentage of the food sale amount to one based exclusively on a percentage of the food sale amount. In early 2018, we established a multi-tier fee structure, allowing restaurants to elect to pay a higher fee rate in lieu of paying a one-time set-up and integration fee. Additionally, we initiated modifications to our fee structure in July 2019 with a majority of restaurants on the Waitr platform, which became effective in August 2019, and in January 2020, with the majority of our remaining restaurants, which became effective throughout February 2020. We continue to review and update our current rate structure, as necessary, as we look to offer new and enhanced value-adding services to our restaurant partners.
Goodwill and Intangible Asset Impairments. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized non-cash impairment charges totaling $191,194 to write down the carrying values of goodwill and intangible assets to their implied fair values, as a result of our annual goodwill impairment analysis, which concluded that the fair value of the reporting unit (the Company) was less than its carrying amount. The primary factor contributing to the decline in fair value of the reporting unit was the negative impacts on the Company’s estimated order volumes and revenue resulting from adverse changes in market conditions from increased competition. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit and intangible assets requires the use of estimates and significant judgments that are based on a number of factors including actual operating results. It is reasonably possible that the judgments and estimates used could change in future periods. There can be no assurance that additional goodwill or intangible assets will not be impaired in future periods. Significant goodwill and intangible asset impairments may impact the comparability of our results from period to period.
Seasonality and Holidays. Our business tends to follow restaurant closure and diner behavior patterns. In many of our markets, we have historically experienced variations in order frequency as a result of weather patterns, university summer breaks and other vacation periods. In addition, most restaurants tend to close on certain major holidays, including Thanksgiving and Christmas Eve Day, in our key markets. Further, diner activity may be impacted by unusually cold, rainy, or warm weather. Cold weather and rain typically drive increases in order volume, while unusually warm or sunny weather typically drives decreases in orders. Furthermore, snowstorms, hurricanes and tropical storms have adverse effects on order volume, particularly if they cause property damage or utility interruptions to our restaurant partners. Consequently, our results between quarters, or between periods may vary as a result of prolonged periods of unusually cold, warm, inclement, or otherwise unexpected weather and the timing of certain holidays. As shown in our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has had an impact on our typical seasonality trends and could impact future periods.
Acquisition Pipeline. We continue to actively maintain and evaluate a pipeline of potential acquisition targets and may pursue acquisitions in the future. Future business acquisitions may impact the comparability of our results in future periods relative to prior periods.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Efficient Market Expansion and Penetration. Our continued revenue growth and improved cash flow and profitability is dependent on successful restaurant, diner and driver penetration of our markets and achieving our targeted scale in current and future markets. Failure in achieving positive market-level operating margins (exclusive of indirect and corporate overhead costs) could adversely affect our working capital, which in turn, could slow our growth plans.
We typically target markets that we estimate could achieve sustainable, positive market-level operating margins that support market operating cash flows and profits, improve efficiency, and appropriately leverage the scale of our advertising, marketing, research and development, and other corporate resources. Our financial condition, cash flows, and results of operations depend, in significant part, on our ability to achieve and sustain our target profitability thresholds in our markets.
Waitr’s Restaurant and Diner Network. A significant part of our growth is our ability to successfully expand our network of restaurants and diners using the Platforms. If we fail to retain existing restaurants and diners using the Platforms, or to add new restaurants and diners to the Platforms, our revenue, financial results and business may be adversely affected.
Key Business Metrics
Defined below are the key business metrics that we use to analyze our business performance, determine financial forecasts, and help develop long-term strategic plans:
Active Diners. We count Active Diners as the number of diner accounts from which an order has been placed through the Platforms during the past twelve months (as of the end of the relevant period) and consider Active Diners an important metric because the number of diners using our Platforms is a key revenue driver and a valuable measure of the size of our engaged diner base.
Average Daily Orders. We calculate Average Daily Orders as the number of orders during the period divided by the number of days in that period, including holidays. Average Daily Orders is an important metric for us because the number of orders processed on our Platforms is a key revenue driver and, in conjunction with the number of Active Diners, a valuable measure of diner activity on our Platforms for a given period.
Gross Food Sales. We calculate Gross Food Sales as the total food and beverage sales, sales taxes, prepaid gratuities, and diner fees processed through the Platforms during a given period. Gross Food Sales are different than the order value upon which we charge our fee to restaurants, which excludes gratuities and diner fees. Prepaid gratuities, which are not included in our revenue, are determined by diners and may differ from order to order. Gratuities other than prepaid gratuities, such as cash tips, are not included in Gross Food Sales. Gross Food Sales is an important metric for us because the total volume of food sales transacted through our Platforms is a key revenue driver.
Average Order Size. We calculate Average Order Size as Gross Food Sales for a given period divided by the number of orders during the same period. Average Order Size is an important metric for us because the average value of food sales on our Platforms is a key revenue driver.
_____________
(1)
The key business metrics include the operations of Bite Squad beginning on the acquisition date, January 17, 2019.
Basis of Presentation
Revenue
We generate revenue primarily when diners place an order on one of the Platforms. We recognize revenue from diner orders when orders are delivered. Our revenue consists primarily of transaction fees, comprised of fees received from restaurants, determined as a percentage of the total food sales, net of any diner promotions or refunds and diner fees (less any discounts).
Cost and Expenses:
Operations and Support. Operations and support expense consists primarily of salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation, and bonuses for employees and contractors engaged in operations and customer service, including independent contractor drivers, as well as market managers, restaurant onboarding, and driver logistics personnel, as well as payment processing costs incurred on customer orders.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expense consists primarily of salaries, commissions, benefits, stock-based compensation and bonuses for sales and sales support personnel, including restaurant business development managers, marketing employees and contractors, and third-party marketing expenses such as social media and search engine marketing, online display, team sponsorships and print marketing.
Research and Development. Research and development expense consists primarily of salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation and bonuses for employees and contractors engaged in the design, development, maintenance and testing of the
Platforms. This expense also includes such items as software subscriptions that are necessary for the upkeep and maintenance of the Platforms.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expense consists primarily of salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation and bonuses for executive, finance and accounting, human resources and administrative employees, third-party legal, accounting, and other professional services, insurance (including workers’ compensation, auto liability and general liability), travel, facilities rent, and other corporate overhead costs.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense consists primarily of amortization of capitalized costs for software development, trademarks and customer relationships and depreciation of leasehold improvements, furniture, and equipment, primarily tablets deployed in restaurants. We do not allocate depreciation and amortization expense to other line items.
Intangible and Other Asset Impairments. Intangible and other asset impairments include write-downs of intangible assets and minor impairments related to the replacement of internally developed software code as well as the impairment of capitalized contract costs of obtaining and fulfilling contracts.
Other Expenses (Income) and Losses (Gains), Net. Other expenses (income) and losses (gains), net, primarily includes interest expense on outstanding debt and accruals for legal contingencies, as well as any other items not considered to be incurred in the normal operations of the business.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods indicated, with line items presented in thousands of dollars and as a percentage of our revenue:
(1)
Percentages may not foot due to rounding.
(2)
Other expense, net loss before income taxes and net loss for the year ended December 31, 2018 have been revised to reflect the correction of a prior period error. See Part II, Item 8, Note 11 - Correction of Prior Period Error of this Form 10-K for further details.
The following section includes a discussion of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Details of results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2018 can be found under Part II, Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in the Company’s 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K. A discussion of other expenses (income) and losses (gains), net for the year ended December 31, 2018 is included below to reflect the revised amounts related to the correction of a prior period error. The results of operations of Bite Squad are included in our consolidated financial statements beginning on the acquisition date, January 17, 2019 (see Part II, Item 8, Note 3 - Business Combinations of this Form 10-K).
Revenue
Revenue increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of improved revenue unit economics. The Average Order Size increased to $41.86 from $36.15, an improvement of 16%, while Average Daily Orders decreased in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, partially as a result of market closures in late 2019 and early 2020.
Included in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 is $3,005 related to a cumulative adjustment to setup and integration fee revenue as a result of contract modifications made in July 2019 and the effect of such modifications on our measure of progress towards the performance obligations. The cumulative adjustment to revenue was partially offset by write-offs of uncollected setup and integration fees within accounts receivable of $797 and refunds of previously paid setup and integration fees of $320.
Operations and Support
Operations and support expenses decreased in dollar terms and as a percentage of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of lower driver operations cost relating to the change to independent contractor drivers.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense decreased in dollar terms and as a percentage of revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of decreased advertising spend of approximately $28,483, as well as staff reductions and the consolidation of sales and marketing functions in the second half of 2019 and early 2020.
Research and Development
Research and development expense decreased in dollar terms and as a percentage of revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, primarily due to the capitalization of increased software development costs during 2020 as further features and functionality were incorporated into the Platforms.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense decreased in dollar terms and as a percentage of revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, due to decreased travel, entertainment and other related expenses as a result of COVID-19 and stock-based compensation expenses. Additionally, included in general and administrative expense during the year ended December 31, 2019 are $6,956 of business combination-related professional and other costs associated with the Bite Squad Merger.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased in dollar terms and as a percentage of revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of the write-down of the carrying value of intangible assets to their implied fair values in September 2019 in connection with the Company’s goodwill impairment analysis.
Goodwill Impairment
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $119,212 to write down the carrying value of goodwill to its implied fair value. The primary factor contributing to a reduction in the fair value was the sustained decline in the Company’s stock price in 2019, resulting in a market capitalization that was significantly lower than the carrying value of the Company’s consolidated stockholders’ equity. See Part II, Item 8, Note 7 - Goodwill and Intangible Assets for additional details.
Intangible and Other Asset Impairments
The sustained decline in the Company’s stock price during 2019 resulted in a non-cash intangible asset impairment charge in the year ended December 31, 2019 of $71,982 to write down the carrying value of certain intangible assets to their implied fair values. The impairment charge included the write-offs of capitalized contracts costs of $3,815, customer relationships of $57,295 and developed technology of $10,872. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized $852 in impairment charges related to non-recoverable capitalized costs to obtain and fulfill contracts as a result of the termination by certain restaurants of their contracts in connection with the modified fee structure introduced by the Company in July 2019.
Other Expenses (Income) and Losses (Gains), Net
Other expenses (income) and losses (gains), net for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of interest expense of $9,318 associated with the Term Loans and Notes and a $1,023 stock-based compensation expense accrual related to the settlement of the Halley and Montgomery legal contingencies (see Part I, Item 3, Legal Proceedings). Other expenses (income) and losses (gains), net for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily consisted of $9,268 of interest expense associated with the Term Loans and Notes and a $2,000 stock-based compensation expense accrual related to the Halley and Montgomery legal contingencies. See Part II, Item 8, Note 9 - Debt for definitions of Term Loans and Notes.
Other expenses (income) and losses (gains), net for the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily consisted of $17,505 related to a medical contingency claim. See Part II, Item 8, Note 11 - Correction of Prior Period Error for additional details.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Income tax expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $122 and $81, respectively, entirely related to state taxes in various jurisdictions. We have historically generated net operating losses; therefore, a valuation allowance has been recorded on our net deferred tax assets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash on hand of $84,706. Our primary sources of liquidity have been cash flow from operations and proceeds from the issuance of stock, long-term convertible debt and term loans.
The implementation of various initiatives throughout 2020, with a focus on improving revenue per order, costs per order, cash flow, operations and liquidity, resulted in positive results for the Company during the year ended December 31, 2020. Additionally, proceeds from the sales of our common stock pursuant to our ATM Program launched in March and May 2020 enhanced our liquidity position at December 31, 2020. We used a portion of the proceeds to repay our debt obligations, as discussed below, and intend to use the remaining proceeds for working capital and general corporate purposes, and to further enhance our ability to execute our strategic, operational and growth initiatives.
In May 2020, the Company entered into a Limited Waiver and Conversion Agreement, pursuant to which the lenders agreed to waive the requirement to prepay the Term Loans arising as a result of the May 2020 ATM Program. In consideration of the prepayment waiver, the Company made a payment of $12,500 on the Term Loans and the lenders converted $12,500 of the Notes into shares of the Company’s common stock. In July 2020, the Company entered into amendments to the agreements governing the Term Loans and Notes, pursuant to which the interest rates for the Term Loans and Notes were reduced by 200 basis points for a one-year period, to 5.125% and 4.0% per annum, respectively, and the maturity dates for the Term Loans and Notes were extended by one year to November 15, 2023 upon the payment of $10,500 of the Term Loans. The aggregate principal amount of outstanding long-term debt totaled $99,137 as of December 31, 2020, consisting of $49,479 of Term Loans, $49,504 of Notes and $154 of promissory notes. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $2,726 of outstanding short-term loans for insurance financing.
We currently expect that our cash on hand and estimated cash flow from operations will be sufficient to meet our working capital needs beyond twelve months; however, there can be no assurance that we will generate cash flow at the levels we anticipate. We may use cash on hand to repay additional debt or to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, products and technologies. We continually evaluate additional opportunities to strengthen our liquidity position, fund growth initiatives and/or combine with other businesses by issuing equity or equity-linked securities (in public or private offerings) and/or incurring additional debt. However, market conditions, our future financial performance or other factors may make it difficult or impossible for us to access sources of capital, on favorable terms or at all, should we determine in the future to raise additional funds.
We are continuously reviewing our liquidity and anticipated working capital needs, particularly in light of the uncertainty created by the COVID-19 pandemic. Thus far, we have been able to operate effectively during the pandemic, however, the potential impacts and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and on our business, in particular, may be difficult to assess or predict.
Capital Expenditures
Our main capital expenditures relate to the purchase of tablets for restaurants on the Platforms and investments in the development of the Platforms, which are expected to increase as we continue to grow our business. Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including those set forth under Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors in this Form 10-K.
Cash Flow
The following table sets forth our summary cash flow information for the periods indicated:
Cash Flows Provided By (Used In) Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $38,445, compared to net cash used in operating activities of $73,477 for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily reflecting the effects of the implementation of various initiatives aimed at improving operations and profitability. The increase in net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018 primarily reflected an increase in new market launch activities in 2019 relative to 2018. Operating activities during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 included the payment of business combination-related expenses of $6,956 and $5,768, respectively.
Cash Flows Used In Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities included $3,982 of costs for internally developed software, $1,555 for the purchase of property and equipment and $628 for the acquisition of intangible assets. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 included $192,568 for the acquisition of Bite Squad, $1,805 for internally developed software, $1,636 for the purchase of property and equipment, and $695 for the acquisition of intangible assets. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily consisted of $3,750 for the purchase of property and equipment.
Property and equipment is comprised primarily of computer tablets for restaurants on the Platforms. The tablets remain our property. We control software applications and updates on the tablets, and the tablets are programmed exclusively for the Platforms. We also periodically purchase office furniture, equipment, computers and software and leasehold improvements.
Cash Flows Provided By Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities included $47,574 of net proceeds from the sales of common stock under the Company’s ATM Program and $4,753 of borrowings under short-term loans for insurance financing, less $22,594 of payments on the Term Loans and $5,632 of payments on short-term loans for insurance financing. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities included net proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $45,823, proceeds from the issuance of Term Loans of $42,080 and $7,875 of borrowings under a short-term loan for the Company’s annual insurance premium financing, less $4,931 of payments on short-term loans for insurance financing.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash provided by financing activities included $143,648 of net cash assumed from the Landcadia Business Combination and $85,000 of proceeds from the issuance of the Term Loans and Notes, less $3,050 of related debt issuance costs. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we borrowed $5,000 under an unsecured line of credit and repaid in full the $5,000 of borrowings. Additionally, we borrowed $2,172 under a short-term loan to finance a portion of our insurance premium obligations and made repayments of $1,514 on such loan during the year ended December 31, 2018.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments
At December 31, 2020, we had corporate offices in Lake Charles and Lafayette, Louisiana, as well as smaller offices across the United States. Our office leases expire on various dates through August 2026. We recognize rent expense on a straight-line basis over the relevant lease period.
Our debt and interest payments, future minimum payments under non-cancellable operating leases for equipment and office facilities and payments related to our medical contingency were as follows as of December 31, 2020:
(1)
Debt includes principal amounts due under the Debt Facility and Notes as of December 31, 2020. See Part II, Item 8, Note 9 - Debt of this Form 10-K for additional details.
(2)
Loan agreements include principal payments due under short-term loans to finance certain insurance premiums and principal payments for promissory notes related to acquisitions. See Part II, Item 8, Note 9 - Debt of this Form 10-K for additional details.
(3)
Interest due on debt assumes all interest payments are paid in cash. Interest on the Notes assumes no conversion prior to the maturity of the Notes.
(4)
In November 2017, Guarantee Insurance Company (“GIC”), the Company’s former workers’ compensation insurer, was ordered into receivership for purposes of liquidation by the Second Judicial Circuit Court in Leon County, Florida. At the time of the court order, GIC was administering the Company’s outstanding workers’ compensation claims. Upon entering receivership, the guaranty associations of the states where GIC operated began reviewing outstanding claims administered by GIC for continued claim coverage eligibility based on guaranty associations’ eligibility criteria. Louisiana Insurance Guaranty Association, the agency created by the Louisiana insurance guaranty act to pay for claims of insolvent members (“LIGA”), determined that the Company’s enterprise value exceeded the $25,000 eligibility threshold for claims coverage. As such, LIGA assessed one of the Company’s outstanding claims as ineligible for coverage. The Company has accrued an estimated amount of loss exposure for the workers’ compensation claim (the Medical Contingency claim). See Part II, Item 8, Note 12 - Commitments and Contingencies of this Form 10-K for additional details.
Contractual commitment amounts in the table above are associated with agreements that are enforceable and legally binding, while obligations under other contracts that we can cancel without a significant penalty are not included. We have no material long-term purchase obligations outstanding with any vendors or other third parties.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.