ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion is management’s analysis to assist in the understanding and evaluation of the consolidated financial condition and results of operations of the Corporation. It should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and footnotes and the selected financial data presented elsewhere in this report. Within the tables presented, certain columns and rows may not sum due to the use of rounded numbers for disclosure purposes.
The detailed financial discussion that follows focuses on 2020 results compared to 2019. For a discussion of 2019 results compared to 2018, see the Corporation's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Overview
The Corporation is a bank holding company headquartered in Wisconsin, providing a broad array of banking and nonbanking products and services to businesses and consumers primarily within our three-state footprint. The Corporation’s primary sources of revenue, through the Bank, are net interest income (predominantly from loans and investment securities) and noninterest income (principally fees and other revenue from financial services provided to customers or ancillary services tied to loans and deposits).
On March 13, 2020, the President of the United States declared a national emergency in response to the global pandemic caused by COVID-19 which has led to stay-at-home orders around the country, including the three state footprint the Corporation does business. On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was enacted to provide economic stimulus to impacted areas of the country. In response to this unprecedented declaration, the Corporation took actions throughout the year that are described throughout this and other sections of this report.
Performance Summary and 2021 Outlook
•Diluted earnings per common share of $1.86 in 2020 decreased $0.05, or 3%, from 2019.
•Average loans of $24.5 billion for 2020 increased $1.4 billion, or 6%, from a year ago, driven by increases in PPP and CRE loans. Average deposits of $26.0 billion for 2020 increased $1.3 billion, or 5%, from a year ago. For 2021, the Corporation expects annual average commercial loan growth, excluding PPP loans, will be between 2% and 4%.
•Net interest income of $763 million in 2020 decreased $73 million, or 9%, from 2019. Net interest margin of 2.53% in 2020 decreased 33 bp from 2.86% in 2019. The decrease was driven primarily by the lower interest rate environment. The Corporation expects full year 2021 net interest margin to be between 2.55% and 2.65%.
•Provision for credit losses was $174 million in 2020, compared to $16 million in 2019. For 2021, the Corporation expects the provision for credit losses to be $70 million or less.
•Noninterest income of $514 million in 2020 increased $133 million, or 35%, from 2019, primarily due to a $163 million gain on the sale of ABRC during the second quarter of 2020, partially offset by decreased insurance revenue resulting from the sale of the business. For 2021, the Corporation expects noninterest income will be between $280 million and $300 million.
•Noninterest expense of $776 million in 2020 decreased $18 million, or 2%, from 2019, primarily driven by a $55 million reduction in personnel expense partially offset by a $45 million loss on prepayment of FHLB advances. For 2021, the Corporation expects noninterest expense will be approximately $675 million.
Income Statement Analysis
Net Interest Income
Table 2 Net Interest Income Analysis
(a) The yield on tax-exempt loans and securities is computed on a fully tax-equivalent basis using a tax rate of 21% and is net of the effects of certain disallowed interest deductions.
(b) Nonaccrual loans and loans held for sale have been included in the average balances.
(c) Interest income includes amortization of net deferred loan origination costs and net accreted purchase loan discount.
Net interest income is the primary source of the Corporation’s revenue. Net interest income is the difference between interest income on interest-earning assets, such as loans and investment securities, and the interest expense on interest-bearing deposits and other borrowings used to fund interest-earning and other assets or activities. Net interest income is affected by the amount and composition of earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, as well as the sensitivity of the balance sheet to changes in interest rates, including characteristics such as the fixed or variable nature of the financial instruments, contractual maturities, re-pricing frequencies, loan prepayment behavior, and the use of interest rate derivative financial instruments.
Interest rate spread and net interest margin are utilized to measure and explain changes in net interest income. Interest rate spread is the difference between the yield on earning assets and the rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities that fund those assets. The net interest margin is expressed as the percentage of net interest income to average earning assets. The net interest margin exceeds the interest rate spread because net free funds, principally noninterest-bearing demand deposits and stockholders’ equity, also support earning assets. To compare tax-exempt asset yields to taxable yields, the yield on tax-exempt loans and investment securities is computed on a fully tax-equivalent basis. Net interest income, interest rate spread, and net interest margin are discussed on a fully tax-equivalent basis.
Table 2 provides average balances of earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, the associated interest income and expense, and the corresponding interest rates earned and paid, as well as net interest income, interest rate spread, and net interest margin on a fully tax-equivalent basis for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018. Table 3 presents additional information to facilitate the review and discussion of fully tax-equivalent net interest income, interest rate spread, and net interest margin.
Notable Contributions to the Change in 2020 Net Interest Income
•Net interest income on the consolidated statements of income (which excludes the fully tax-equivalent adjustment) was $763 million in 2020 compared to $836 million in 2019. Fully tax-equivalent net interest income of $779 million for 2020 was $73 million, or 9%, lower than 2019. The decrease was attributable to a lower interest rate environment. To lessen the impact of the lower rate environment, during the third quarter of 2020, the Corporation began requiring LIBOR floors on all applicable loan renewals of existing loan transactions and new loan transactions. See sections Interest Rate Risk and Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk for a discussion of interest rate risk and market risk.
•Average earning assets of $30.8 billion in 2020 were $1.0 billion, or 3%, higher than 2019. The increase in average earning assets over 2019 was driven by a $1.4 billion, or 6%, increase in average loans, primarily driven by $701 million of PPP loan originations beginning in April and CRE loans increasing $661 million, or 13%. Average investments and other short-term investments decreased $404 million, or 6%, due to the lower interest rate environment, which reduced the attractiveness of reinvestment opportunities.
•Average interest-bearing liabilities of $23.0 billion in 2020 were down $543 million, or 2%, versus 2019. On average, interest-bearing deposits decreased $393 million, or 2%, primarily driven by decreases in higher cost deposits such as network, time, and money market accounts. Average noninterest-bearing demand deposits of $6.9 billion were up $1.7 billion, or 32%, over 2019. This increase is primarily attributed to customers holding proceeds from government stimulus programs in their deposit accounts.
•The average cost of interest-bearing liabilities was 0.65% in 2020, 78 bp lower than 2019. The decrease was due to an 87 bp decrease in the average cost of interest-bearing deposits to 0.35% and a 35 bp decrease in the cost of short and long-term funding to 2.13%, primarily attributed to the federal funds rate decreases over the last year.
•The Federal Reserve decreased the target Federal Funds rate on March 15, 2020 to a range of 0.00% to 0.25% compared to a range of 1.50% to 1.75% at the end of 2019.
Table 3 Rate/Volume Analysis(a)
(a) The change in interest due to both rate and volume has been allocated in proportion to the relationship to the dollar amounts of the change in each.
(b) The yield on tax-exempt loans and securities is computed on a fully tax-equivalent basis using a tax rate of 21% and is net of the effects of certain disallowed interest deductions.
Provision for Credit Losses
The provision for credit losses is predominantly a function of the Corporation’s reserving methodology and judgments as to other qualitative and quantitative factors used to determine the appropriate level of the ACLL, which focuses on changes in the size and character of the loan portfolio, changes in levels of individually evaluated and other nonaccrual loans, historical losses and delinquencies in each portfolio category, the risk inherent in specific loans, concentrations of loans to specific borrowers or industries, existing economic conditions and economic forecasts, the fair value of underlying collateral, and other factors which could affect potential credit losses. The forecast the Corporation used for December 31, 2020 was the Moody's baseline scenario from December 2020 over a 2 year reasonable and supportable period with straight-line reversion to historical losses over the second year of the period. See additional discussion under the sections titled Loans, Credit Risk, Nonperforming Assets, and Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans.
Noninterest Income
Table 4 Noninterest Income
N/M = Not Meaningful
(a) Includes trust, asset management, brokerage, and annuity fees.
(b) Includes mortgage origination and servicing fees, net of mortgage servicing rights amortization.
(c) 2020 includes a gain of $163 million from the sale of ABRC, 2019 includes less than $1 million of Huntington related asset losses, 2018 includes approximately $2 million of Bank Mutual acquisition related asset losses net of asset gains.
(d) $ in millions. Excludes assets held in brokerage accounts.
Notable Contributions to the Change in 2020 Noninterest Income
•Asset gains (losses), net was up $153 million from 2019, primarily driven by a gain of $163 million from the sale of ABRC in June 2020. As a result of the sale, insurance commissions and fees decreased $44 million, or 49%, from 2019. See Note 2 Acquisitions and Dispositions of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for more details on the sale of ABRC.
•Mortgage banking, net was $46 million in 2020, an increase of $14 million, or 43%, compared to 2019. There was a $43 million increase in gains and fair value adjustments on loans held for sale driven by higher refinance activity due to the lower rate environment, partially offset by an increase of $18 million in MSRs impairment driven by lower rates.
•Gains on the sale of branches was $7 million in 2020, driven by the deposit premium on sold deposits, offset by costs to sell. See Note 2 Acquisitions and Dispositions of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for more details on the branch sales that occurred during the fourth quarter of 2020.
•Service charges and deposit account fees were down $7 million, or 11%, from 2019 primarily driven by higher deposit account balances and reduced customer activity.
Noninterest Expense
Table 5 Noninterest Expense
N/M = Not Meaningful
(a) Includes First Staunton, Huntington branch, and Bank Mutual acquisition related costs only
(b) Average full-time equivalent employees without overtime
Notable Contributions to the Change in 2020 Noninterest Expense
•Personnel costs decreased $55 million, or 11% from 2019, primarily driven by a decrease in funding for the management incentive plan and lower staffing as a result of the sale of ABRC.
•During the third quarter of 2020, the Corporation prepaid $950 million of long-term FHLB advances and incurred a loss of $45 million on the prepayment.
•Business development and advertising decreased $11 million, or 38% from 2019, primarily driven by reductions in travel and entertainment costs and special event sponsorships, largely due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Income Taxes
The Corporation recognized income tax expense of $20 million for 2020, compared to income tax expense of $80 million for 2019. The decrease in income tax expense was primarily driven by corporate restructuring which allowed for the recognition of built in capital losses and tax basis step-up yielding a tax benefit of $63 million, partially offset by the gain on sale of ABRC. Tax expense was further decreased due to the decrease in income before tax in 2020 compared to 2019. The effective tax rate was 6.18% for 2020, compared to an effective tax rate of 19.61% for 2019.
See Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the notes to consolidated financial statements for the Corporation’s income tax accounting policy and section Critical Accounting Policies. Income tax expense recorded on the consolidated statements of income involves the interpretation and application of certain accounting pronouncements and federal and state tax laws and regulations, and is therefore considered a critical accounting policy. The Corporation is subject to examination by various taxing authorities. Examination by taxing authorities may impact the amount of tax expense and/or the reserve for uncertainty in income taxes if their interpretations differ from those of management, based on their judgments about information available to them at the time of their examinations. See Note 13 Income Taxes of the notes to consolidated financial statements for more information.
Balance Sheet Analysis
•At December 31, 2020, total assets were $33.4 billion, up $1.0 billion, or 3%, from December 31, 2019.
•Loans of $24.5 billion at December 31, 2020 were up $1.6 billion, or 7%, from December 31, 2019, driven by a $968 million, or 19%, increase in CRE lending and $768 million in PPP loans, which originated largely during the second quarter of 2020. The Corporation added $370 million in loans from the First Staunton acquisition in the first quarter of 2020. See section Loans and Note 4 Loans of the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information on loans and see Note 2 Acquisitions and Dispositions for additional information on the acquisition of First Staunton.
•At December 31, 2020, total deposits of $26.5 billion were up $2.7 billion, or 11%, from December 31, 2019. During the first quarter of 2020, the Corporation assumed $439 million of deposits from the First Staunton acquisition. In addition, the balance increases were primarily due to customers holding proceeds from government stimulus programs in their deposit accounts. See section Deposits and Customer Funding and Note 8 Deposits of the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information on deposits and see Note 2 Acquisitions and Dispositions for additional information on the acquisition of First Staunton.
•At December 31, 2020, FHLB advances of $1.6 billion decreased $1.5 billion, or 49% from December 31, 2019, primarily driven by the Corporation's prepayment of $950 million in long-term FHLB advances during the third quarter of 2020. In addition, the Corporation saw a decrease of $520 million in short-term FHLB advances from December 31, 2019. See section Other Funding Sources and Note 9 Short and Long-Term Funding of the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information on FHLB Advances.
•On January 1, 2020, the Corporation adopted ASU 2016-13 using the modified retrospective approach which resulted in an increase to the allowance for loan losses of $112 million and an increase to the allowance for unfunded commitments of $19 million for a total increase to the ACLL of $131 million. A corresponding after tax decrease to common equity of $98 million was recorded along with a DTA of $33 million. See Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information on the adoption of ASU 2016-13.
•At December 31 2020, preferred equity was $354 million, up $97 million, or 38% from December 31, 2019. On June 9, 2020, the Corporation issued $100 million, or $97 million net of issuance costs, of 5.625% Non-Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series F. See Note 10 Stockholders' Equity of the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information on the Corporation's preferred stock.
Loans
Table 6 Period End Loan Composition
The Corporation has long-term guidelines relative to the proportion of Commercial and Business, CRE, and Consumer loans within the overall loan portfolio, with each targeted to represent 30-40% of the overall loan portfolio. The targeted long-term guidelines were unchanged during 2020 and 2019. Furthermore, certain sub-asset classes within the respective portfolios are further defined and dollar limitations are placed on these sub-portfolios. These guidelines and limits are reviewed quarterly and approved annually by the Enterprise Risk Committee of the Corporation’s Board of Directors. These guidelines and limits are designed to create balance and diversification within the loan portfolios.
The Corporation's loan distribution and interest rate sensitivity as of December 31, 2020 are summarized in the following table:
Table 7 Loan Distribution and Interest Rate Sensitivity
(a) Demand loans, past due loans, overdrafts, and credit cards are reported in the “Within 1 Year” category.
(b) Based on contractual loan terms for adjustable rate mortgages; does not factor in early prepayments or amortization.
At December 31, 2020, $18.3 billion, or 75%, of the loans outstanding were floating rate, adjustable rate, re-pricing within one year, or maturing within one year.
Credit Risk
An active credit risk management process is used for commercial loans to ensure that sound and consistent credit decisions are made. Credit risk is controlled by detailed underwriting procedures, comprehensive loan administration, and periodic review of borrowers’ outstanding loans and commitments. Borrower relationships are formally reviewed and graded on an ongoing basis for early identification of potential problems. Further analysis by customer, industry, and geographic location are performed to monitor trends, financial performance, and concentrations. See Note 4 Loans of the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information on managing overall credit quality.
The loan portfolio is widely diversified by types of borrowers, industry groups, and market areas within the Corporation's branch footprint. Significant loan concentrations are considered to exist when there are amounts loaned to numerous borrowers engaged in similar activities that would cause them to be similarly impacted by economic or other conditions. At December 31, 2020, no significant concentrations existed in the Corporation’s loan portfolio in excess of 10% of total loans.
Commercial and business lending: The commercial and business lending classification primarily includes commercial loans to large corporations, middle market companies, small businesses, and lease financing.
Table 8 Largest Commercial and Business Lending Industry Group Exposures
The remaining commercial and business lending portfolio is spread over a diverse range of industries, none of which exceed 2% of total loans.
The credit risk related to commercial loans is largely influenced by general economic conditions and the resulting impact on a borrower’s operations or on the value of underlying collateral, if any. Currently, a higher risk segment of the commercial and business lending portfolio is loans to borrowers supporting oil and gas exploration and production, which are further discussed under section oil and gas lending below.
Oil and gas lending: The Corporation has provided reserve based loans to oil and gas exploration and production firms. The oil and gas portfolio is in run-off and no new oil and gas loans have been originated since February 2019. At December 31, 2020, the oil and gas portfolio was comprised of 29 credits, totaling $296 million of outstanding balances, which represents
approximately 1% of the Corporation's total loans. The decrease in balances from prior years is driven by a purposeful reduction in exposure to oil and gas borrowers.
The oil and gas loans are first lien, reserve-based, and borrowing base dependent lines of credit. The portfolio is diversified across all major U.S. geographic basins and is diversified by product line with approximately 56% in oil and 44% in gas at December 31, 2020. Borrowing base re-determinations for the portfolio are generally completed at least twice a year and are based on detailed engineering reports and discounted cash flow analysis.
The following table summarizes information about the Corporation's oil and gas loan portfolio:
Table 9 Oil and Gas Loan Portfolio
•The increase in the ACLL attributable to oil and gas related credits (included within the commercial and industrial ACLL) at December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by the expected impact of the COVID-19 pandemic within the economic models used in the new expected credit loss methodology.
The adoption impact of ASU 2016-13 for oil and gas loans was included within the commercial and industrial line item of the adoption table in Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the notes to consolidated financial statements. The following table provides a summary of the changes in the ACLL in the Corporation's oil and gas loan portfolio as a result of adopting ASU 2016-13.
Table 10 Oil and Gas Impact of Adopting ASU 2016-13
The following tables provide a summary of the changes in ACLL in the Corporation's oil and gas loan portfolio at December 31, 2020 and a summary of the changes in allowance for loan losses in the Corporation's oil and gas loan portfolio at December 31, 2019:
Table 11 Allowance for Credit Losses on Oil and Gas Loans
Table 12 Allowance for Loan Losses on Oil and Gas Loans
Commercial real estate - investor: CRE-investor is comprised of loans secured by various non-owner occupied or investor income producing property types.
Table 13 Largest Commercial Real Estate Investor Property Type Exposures
The remaining CRE-investor portfolio is spread over various other property types, none of which exceed 2% of total loans.
Credit risk is managed in a similar manner to commercial and business lending by employing sound underwriting guidelines, lending primarily to borrowers in local markets and businesses, periodically evaluating the underlying collateral, and formally reviewing the borrower’s financial soundness and relationship on an ongoing basis.
Real estate construction: Real estate construction loans are primarily short-term or interim loans that provide financing for the acquisition or development of commercial income properties, multi-family projects or residential development, both single family and condominium. Real estate construction loans are made to developers and project managers who are generally well known to the Corporation and have prior successful project experience. The credit risk associated with real estate construction loans is generally confined to specific geographic areas but is also influenced by general economic conditions. The Corporation controls the credit risk on these types of loans by making loans in familiar markets to developers, reviewing the merits of individual projects, controlling loan structure, and monitoring project progress and construction advances.
Table 14 Largest Real Estate Construction Property Type Exposures
The remaining real estate construction portfolio is spread over various other property types, none of which exceed 2% of total loans.
The Corporation’s current lending standards for CRE and real estate construction lending are determined by property type and specifically address many criteria, including: maximum loan amounts, maximum LTV, requirements for pre-leasing and / or presales, minimum borrower equity, and maximum loan-to-cost. Currently, the maximum standard for LTV is 80%, with lower limits established for certain higher risk types, such as raw land that has a 50% LTV maximum. The Corporation’s LTV guidelines are in compliance with regulatory supervisory limits. In most cases, for real estate construction loans, the loan amounts include interest reserves, which are built into the loans and sized to fund loan payments through construction and lease up and/or sell out.
Residential mortgages: Residential mortgage loans are primarily first lien home mortgages with a maximum loan-to-collateral value without credit enhancement (e.g., private mortgage insurance) of 80%. The residential mortgage portfolio is focused primarily in the Corporation's three-state branch footprint, with approximately 88% of the outstanding loan balances in the Corporation's branch footprint at December 31, 2020. The majority of the on balance sheet residential mortgage portfolio consists of LIBOR or constant maturity treasury based, hybrid, adjustable rate mortgage loans with initial fixed-rate terms of 3, 5, 7, or 10 years. The rates on these mortgages adjust based upon the movement in the underlying index which is then added to a margin and rounded to the nearest 0.125%. That result is then subjected to any periodic caps to produce the borrower's interest rate for the coming term.
In 2014, the Financial Stability Oversight Council and Financial Stability Board raised concerns about the reliability and robustness of LIBOR and called for the development of alternative interest rate benchmarks. The ARRC, through authority from the Federal Reserve, have selected the SOFR as the alternative rate and developed a paced transition plan which addresses the risk that LIBOR may not exist beyond the end of 2021. There are still many components of this plan which have not been
fully decided or implemented in the industry. As a result, the Corporation is reaching out to certain borrowers offering an opportunity to refinance or modify their loans to avoid uncertainty around the LIBOR transition. Performing borrowers can modify or refinance to a fixed interest rate or an adjustable rate mortgage tied to the one-year treasury adjusted to a constant maturity of one-year with an appropriate margin. This provides the Bank and borrower with greater certainty around the loan structure.
The Corporation generally retains certain fixed-rate residential real estate mortgages in its loan portfolio, including retail and private banking jumbo mortgages and CRA-related mortgages. As part of management's historical practice of originating and servicing residential mortgage loans, generally the Corporation's 30 year, agency conforming, fixed-rate residential real estate mortgage loans have been sold in the secondary market with servicing rights retained. Subject to management's analysis of the current interest rate environment, among other market factors, the Corporation may choose to retain 30 year mortgage loan production on its balance sheet. See section Loans for additional information on loans.
The Corporation’s underwriting and risk-based pricing guidelines for residential mortgage loans include minimum borrower FICO score and maximum LTV of the property securing the loan. Residential mortgage products generally are underwritten using FHLMC and FNMA secondary marketing guidelines.
Home equity: Home equity consists of both home equity lines of credit and closed-end home equity loans. The Corporation’s credit risk monitoring guidelines for home equity is based on an ongoing review of loan delinquency status, as well as a quarterly review of FICO score deterioration and property devaluation. The Corporation does not routinely obtain appraisals on performing loans to update LTV ratios after origination; however, the Corporation monitors the local housing markets by reviewing the various home price indices and incorporates the impact of the changing market conditions in its ongoing credit monitoring process. For junior lien home equity loans, the Corporation is unable to track the performance of the first lien loan if it does not own or service the first lien loan. However, the Corporation obtains a refreshed FICO score on a quarterly basis and monitors this as part of its assessment of the home equity portfolio.
The Corporation’s underwriting and risk-based pricing guidelines for home equity lines and loans consist of a combination of both borrower FICO score and the original cumulative LTV against the property securing the loan. During the second quarter of 2020, in the volatile economic environment, the Corporation reduced its exposure by reducing its maximum LTV on home equity lines of credit from 90% to 80%, among other changes, while maintaining the minimum acceptable FICO score at 670. The Corporation's current home equity line of credit offering is priced based on floating rate indices and generally allows 10 years of interest-only payments followed by a 20-year amortization of the outstanding balance. During the third quarter of 2020, based upon an analysis of market conditions and uncertainty around the timing and scope of the anticipated economic recovery, the Corporation temporarily suspended new applications for home equity lines of credit. The Corporation has significantly curtailed its offerings of fixed-rate, closed-end home equity loans. The loans in the Corporation's portfolio generally have an original term of 20 years with principal and interest payments required. See section Loans for additional information on loans.
Other consumer: Other consumer consists of student loans, short-term personal installment loans, and credit cards. The Corporation had $118 million and $136 million of student loans at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, the majority of which are government guaranteed. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the passage of the CARES Act, government guaranteed student loans had been placed on an administrative forbearance through September 30, 2020. Subsequently, on August 8, 2020, President Trump directed the Secretary of Education to continue to suspend loan payments, stop collections, and waive interest on U.S. Department of Education held federal student loans through December 31, 2020. On December 4, 2020, the relief measures were extended through January 31, 2021, and on January 20, 2021, President Biden extended the federal student loan relief through September 30, 2021. Credit risk for non-government guaranteed student loans, short-term personal installment loans, and credit cards is influenced by general economic conditions, the characteristics of individual borrowers, and the nature of the loan collateral. Risks of loss are generally on smaller average balances per loan spread over many borrowers. Once charged off, there is usually less opportunity for recovery of these smaller consumer loans. Credit risk is primarily controlled by reviewing the creditworthiness of the borrowers, monitoring payment histories, and taking appropriate collateral and guarantee positions. The student loan portfolio is in run-off and no new student loans are being originated.
COVID-19 Update:
Beginning on April 3, 2020, the Corporation began originating SBA loans under the PPP, which are included in commercial and business lending loans, to help businesses keep their workforce employed and cover other working capital needs during the COVID-19 pandemic. All complete eligible applications for the PPP have been processed in the order in which they have been received. The Corporation began submitting PPP forgiveness applications to the SBA on behalf of our customers on September 14, 2020. Forgiveness payments from the SBA began to be received early in the fourth quarter of 2020. The Corporation received approximately $248 million of forgiveness payments in 2020, with nearly all of the remaining loans expected to be forgiven in 2021. On December 27, 2020, the Economic Aid Act was signed into law, which included another round of PPP funding. The Corporation began originating the new round of PPP loans in January 2021. As of February 5, 2021, the Corporation has funded $133 million of PPP loans in this most recent round.
The following table summarizes the balance segmentation of the PPP loans as of December 31, 2020:
Table 15 Paycheck Protection Program Loan Segmentation
The following table summarizes loan forbearances outstanding in response to the COVID-19 pandemic as of each quarterly period during 2020, as a result of the loan forbearance program:
Table 16 COVID-19 Loan Forbearances
Nonperforming Assets
Management is committed to a proactive nonaccrual and problem loan identification philosophy. This philosophy is implemented through the ongoing monitoring and review of all pools of risk in the loan portfolio to ensure that problem loans are identified quickly and the risk of loss is minimized. Table 17 provides detailed information regarding NPAs, which include nonaccrual loans, OREO, and other NPAs:
Table 17 Nonperforming Assets
(a) Does not include any restructured loans related to the COVID-19 pandemic in accordance with Section 4013 of the CARES Act.
Table 17 Nonperforming Assets (continued)
(a) The Corporation's policy is to assign risk ratings at the borrower level. PPP loans are 100% guaranteed by the SBA and therefore the Corporation considers these loans to have a risk profile similar to pass rated loans.
Nonaccrual loans: Nonaccrual loans are considered to be one indicator of potential future loan losses. See management’s accounting policy for nonaccrual loans in Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 4 Loans of the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional nonaccrual loan disclosures. See also sections Credit Risk and Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans.
Accruing loans past due 90 days or more: Loans past due 90 days or more but still accruing interest are classified as such where the underlying loans are both well secured (the collateral value is sufficient to cover principal and accrued interest) and are in the process of collection.
Restructured loans: Loans are considered restructured loans if concessions have been granted to borrowers that are experiencing financial difficulty. See also Note 4 Loans of the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional restructured loans disclosures.
Potential problem loans: The level of potential problem loans is another predominant factor in determining the relative level of risk in the loan portfolio and in determining the appropriate level of the allowance for credit losses. Potential problem loans are generally defined by management to include loans rated as substandard by management that are collectively evaluated (not nonaccrual loans or accruing TDRs); however, there are circumstances present to create doubt as to the ability of the borrower to comply with present repayment terms. The decision of management to include performing loans in potential problem loans does not necessarily mean that the Corporation expects losses to occur, but that management recognizes a higher degree of risk associated with these loans.
OREO: Management actively seeks to ensure OREO properties held are monitored to minimize the Corporation's risk of loss. OREO properties decreased $7 million, or 32%, from December 31, 2019, primarily driven by decreases in residential OREO.
Other nonperforming assets: During the third quarter of 2019, the Bank accepted a partial settlement of a debt by receiving units of ownership interest in an oil and gas limited liability company, and during 2020, the Corporation wrote the value for the ownership interest down to zero.
Foregone Loan Interest: The following table shows, for those loans accounted for on a nonaccrual basis and restructured loans for the years ended as indicated, the approximate gross interest that would have been recorded if the loans had been current in accordance with their original terms and the amount of interest income that was included in interest income for the period:
Table 18 Foregone Loan Interest
Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans
Credit risks within the loan portfolio are inherently different for each loan type. Credit risk is controlled and monitored through the use of lending standards, a thorough review of potential borrowers, and ongoing review of loan payment performance. Active asset quality administration, including early problem loan identification and timely resolution of problems, aids in the management of credit risk and the minimization of loan losses. Credit risk management for each loan type is discussed in the section entitled Credit Risk. See Note 4 Loans of the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional disclosures on the ACLL.
To assess the appropriateness of the ACLL, the Corporation focuses on the evaluation of many factors, including but not limited to: evaluation of facts and issues related to specific loans, management’s ongoing review and grading of the loan portfolio, credit report refreshes, consideration of historical loan loss and delinquency experience on each portfolio category, trends in past due and nonaccrual loans, the level of potential problem loans, the risk characteristics of the various classifications of loan segments, changes in the size and character of the loan portfolio, concentrations of loans to specific borrowers or industries, existing economic conditions and economic forecasts, the fair value of underlying collateral, funding assumptions on lines, and other qualitative and quantitative factors which could affect potential credit losses. The Corporation utilized the Moody's baseline forecast for December 2020 in the allowance model. The forecast is applied over a 2 year reasonable and supportable period with straight-line reversion to historical losses over the second year of the period. Assessing these factors involves significant judgment. Because each of the criteria used is subject to change, the ACLL is not necessarily indicative of the trend of future credit losses on loans in any particular segment. Therefore, management considers the ACLL a critical accounting policy, see section Critical Accounting Policies for additional information on the ACLL. See section Nonperforming Assets for a detailed discussion on asset quality. See also Note 4 Loans of the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional ACLL disclosures. Table 6 provides information on loan growth and period end loan composition, Table 17 provides additional information regarding NPAs, and Table 19 and Table 20 provide additional information regarding activity in the ACLL.
The loan segmentation used in calculating the ACLL at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 was generally comparable. The methodology to calculate the ACLL consists of the following components: a valuation allowance estimate is established for commercial and consumer loans determined by the Corporation to be individually evaluated, using discounted cash flows, estimated fair value of underlying collateral, and/or other data available. Loans are segmented for criticized loan pools by loan type as well as for non-criticized loan pools by loan type, primarily based on historical loss rates after considering loan type, historical loss and delinquency experience, credit quality, and industry classifications. Loans that have been criticized are considered to have a higher risk of default than non-criticized loans, as circumstances were present to support the lower loan grade, warranting higher loss factors. The loss factors applied in the methodology are periodically re-evaluated and adjusted to reflect changes in historical loss levels or other risks. Additionally, management allocates ACLL to absorb losses that may not be provided for by the other components due to qualitative factors evaluated by management, such as limitations within the credit risk grading process, known current economic or business conditions that may not yet show in trends, industry or other concentrations with current issues that impose higher inherent risks than are reflected in the loss factors, and other relevant considerations. The total allowance is available to absorb losses from any segment of the loan portfolio. The allocation of the Corporation’s ACLL is shown in Table 21.
Table 19 Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans
Table 19 Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans (continued)
Table 20 Net (Charge Offs) Recoveries(a)
(a) Ratio of net charge offs to average loans by loan type
The following table illustrates the effect of the Day 1 adoption of ASU 2016-13 as well as the net ACLL build during the year ended December 31, 2020:
Table 21 Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans by Loan Portfolio
Notable Contributions to the Change in the Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans
•Total loans increased $1.6 billion, or 7%, from December 31, 2019, primarily driven by the addition of PPP loans in 2020 along with growth in CRE lending. See section Loans for additional information on the changes in the loan portfolio and see section Credit Risk for discussion about credit risk management for each loan type.
•Total potential problem loans increased $121 million, or 75%, from December 31, 2019, primarily driven by an increase in potential problem loans across the Corporation's commercial portfolio, stemming in part from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. See also Note 4 Loans of the notes to consolidated financial statements and section Nonperforming Assets for additional disclosures on the changes in asset quality.
•For the year ended December 31, 2020, net charge offs of $101 million included $52 million of oil and gas charge offs and $49 million of net charge offs from all other portfolio categories. See Tables 19, 20, and 21 for additional information regarding the activity in the ACLL. See also oil and gas lending within the Credit Risk section for additional information.
•Total nonaccrual loans increased $92 million, or 78%, from December 31, 2019, primarily driven by an increase in nonaccrual CRE-investor and commercial & industrial loans, stemming in part from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. See also Note 4 Loans of the notes to consolidated financial statements and section Nonperforming Assets for additional disclosures on the changes in asset quality.
•The ACLL attributable to oil and gas related credits (included within the commercial and industrial ACLL) was $54 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $13 million at December 31, 2019, with the increase primarily driven by the expected impact of the COVID-19 pandemic within the economic models used in the new expected credit loss methodology. See Oil and gas lending within the Credit Risk section for additional information.
Management believes the level of ACLL to be appropriate at December 31, 2020.
Consolidated net income and stockholders’ equity could be affected if management’s estimate of the ACLL is subsequently materially different, requiring additional or less provision for credit losses to be recorded. Management carefully considers numerous detailed and general factors, its assumptions, and the likelihood of materially different conditions that could alter its assumptions. While management uses currently available information to recognize losses on loans, future adjustments to the ACLL may be necessary based on newly received appraisals, updated commercial customer financial statements, rapidly deteriorating customer cash flow, and changes in economic conditions that affect our customers. Additionally, larger credit relationships do not inherently create more risk, but can create wider fluctuations in net charge offs and asset quality measures. As an integral part of their examination processes, various federal and state regulatory agencies also review the ACLL. These agencies may require additions to the ACLL or may require that certain loan balances be charged off or downgraded into criticized loan categories when their credit evaluations differ from those of management, based on their judgments about information available to them at the time of their examinations.
Investment Securities Portfolio
Management of the investment securities portfolio involves the maximization of income while actively monitoring the portfolio's liquidity, market risk, quality of the investment securities, and its role in balance sheet and capital management. The Corporation classifies its investment securities as AFS, HTM, or equity securities on the consolidated balance sheets at the time of purchase or adoption of a new accounting standard. Securities classified as AFS may be sold from time to time in order to help manage interest rate risk, liquidity, credit quality, capital levels, or to take advantage of relative value opportunities in the marketplace. Investment securities classified as AFS and equity are carried at fair value on the consolidated balance sheets, while investment securities classified as HTM are carried at amortized cost on the consolidated balance sheets.
Table 22 Investment Securities Portfolio
Table 22 Investment Securities Portfolio (continued)
At December 31, 2020, the Corporation’s investment securities portfolio did not contain securities of any single non-government or non-GSE issuer that were payable from and secured by the same source of revenue or taxing authority where the aggregate carrying value of such securities exceeded 5% of stockholders’ equity or approximately $205 million.
The Corporation did not recognize any credit-related write-downs to the allowance for credit losses on investments during 2020, or any other than temporary impairment write-downs in 2019 or 2018. See Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for management's accounting policy for investment securities and Note 3 Investment Securities of the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional investment securities disclosures.
AFS Securities
U.S. Treasury Securities: U.S. Treasury Securities, including Treasury bills, notes, and bonds, are debt obligations issued by the U.S. Department of the Treasury and are backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government.
Municipal Securities: The municipal securities relate to various state and political subdivisions and school districts. The municipal securities portfolio is regularly assessed for credit quality and deterioration.
Agency Securities: Agency securities are debt obligations that are issued by a U.S. GSE or other federally related entity, and have an implied guarantee from the U.S. government.
Agency Residential and Agency Commercial Mortgage-Related Securities: Residential and commercial mortgage-related securities include predominantly GNMA, FNMA, and FHLMC MBS and CMOs. The fair value of these mortgage-related securities is subject to inherent risks, such as prepayment risk and interest rate changes. The Corporation regularly assesses valuation of these securities.
FFELP Asset Backed Securities: FFELP asset backed securities are collateralized with government guaranteed student loans.
SBA Asset Backed Securities: SBA asset backed securities are securities whose underlying assets are loans from the SBA. These loans are backed by the U.S. government.
Other Debt Securities: Other debt securities are primarily comprised of debt securities that mature within 3 years and have a rating of A.
HTM Securities
Municipal Securities: The municipal securities relate to various state and political subdivisions and school districts. The municipal securities portfolio is regularly assessed for credit quality and deterioration.
Agency Residential and Agency Commercial Mortgage-Related Securities: Residential and commercial mortgage-related securities in HTM are comprised of select MBS and CMOs, such as when a component qualifies for CRA purposes.
Equity Securities
Equity Securities with Readily Determinable Fair Values: The Corporation's portfolio of equity securities with readily determinable fair values is primarily comprised of CRA Qualified Investment mutual funds.
Equity Securities without Readily Determinable Fair Values: The Corporation's portfolio of equity securities without readily determinable fair values consists of Visa Class B restricted shares that the Corporation received in 2008 as part of Visa's initial public offering as well as additional Visa Class B restricted shares that were acquired during the acquisition of First Staunton during the first quarter of 2020.
Regulatory Stock (FHLB and Federal Reserve System)
In addition to the AFS, HTM, and equity investment securities noted above, the Corporation is also required to hold certain regulatory stock. The Corporation is required to maintain Federal Reserve Bank stock and FHLB stock as member banks of both the Federal Reserve System and the FHLB, and in amounts as required by these institutions. See Note 3 Investment Securities of the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information on the regulatory stock.
Table 23 Investment Securities Portfolio Maturity Distribution(a)
Table 23 Investment Securities Portfolio Maturity Distribution (continued) (a)
(a) Expected maturities will differ from contractual maturities, as borrowers may have the right to call or repay obligations with or without call or prepayment penalties.
(b) Yields on tax-exempt securities are computed on a fully tax-equivalent basis using a tax rate of 21% and are net of the effects of certain disallowed interest deductions.
Analysis of Deposits and Funding
Deposits and Customer Funding
The following table summarizes the composition of our deposits and customer funding:
Table 24 Period End Deposit and Customer Funding Composition
(a) Securities sold under agreement to repurchase and commercial paper.
(b) Included above in interest-bearing demand and money market.
•Deposits are the Corporation's largest source of funds.
•Total deposits increased $2.7 billion, or 11%, from December 31, 2019 primarily driven by customers holding proceeds from government stimulus programs in their deposit accounts. In addition, in the first quarter of 2020, the Corporation assumed $439 million of deposits from the acquisition of First Staunton, see Note 2 Acquisitions and Dispositions of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on the acquisition of First Staunton.
•Noninterest-bearing deposits increased $2.2 billion, or 41%, from December 31, 2019 and savings accounts increased $915 million, or 33%, from December 31, 2019. These increases were primarily due to government stimulus program inflows and deposits acquired.
•Time deposits (excluding brokered CDs) decreased $860 million, or 33% from December 31, 2019 due to higher priced time deposits rolling off as they mature.
•Non-maturity deposit accounts comprised of savings, money market, and demand (both interest and non-interest bearing demand) accounts, accounted for 93% of the Corporation's total deposits at December 31, 2020.
Table 25 Maturity Distribution-Certificates of Deposit and Other Time Deposits of $100,000 or More
•Selected period end deposit information is detailed in Note 8 Deposits of the notes to consolidated financial statements, including a maturity distribution of all time deposits at December 31, 2020. See Table 2 for additional information on average deposit balances and deposit rates.
Other Funding Sources
Short-Term Funding: Short-term funding is comprised of federal funds purchased, securities sold under agreements to repurchase, and commercial paper. Many short-term funding sources are expected to be reissued and, therefore, do not represent an immediate need for cash. Short-term funding sources at December 31, 2020 were $252 million, a decrease of $213 million from December 31, 2019. The decrease in short-term funding was primarily due to higher deposit levels.
Long-Term Funding: Long-term funding is comprised of senior notes, subordinated notes, and finance leases. Long-term funding at December 31, 2020 was $549 million, relatively unchanged from December 31, 2019.
Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility: In connection with the funding of PPP loans, the Corporation had utilized the PPPLF. These borrowings from the Federal Reserve Bank match the term of the underlying loan, which had been pledged to secure the borrowings, with original terms of two or five years. In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Corporation paid off its obligation to the PPPLF in full.
FHLB Advances: FHLB advances are comprised of short-term FHLB advances (with original contractual maturities of one year or less) and long-term FHLB advances (with original contractual maturities greater than one year). FHLB advances at December 31, 2020 were $1.6 billion, down $1.5 billion from December 31, 2019, primarily due to the prepayment of $950 million of long-term FHLB advances in the third quarter of 2020, along with a $520 million decrease in short-term FHLB advances.
See Note 9 Short and Long-Term Funding of the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information on short-term funding, long-term funding, PPPLF, and FHLB advances. See Table 2 for additional information on average funding and rates.
Liquidity
The objective of liquidity risk management is to ensure that the Corporation has the ability to generate sufficient cash or cash equivalents in a timely and cost effective manner to satisfy the cash flow requirements of depositors and borrowers and to meet
its other commitments as they become due. The Corporation’s liquidity risk management process is designed to identify, measure, and manage the Corporation’s funding and liquidity risk to meet its daily funding needs in the ordinary course of business, as well as to address expected and unexpected changes in its funding requirements. The Corporation engages in various activities to manage its liquidity risk, including diversifying its funding sources, stress testing, and holding readily-marketable assets which can be used as a source of liquidity, if needed.
The Corporation performs dynamic scenario analysis in accordance with industry best practices. Measures have been established to ensure the Corporation has sufficient high quality short-term liquidity to meet cash flow requirements under stressed scenarios. In addition, the Corporation also reviews static measures such as deposit funding as a percent of total assets and liquid asset levels. Strong capital ratios, credit quality, and core earnings are also essential to maintaining cost effective access to wholesale funding markets. At December 31, 2020, the Corporation was in compliance with its internal liquidity objectives and has sufficient asset based liquidity to meet its obligations even under a stressed scenario.
The Corporation maintains diverse and readily available liquidity sources, including:
•Investment securities, which are an important tool to the Corporation’s liquidity objective and can be pledged or sold to enhance liquidity, if necessary. See Note 3 Investment Securities of the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information on the Corporation's investment securities portfolio, including pledged investment securities.
•Pledgeable loan collateral, which is eligible collateral with both the Federal Reserve Bank and the FHLB under established lines of credit. Based on the amount of collateral pledged, the FHLB established a collateral value from which the Bank may draw advances against the collateral. The collateral is also used to enable the FHLB to issue letters of credit in favor of public fund depositors of the Bank. As of December 31, 2020, the Bank had $5.7 billion available for future advances. The Federal Reserve Bank also establishes a collateral value of assets to support borrowings from the discount window. As of December 31, 2020, the Bank had $762 million available for discount window borrowings.
•A $200 million Parent Company commercial paper program, of which $59 million was outstanding at December 31, 2020.
•Dividends and service fees from subsidiaries, as well as the proceeds from issuance of capital, are also funding sources for the Parent Company.
•Equity issuances by the Parent Company; the Corporation has filed a shelf registration statement with the SEC under which the Parent Company may, from time to time, offer shares of the Corporation’s common stock in connection with acquisitions of businesses, assets, or securities of other companies.
•Other issuances by the Parent Company; the Corporation also has filed a universal shelf registration statement with the SEC, under which the Parent Company may offer the following securities, either separately or in units: debt securities, preferred stock, depositary shares, common stock, and warrants.
•Bank issuances; the Bank may also issue institutional CDs, network transaction deposits, and brokered CDs.
•Global Bank Note Program issuances; the Bank has implemented the program pursuant to which it may from time to time offer up to $2.0 billion aggregate principal amount of its unsecured senior and subordinated notes. In August 2018, the Bank issued $300 million of senior notes, due August 2021, and callable July 2021.
Credit ratings relate to the Corporation’s ability to issue debt securities and the cost to borrow money, and should not be viewed as an indication of future stock performance or a recommendation to buy, sell, or hold securities. Adverse changes in these factors could result in a negative change in credit ratings and impact not only the ability to raise funds in the capital markets but also the cost of these funds. The credit ratings of the Parent Company and the Bank at December 31, 2020 are displayed below:
Table 26 Credit Ratings
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating and financing activities was $550 million and $371 million, respectively, while investing activities used net cash of $794 million, for a net increase in cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash of $127 million since year-end 2019. During 2020, total assets increased to $33.4 billion, up $1.0 billion, or 3%, compared to year-end 2019, primarily due to an increase of $1.6 billion in loans. The increase was primarily driven by PPP loan originations, growth in CRE loans, and loans acquired as a result of the First Staunton acquisition. On the funding side, deposits increased $2.7 billion, mainly driven by customers holding proceeds from government stimulus programs in their deposit accounts, while funding, including short-term, long-term, and FHLB advances, was down $1.8 billion. The decrease in funding was primarily driven by the prepayment of $950 million of long-term FHLB advances and the paydown of $520 million of short-term FHLB advances.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by operating and investing activities was $574 million and $1.6 billion, respectively, while financing activities used net cash of $2.5 billion, for a net decrease in cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash of $288 million since year-end 2018. During 2019, total assets decreased to $32.4 billion, down $1.2 billion, or 4%, compared to year-end 2018, primarily due to net decreases of $1.2 billion in investment securities. On the funding side, deposits decreased $1.1 billion while funding, including short-term, long-term, and FHLB advances, was down $332 million. On June 14, 2019, the Corporation assumed $725 million of deposits from the Huntington branch acquisition. As a result of the acquisition, the Corporation was able to reduce higher cost brokered CDs and network deposits. The decrease in short-term, long-term, and FHLB advances was driven by the Corporation's redemption of $250 million in senior notes on October 15, 2019.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk
Market risk and interest rate risk are managed centrally. Market risk is the potential for loss arising from adverse changes in the fair value of fixed-income securities, equity securities, other earning assets, and derivative financial instruments as a result of changes in interest rates or other factors. Interest rate risk is the potential for reduced net interest income resulting from adverse changes in the level of interest rates. As a financial institution that engages in transactions involving an array of financial products, the Corporation is exposed to both market risk and interest rate risk. In addition to market risk, interest rate risk is measured and managed through a number of methods. The Corporation uses financial modeling simulation techniques that measure the sensitivity of future earnings due to changing rate environments to measure interest rate risk.
Policies established by the Corporation’s ALCO and approved by the Board of Directors are intended to limit these risks. The Board has delegated day-to-day responsibility for managing market and interest rate risk to ALCO. The primary objectives of market risk management is to minimize any adverse effect that changes in market risk factors may have on net interest income and to offset the risk of price changes for certain assets recorded at fair value.
Interest Rate Risk
The primary goal of interest rate risk management is to control exposure to interest rate risk within policy limits approved by the Board of Directors. These limits and guidelines reflect the Corporation's risk appetite for interest rate risk over both short-term and long-term horizons. No interest rate limit breaches occurred during 2020.
The major sources of the Corporation's non-trading interest rate risk are timing differences in the maturity and re-pricing characteristics of assets and liabilities, changes in the shape of the yield curve, and the potential exercise of explicit or embedded options. We measure these risks and their impact by identifying and quantifying exposures through the use of sophisticated simulation and valuation models which are employed by management to understand NII at risk, interest rate sensitive EAR, and MVE at risk. The Corporation’s interest rate risk profile is such that a higher or steeper yield curve adds to income while a flatter yield curve is relatively neutral, and a lower or inverted yield curve generally has a negative impact on earnings. The Corporation's EAR profile is asset sensitive at December 31, 2020.
MVE and EAR are complementary interest rate risk metrics and should be viewed together. NII and EAR sensitivity capture asset and liability re-pricing mismatches for the first year inclusive of forecast balance sheet changes and are considered shorter term measures, while MVE sensitivity captures mismatches within the period end balance sheets through the financial instruments’ respective maturities and is considered a longer term measure.
A positive NII and EAR sensitivity in a rising rate environment indicates that over the forecast horizon of one year, asset based income will increase more quickly than liability based expense due to the balance sheet composition. A negative MVE sensitivity in a rising rate environment indicates that the value of financial assets will decrease more than the value of financial liabilities.
One of the primary methods that we use to quantify and manage interest rate risk is simulation analysis, which we use to model NII and rate sensitive noninterest items from the Corporation’s balance sheet and derivative positions under various interest rate scenarios. As the future path of interest rates is not known with certainty, we use simulation analysis to project rate sensitive income under many scenarios including implied forward and deliberately extreme and perhaps unlikely scenarios. The analyses may include rapid and gradual ramping of interest rates, rate shocks, basis risk analysis, and yield curve twists. Specific balance sheet management strategies are also analyzed to determine their impact on NII and EAR.
Key assumptions in the simulation analysis (and in the valuation analysis discussed below) relate to the behavior of interest rates and pricing spreads, the changes in product balances, and the behavior of loan and deposit clients in different rate environments. This analysis incorporates several assumptions, the most material of which relate to the re-pricing characteristics and balance fluctuations of deposits with indeterminate or non-contractual maturities, and prepayment of loans and securities.
The sensitivity analysis included below is measured as a percentage change in NII and EAR due to gradual moves in benchmark interest rates from a baseline scenario over 12 months. We evaluate the sensitivity using: 1) a dynamic forecast incorporating expected growth in the balance sheet, and 2) a static forecast where the current balance sheet is held constant.
While a gradual shift in interest rates was used in this analysis to provide an estimate of exposure under a probable scenario, an instantaneous shift in interest rates would have a much more significant impact.
Table 27 Estimated % Change in Rate Sensitive EAR Over 12 Months
We also perform valuation analysis, which we use for discerning levels of risk present in the balance sheet and derivative positions that might not be taken into account in the NII simulation analysis. Whereas, NII and EAR simulation highlights exposures over a relatively short time horizon, valuation analysis incorporates all cash flows over the estimated remaining life of all balance sheet and derivative positions. The valuation of the balance sheet, at a point in time, is defined as the discounted present value of all asset cash flows and derivative cash flows, minus the discounted present value of all liability cash flows, the net of which is referred to as MVE. The sensitivity of MVE to changes in the level of interest rates is a measure of the longer-term re-pricing risk and options risk embedded in the balance sheet. Unlike the NII simulation, MVE uses instantaneous changes in rates. Additionally, MVE values only the current balance sheet and does not incorporate the growth assumptions that are used in the NII and EAR simulations. As with NII and EAR simulations, assumptions about the timing and variability of balance sheet cash flows are critical in the MVE analysis. Particularly important are the assumptions driving prepayments and the expected changes in balances and pricing of the indeterminate deposit portfolios. At December 31, 2020, the MVE profile indicates an increase in net balance sheet value due to instantaneous upward changes in rates. MVE sensitivity is reported in both upward and downward rate shocks.
Table 28 Market Value of Equity Sensitivity
In the current rate environment, an increase in rates would result in an increase in MVE versus a decrease in 2019. The growth of core deposits along with paying down our term FHLB funding year over year were the main drivers of this change. Since MVE measures the discounted present value of cash flows over the estimated lives of instruments, the change in MVE does not directly correlate to the degree that earnings would be impacted over a shorter time horizon (i.e., the current year). Further, MVE does not take into account factors such as future balance sheet growth, changes in product mix, changes in yield curve relationships, and changes in product spreads that could mitigate the adverse impact of changes in interest rates.
The above NII, EAR, and MVE measures do not include all actions that management may undertake to manage this risk in response to anticipated changes in interest rates.
Contractual Obligations, Commitments, Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements, and Contingent Liabilities
The following table summarizes significant contractual obligations and other commitments at December 31, 2020, at those amounts contractually due to the recipient, including any unamortized premiums or discounts, hedge basis adjustments, or other similar carrying value adjustments.
Table 29 Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments(a)
(a) Based on original contractual maturity
Through the normal course of operations, the Corporation has entered into certain contractual obligations and other commitments, including but not limited to those most usually related to funding of operations through deposits or funding, commitments to extend credit, derivative contracts to assist management of interest rate exposure, and to a lesser degree leases for premises and equipment. Further discussion of the nature of each obligation is included in the referenced note to the consolidated financial statements.
The Corporation also has obligations under its retirement plans as described in Note 12 Retirement Plans of the notes to consolidated financial statements.
As of December 31, 2020, the net liability for uncertainty in income taxes, including associated interest and penalties, was $3 million. This liability represents an estimate of tax positions that the Corporation has taken in its tax returns which may ultimately not be sustained upon examination by the tax authorities. Since the ultimate amount and timing of any future cash settlements cannot be predicted with reasonable certainty, this estimated liability has been excluded from Table 29. See Note 13 Income Taxes of the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information and disclosure related to uncertainty in income taxes.
The Corporation may have a variety of financial transactions that, under GAAP, are either not recorded on the consolidated balance sheets or are recorded on the consolidated balance sheets in amounts that differ from the full contract or notional amounts.
The Corporation routinely enters into lending-related commitments, including commitments to extend credit, interest rate lock commitments to originate residential mortgage loans held for sale (discussed further below), commercial letters of credit, and standby letters of credit. See Note 16 Commitments, Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements, and Legal Proceedings of the notes to consolidated financial statements for further information on lending-related commitments.
The Corporation’s derivative financial instruments, under which the Corporation is required to either receive cash from or pay cash to counterparties depending on changes in interest rates, foreign currency, and commodity prices applied to notional amounts, are carried at fair value on the consolidated balance sheets. Because neither the derivative assets and liabilities, nor their notional amounts, represent the amounts that may ultimately be paid under these contracts, they are not included in Table 29. For further information and discussion of derivative contracts, see Note 14 Derivative and Hedging Activities of the notes to consolidated financial statements.
The Corporation sells residential mortgage loans to investors in the normal course of business. Residential mortgage loans sold to others are predominantly conventional residential first lien mortgages originated under our usual underwriting procedures, and are most often sold on a nonrecourse basis primarily to the GSEs. See Note 16 Commitments, Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements, and Legal Proceedings of the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information on residential mortgage loans sold.
The Corporation has principal investment commitments to provide capital-based financing to private and public companies and also invests in low-income housing, and various tax credit projects. See Note 16 Commitments, Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements, and Legal Proceedings of the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information on these investments. The Volcker Rule prohibits IDIs and their holding companies from engaging in proprietary trading except in
limited circumstances, and prohibits them from owning equity interests in excess of three percent of Tier 1 Capital in private equity and hedge funds. Complying with the Volcker Rule is not expected to have a material impact on the Corporation. See Part I, Item 1, Business, for additional information on the Volcker Rule.
Capital
Management actively reviews capital strategies for the Corporation and each of its subsidiaries in light of perceived business risks, future growth opportunities, industry standards, and compliance with regulatory requirements. The assessment of overall capital adequacy depends on a variety of factors, including asset quality, liquidity, stability of earnings, changing competitive forces, economic condition in markets served, and strength of management. At December 31, 2020, the capital ratios of the Corporation and its banking subsidiaries were in excess of regulatory minimum requirements. The Corporation’s capital ratios are summarized in the following table.
Table 30 Capital Ratios
(a)The Federal Reserve establishes regulatory capital requirements, including well-capitalized standards for the Corporation. The Corporation follows Basel III, subject to certain transition provisions. These regulatory capital measurements are used by management, regulators, investors, and analysts to assess, monitor and compare the quality and composition of the Corporation's capital with the capital of other financial services companies.
(b) Ratio is based upon basic earnings per common share.
See Part II, Item 5, Market for Registrant's Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities, for information on the shares repurchased during the fourth quarter of 2020, which consisted entirely of repurchases related to tax withholding on equity compensation. There were no open market purchases during the quarter due to the suspension of the share repurchase program on March 13, 2020.
During the second quarter of 2020, the Corporation issued 4.0 million depositary shares each representing a 1/40th interest in a share of 5.625% Non-Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series F, for net proceeds of approximately $97 million.
In February 2019, the federal bank regulatory agencies issued a final rule (the "2019 CECL Rule") that revised certain capital regulations to account for changes to credit loss accounting under GAAP. The rule included a transition option that allowed banking organizations to phase in, over a three-year period, the day-one impact of CECL adoption on regulatory capital ratios. In August 2020, the federal bank regulatory agencies issued a final rule that maintains the three-year transition option of the 2019 CECL Rule and also provided an option to delay for two years an estimate of the effect of CECL on regulatory capital, relative to the incurred loss methodology's effect on regulatory capital, followed by a three-year transition period. The Corporation has elected to utilize the CECL Transition Provision granted by the banking regulators. Under these provisions, the Day 1 capital impact relating to the adoption of ASU 2016-13 and 25% of the difference between the period end ACL and the Day 1 ACL will be 100% deferred for 2 years, and then phased in over the next 3 years. At December 31, 2020, the Corporation had a modified CECL transitional amount of $118 million.
Table 31 Non-GAAP Measures
(a) The ratio tangible common equity to tangible assets excludes goodwill and other intangible assets, net. This financial measure has been included as it is considered to be a critical metric with which to analyze and evaluate financial condition and capital strength.
(b) These capital measurements are used by management, regulators, investors, and analysts to assess, monitor, and compare the quality and composition of our capital with the capital of other financial services companies.
(c) The efficiency ratio as defined by the Federal Reserve guidance is noninterest expense (which includes the provision for unfunded commitments) divided by the sum of net interest income plus noninterest income, excluding investment securities gains / losses, net. The fully tax-equivalent efficiency ratio is noninterest expense (which includes the provision for unfunded commitments), excluding other intangible amortization, divided by the sum of fully tax-equivalent net interest income plus noninterest income, excluding investment securities gains / losses, net. The adjusted efficiency ratio is noninterest expense, which excludes the provision for unfunded commitments, other intangible amortization, acquisition related costs, and third quarter of 2020 initiatives, as described below, divided by the sum of fully tax-equivalent net interest income plus noninterest income, excluding investment securities gains (losses), net, acquisition related costs, asset gains (losses), net, and gain on sale of branches, net. Management believes the adjusted efficiency ratio is a meaningful measure as it enhances the comparability of net interest income arising from taxable and tax-exempt sources and provides a better measure as to how the Corporation is managing its expenses by adjusting for acquisition related costs, provision for unfunded commitments, asset gains (losses), net, branch sales, and third quarter of 2020 initiatives.
(d) Only includes First Staunton, Huntington branch, and Bank Mutual acquisitions.
(e) Third quarter of 2020 initiatives consisted of cost saving efforts that were executed during the third quarter of 2020. These initiatives included a $45 million loss on prepayment of FHLB advances, $10 million in severance, and $6 million in write-downs related to branch sales and lease breakage related to announced branch consolidations.
See Note 10 Stockholders' Equity and Note 19 Regulatory Matters of the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional capital disclosures.
Segment Review
As discussed in Note 21 Segment Reporting of the notes to consolidated financial statements, the Corporation’s reportable segments have been determined based upon its internal profitability reporting system, which is organized by strategic business unit. Certain strategic business units have been combined for segment information reporting purposes where the nature of the products and services, the type of customer, and the distribution of those products and services are similar. The reportable segments are Corporate and Commercial Specialty; Community, Consumer and Business; and Risk Management and Shared Services. The financial information of the Corporation’s segments was compiled utilizing the accounting policies described in Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 21 Segment Reporting of the notes to consolidated financial statements.
FTP is an important tool for managing the Corporation’s balance sheet structure and measuring risk-adjusted profitability. By appropriately allocating the cost of funding and contingent liquidity to business units, the FTP process improves product pricing which influences the volume and terms of new business and helps to optimize the risk / reward profile of the balance sheet. This process helps align the Corporation’s funding and contingent liquidity risk with its risk appetite and complements broader liquidity and interest rate risk management programs. FTP methodologies are designed to promote more resilient, sustainable business models and centralize the management of funding and contingent liquidity risks. Through FTP, the Corporation transfers these risks to a central management function that can take advantage of natural off-sets, centralized hedging activities, and a broader view of these risks across business units. The net FTP allocation is reflected as net intersegment interest income (expense) shown in Note 21 Segment Reporting of the notes to consolidated financial statements.
Table 32 Selected Segment Financial Data
N/M = Not Meaningful
(a) The Federal Reserve establishes capital adequacy requirements for the Corporation, including CET1. For segment reporting purposes, the return on CET 1 ("ROCET1") reflects return on average allocated CET1. The ROCET1 for the Risk Management and Shared Services segment and the Consolidated Total is inclusive of the annualized effect of the preferred stock dividends. Please refer to Table 31 for a reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures to GAAP financial measures.
(b) For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Corporation recognized a $163 million asset gain related to the sale of ABRC, 2019 includes less than $1 million of Huntington related asset losses, 2018 includes approximately $2 million of Bank Mutual acquisition related asset losses net of asset gains.
(c) For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, the Risk Management and Shared Services segment included approximately $2 million, $7 million, and $29 million respectively, of acquisition related noninterest expense. The Risk Management and Shared Services segment also incurred a loss of $45 million on the prepayment of FHLB advances during the third quarter of 2020.
(d) The Corporation has recognized $63 million in tax benefits in 2020, primarily driven by corporate restructuring which allowed for the recognition of built in capital losses and tax basis step-up yielding this tax benefit.
Segment Review 2020 Compared to 2019
The Corporate and Commercial Specialty segment consists of lending and deposit solutions to larger businesses, developers, not-for-profits, municipalities, and financial institutions, and the support to deliver, fund, and manage such banking solutions. In addition, this segment provides a variety of investment, fiduciary, and retirement planning products and services to individuals and small to mid-sized businesses.
•Segment revenue increased $23 million to $555 million in 2020, compared to $532 million in 2019, driven by an increase in net intersegment income partially offset by a decrease in net interest income. In addition, capital markets fees increased from 2019 as a result of higher interest rate swap fees.
•Noninterest expense decreased $24 million to $210 million in 2020, compared to $234 million in 2019, driven by a $14 million decrease in personnel expense, primarily related to a decrease in the funding for the management incentive plan.
•Average loan balances were $14.2 billion for 2020, up $1.4 billion from an average balance of $12.8 billion for 2019, largely due to growth in PPP loans and CRE lending loans.
The Community, Consumer, and Business segment consists of lending, deposit solutions, and historically offered ancillary financial services, primarily insurance and risk consulting, to individuals and small to mid-sized businesses.
•Segment revenue decreased $83 million to $535 million in 2020, largely driven by the current interest rate environment, along with a decrease of $44 million in insurance commissions and fees due to sale of ABRC.
•Noninterest expense decreased $38 million to $429 million in 2020, primarily driven by a $26 million decrease in personnel expense. This was largely driven by a reduction in FTEs as a result of the sale of ABRC and a decrease in the funding for the management incentive plan.
•Average deposit balances were $15.0 billion in 2020, up $2.1 billion from average deposits of $13.0 billion in 2019, primarily driven by customers holding proceeds from government stimulus programs in their deposit accounts.
The Risk Management and Shared Services segment includes key shared Corporate functions, Parent Company activity, intersegment eliminations, and residual revenues and expense.
•Segment revenue increased $121 million to $187 million in 2020, primarily driven by a $163 million gain from the sale of ABRC.
•Provision for credit losses increased $144 million to $92 million in 2020, as a result of the expected impact of the COVID-19 pandemic within the economic models used in the new expected credit loss methodology.
•Noninterest expense increased $44 million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a $45 million FHLB prepayment fee.
•Income tax expense decreased $55 million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily driven by corporate restructuring which allowed for the recognition of built in capital losses and tax basis step-up yielding a tax benefit of $63 million, partially offset by the gain on sale of ABRC.
•Average earning assets decreased $633 million in 2020 compared to 2019, driven by lower investment securities balances and runoff in the oil and gas loan portfolio.
•Average deposits were $1.6 billion in 2020, down $511 million from 2019, primarily driven by a decrease in higher cost network and time deposit accounts.
Table 33 Selected Quarterly Financial Data
The following is selected financial data summarizing the results of operations for each quarter in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Critical Accounting Policies
In preparing the consolidated financial statements, management is required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the balance sheet and revenues and expenses for the period. Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates. Estimates that are particularly susceptible to significant change include the determination of the ACLL, goodwill impairment assessment, MSRs valuation, and income taxes.
The consolidated financial statements of the Corporation are prepared in conformity with U.S. GAAP and follow general practices within the industries in which it operates. This preparation requires management to make estimates, assumptions, and judgments that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. These estimates, assumptions, and judgments are based on information available as of the date of the financial statements; accordingly, as this information changes, actual results could differ from the estimates, assumptions, and judgments reflected in the financial statements. Certain policies inherently have a greater reliance on the use of estimates, assumptions, and judgments and, as such, have a greater possibility of producing results that could be materially different than originally reported. Management believes the following policies are both important to the portrayal of the Corporation’s financial condition and results of operations and require subjective or complex judgments and, therefore, management considers the following to be critical accounting policies. The critical accounting policies are discussed directly with the Audit Committee of the Corporation’s Board of Directors.
Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans: Management’s evaluation process used to determine the appropriateness of the ACLL is subject to the use of estimates, assumptions, and judgments. The evaluation process combines many factors: management’s ongoing review and grading of the loan portfolio using a dual risk rating system leveraging probability of default and loss given default, consideration of historical loan loss and delinquency experience, trends in past due and nonaccrual loans, risk characteristics of the various classifications of loans, concentrations of loans to specific borrowers or industries, existing economic conditions and forecasts, the fair value of underlying collateral, and other qualitative and quantitative factors which could affect future credit losses. Because current economic conditions and forecasts can change and future events are inherently difficult to predict, the anticipated amount of estimated credit losses on loans, and therefore the appropriateness of the ACLL, could change significantly. The Corporation uses Moody's baseline economic forecast within its model. As an integral part of their examination process, various regulatory agencies also review the ACLL. Such agencies may require additions to the ACLL or may require that certain loan balances be charged off or downgraded into criticized loan categories when their credit evaluations differ from those of management, based on their judgments about information available to them at the time of their examination. The Corporation believes the level of the ACLL is appropriate. See Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 4 Loans of the notes to consolidated financial statements as well as the Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans section.
Goodwill Impairment Assessment: Goodwill is not amortized but, instead, is subject to impairment tests on at least an annual basis, and more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. The Corporation conducted its most recent annual impairment test in May 2020, utilizing a quantitative assessment. See Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the notes to consolidated
financial statements for the Corporation's accounting policy on goodwill and see Note 5 Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets of the notes to consolidated financial statements for a detailed discussion of the factors considered by management in the quantitative assessment. Management estimated the fair value of each reporting unit utilizing an equally weighted combination of discounted cash flow and market-based approaches. Based on this assessment, management concluded that the estimated fair value exceeded the carrying value (including goodwill) for each reporting unit. There were no events since the May 2020 impairment testing that have changed the Corporation's impairment assessment conclusion. There was no impairment charges recorded in 2020, 2019, or 2018.
Mortgage Servicing Rights Valuation: The fair value of the Corporation’s MSRs asset is important to the presentation of the consolidated financial statements since the MSRs are carried on the consolidated balance sheets at the lower of amortized cost or estimated fair value. MSRs do not trade in an active open market with readily observable prices. As such, like other participants in the mortgage banking business, the Corporation relies on an independent valuation from a third party which uses a discounted cash flow model to estimate the fair value of its MSRs. The use of a discounted cash flow model involves judgment, particularly of estimated prepayment speeds of underlying mortgages serviced and the overall level of interest rates. Loan type and note interest rate are the predominant risk characteristics of the underlying loans used to stratify capitalized MSRs for purposes of measuring impairment. The Corporation periodically reviews the assumptions underlying the valuation of MSRs. While the Corporation believes that the values produced by the discounted cash flow model are indicative of the fair value of its MSRs portfolio, these values can change significantly depending upon key factors, such as the then current interest rate environment, estimated prepayment speeds of the underlying mortgages serviced, and other economic conditions. The proceeds that might be received should the Corporation actually consider a sale of some or all of the MSRs portfolio could differ from the amounts reported at any point in time.
To better understand the sensitivity of the impact of prepayment speeds and refinance rates on the value of the MSRs asset at December 31, 2020, (holding all other factors unchanged), if refinance rates were to decrease 50 bp, the estimated value of the MSRs asset would have been approximately $4 million, or 10%, lower. Conversely, if refinance rates were to increase 50 bp, the estimated value of the MSRs asset would have been approximately $7 million, or 16%, higher. However, the Corporation’s potential recovery recognition due to valuation improvement is limited to the balance of the MSRs valuation reserve, which was approximately $18 million at December 31, 2020. The potential recovery recognition is constrained as the Corporation has elected to use the amortization method of accounting (rather than fair value measurement accounting). Under the amortization method, MSRs are carried at the lower of the initial capitalized amount, net of accumulated amortization, or estimated fair value. Therefore, the MSRs asset may only be marked up to the extent of the previously recognized valuation reserve. The Corporation believes the MSRs asset is properly recorded on the consolidated balance sheets. See Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 5 Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets of the notes to consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes: The assessment of tax assets and liabilities involves the use of estimates, assumptions, interpretations, and judgment concerning certain accounting pronouncements and federal and state tax codes and regulations. There can be no assurance that future events, such as court decisions or positions of federal and state taxing authorities, will not differ from management’s current assessment, the impact of which could be significant to the consolidated results of operations and reported earnings. Quarterly assessments are performed to determine if valuation allowances are necessary against any portion of the Corporation’s DTAs. Assessing the need for, or sufficiency of, a valuation allowance requires management to evaluate all available evidence, both positive and negative, including the recent trend of quarterly earnings. Positive evidence necessary to overcome the negative evidence includes whether future taxable income in sufficient amounts and character within the carryback and carryforward periods is available under the tax law, including the use of tax planning strategies. When negative evidence (e.g., cumulative losses in recent years, history of operating loss or tax credit carryforwards expiring unused) exists, more positive evidence than negative evidence will be necessary. The Corporation has concluded that based on the level of positive evidence, it is more likely than not that the DTA will be realized, net of the existing valuation allowances at December 31, 2020 and 2019. However, there is no guarantee that the tax benefits associated with the DTAs will be fully realized. The Corporation believes the tax assets and liabilities are properly recorded on the consolidated balance sheets. See Note 13 Income Taxes of the notes to consolidated financial statements and section Income Taxes.