ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
We develop, publish and market Apps for smartphones and tablet devices. We derive revenue from sales, or downloads, of our Apps and from advertisements published on our ad-supported game titles. During 2019, we did not generate any revenue. Over the course of 2021, we expect to generate revenue from the sale of software titles that we are developing for own account, from titles that were developed by third-parties which we acquired and from titles that have been developed for our benefit. Operating margins are dependent in part upon our ability to release new, commercially successful software products and to manage effectively their development costs.
Our Apps titles include games designed to appeal to a broad cross section of consumers and legal-related Apps that provide compilations of federal and state laws and regulations across a variety of legal disciplines and digests of court decisions rendered by federal courts that are directed to legal professionals. We offer all of our game titles in both a free advertisement-supported version and a paid version that does not display ads. We believe that the ad supported versions allow for wider dissemination of our titles to consumers who might not otherwise spend money for an App without first playing the game.
We market, sell and distribute our games through direct-to-consumer digital storefronts, such as Apple’s App Store and the Google Play Store. We currently expect to advertise our Apps through the digital storefronts, our own website, social media, such as Facebook and LinkedIn, through mobile ad networks and search engine optimization, or SEO, tools.
We will develop and acquire new Apps to expand our existing product offerings, as our resources permit. We rely on third party designers, developers and programs to develop new Apps. We also solicit ideas for new titles from unrelated parties. We evaluate prospects based on a variety of factors. If we conclude that a particular prospect is worth pursuing, we may fund the development of the App through launch and beyond. We expect to release several new Apps throughout 2019.
Over the last decade, mobile devices, including smartphone and tablets, have proliferated extensively around the world across a wide range of demographic groups. The mobile Apps industry has experienced corresponding growth in the number of downloads, the number and types of Apps published. We believe that there will continue to be an increase in the number of smartphones and tablets sold. In addition, technological advances to these devices, including more powerful smartphones and tablets with larger screens provide a platform for more diverse Apps and make games more fun and visually appealing. We believe that technological developments will continue to drive growth in our industry for the foreseeable future.
Growth Strategies and Outlook
Our principal growth strategy entails developing and acquiring new Apps to supplement our existing Apps portfolio. Our primary focus will be to release new game titles. We seek to solicit new games and concepts that we may acquire from third parties. We also will seek to develop and publish free-to-play games. Free-to-play games are games that a player can download and play for free, but which allow players to access a variety of additional content and features for a fee, through “in-app purchases” utilizing virtual currency that may be purchased through digital storefronts, and to engage with various advertisements and offers that generate revenues for us. We may seek to acquire franchises around which we develop games, including movies, television programs, toys and other cultural phenomena that lend themselves to gamification.
We have been constrained in our development and acquisition activities by a lack of cash. Our ability to pursue and achieve our objectives is predicated on our receipt of meaningful revenue from sales of our existing Apps and those we may release in the future and from our ability to raise capital from outside sources.
Our revenues will depend significantly on growth in the mobile games market and our ability to develop or acquire and publish Apps that are well-received by consumers. In addition, because our products are purchased with disposable income, our success is dependent on the overall strength of the economy in the United States. We expect to invest resources in research and development, analytics and marketing to introduce new Apps and continue to update our existing Apps, and to the extent that Apps into which we have invested significant capital are not successful, our business and financial condition could be harmed. We operate in an environment that is extremely competitive for users against a continually increasing number of developers, many of which are significantly larger than us and have other competitive advantages. We expect to allocate a material portion of our operating revenue and capital that we receive to sales and marketing initiatives in connection with the launch and promotion of our games in an effort to drive sales.
Our revenues also will depend on maintaining our continued good relationship with the digital storefront operators, namely Apple and Google, each of which could unilaterally alter their terms of service in ways that could harm our business.
Our ability to achieve and sustain profitability will depend not only on our ability to generate meaningful our revenues, but also on our ability to manage our operating expenses. Currently, we have one full-time employee, who receives compensation when and as determined by the board of directors. For the foreseeable further, we expect to utilize the services of independent contractors and consultants, who we believe are readily available for our purposes, in order to manage our personnel costs. We also will continue to maintain a virtual office as long as our operations permit us to do so to contain our office space overhead.
We require significant additional capital to fund the development of Apps in process that we have developed internally or acquired from third parties during the last year. We also require capital to fund marketing initiatives for our existing products and the launch and marketing of Apps in development. We cannot be sure that the additional capital we require will be available on acceptable terms or at all. If adequate funds are not available on acceptable terms or at all, we may be unable to develop or enhance our services and products, take advantage of future opportunities, repay debt obligations as they become due, or respond to competitive pressures, any of which would have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, financial condition, and results of operations.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table presents our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is the ability of a company to generate cash to support its current and future operations, satisfy its obligations, and otherwise operate on an ongoing basis. Significant factors in the management of liquidity include funds generated by operations, the availability of credit facilities, levels of accounts receivable and accounts payable and capital expenditures.
As of December 31, 2020, we had total assets of $213 and total liabilities of $287,852, of which $241,220 is attributable to the principal and interest due under a promissory note we issued in 2019 which replaced promissory notes issued during the prior three years. Comparably, as of December 31, 2019, we had total assets of $629 and total liabilities of $241,462, of which $202,420 is attributable to the principal and interest due under promissory notes issued during the three prior years. As of December 31, 2020, we had a working capital deficit of $46,626 and a working capital deficit of $33,922 as of December 31, 2019.
Cash Flows:
The following table presents summary cash flow information for the periods indicated.
Operating Activities
Cash used in operations was $38,800 and $42,118 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In 2020 and 2019, cash was mainly used to pay SGA expenses and the cost of our outside professionals.
Investing Activities
We did not use any cash in investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Financing Activities
Cash flow from financing activities was $38,800 and $42,106 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. These amounts were attributable to loans received periodically over the course of the year.
Off-Balance Sheet and Other Arrangements
As of the date of this report, the Company does not have any off-balance sheet or similar arrangements.
Going Concern
The report of our independent auditor and Note B to the financial statements filed with this annual report on Form 10-K indicate that the Company’s minimal operations to date and lack of fully established sources of revenue raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. For these reasons, our financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern, which assumes we will realize our assets and discharge our liabilities in the normal course of business. If we are unable to achieve these ends, we cannot assure you that we will be able to generate revenue to support our operations and continue operations.
The presence of the going concern explanatory paragraph suggests that we may not have sufficient liquidity, or minimum cash levels, to operate our business. Since our inception, we have incurred losses and anticipate that we will continue to incur losses until such time as our Apps generate sufficient revenue to offset our research and development, general and administrative and sales and marketing expenses. We will need to raise additional capital to fund our near-term operational plans described elsewhere in this report. We cannot assure you that we will be successful in our operational plans. We cannot be sure that the additional capital we require will be available on acceptable terms or at all. If adequate funds are not available on acceptable terms or at all, we may be unable to develop or enhance our services and products, take advantage of future opportunities, repay debt obligations as they become due, or respond to competitive pressures, any of which would have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, financial condition, and results of operations.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation has had a material effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. If our costs were to become subject to significant inflationary pressures, we might not be able to fully offset these higher costs through price increases. Our inability or failure to do so could harm our business, operating results and financial condition.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
The preparation of our financial statements in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, of GAAP, requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect our reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under current circumstances in making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from other sources. We evaluate our estimates on an on-going basis. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Accounting policies are an integral part of our financial statements. A thorough understanding of these accounting policies is essential when reviewing our reported results of operations and our financial position. Management believes that the critical accounting policies and estimates discussed below involve the most difficult management judgments, due to the sensitivity of the methods and assumptions used. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
We believe the following accounting policies and estimates are the most critical. Some of them involve significant judgments and uncertainties and could potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions.
Revenue Recognition - The Company applies paragraph 605-10-S99-1 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification for revenue recognition. The Company recognizes revenue when it is realized or realizable and earned less estimated future doubtful accounts. The Company considers revenue realized or realizable and earned when all of the following criteria are met:
(i)
persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists,
(ii)
the services have been rendered and all required milestones achieved,
(iii)
the sales price is fixed or determinable, and
(iv)
collectability is reasonably assured.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Emerging Growth Company Critical Accounting Policy Disclosure: We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the 2012 JOBS Act. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. As an emerging growth company, we can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period.
There are no recent accounting pronouncements published after December 31, 2019 that have a material effect on the financial statements presented herein.