Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the other sections of this 2020 10-K, including the Special Note on Forward-Looking Statements and Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors.
OVERVIEW
ASGN provides professional staffing and IT consulting services in the technology, digital, creative, engineering and life sciences fields across commercial and government sectors. Our Commercial business is comprised of the Apex and Oxford segments, and the Federal Government business is the ECS segment.
Our Apex segment provides technology, digital, creative, scientific, engineering staffing and consulting services to Fortune 1000 and mid-market clients across the United States and Canada. Our Oxford segment provides hard-to-find technology, digital, engineering and life sciences staffing and consulting services, in select skill and geographic markets in the United States and Europe. Our ECS segment delivers advanced solutions in cloud, cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, machine learning, application and IT modernization, science and engineering to departments and agencies in the federal government.
The Impact of COVID-19 on our Results and Operations
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, our Commercial business was down 5.7 percent from 2019 related to lower demand in certain industry verticals. During 2020, we experienced week-to-week declines in revenues beginning in March 2020 through mid-May. Thereafter, revenues have steadily improved, which has continued into 2021. Our Commercial business reported sequential quarterly revenue growth in the second half of 2020 and for the fourth quarter both commercial segments and all five industry verticals were up sequentially. Over the same period, our Federal Government business experienced double-digit year-over-year revenue growth.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ("GAAP"), which require us to make certain assumptions and related estimates affecting the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Critical accounting policies are those we believe are both most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results and require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often because we must make estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. Judgments and uncertainties affecting the application of those policies may result in materially different amounts being reported under different conditions or using different assumptions. We believe the accounting policies and estimates most critical in understanding the judgments involved in preparing our financial statements are goodwill and acquired intangible assets.
Recognition of Goodwill and Acquired Intangible Assets - Determining the fair value of goodwill and intangible assets requires management's judgment, the use of significant estimates and assumptions and, in some cases, the utilization of independent valuation experts. The most critical assumptions utilized in this determination are the future cash flow estimates associated with the acquired businesses and the discount rates applied to those cash flow estimates.
Recoverability of Goodwill and Acquired Intangible Assets - As of October 31, 2020, we performed an annual qualitative assessment for three of our four reporting units where we determined there were no indicators of impairment, and it was more likely than not that the fair value of each reporting unit exceeded its carrying amount. The remaining reporting unit, Creative Circle, has had a slower recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. Consequently, we performed a quantitative assessment on the reporting unit and its trademark. This quantitative assessment indicated that, as of October 31, 2020, there was an excess of fair value over the reporting unit's carrying amount and the carrying amount of its trademark. Critical assumptions utilized in this assessment included future cash flows and discount rates. We conducted sensitivity analyses on the discount rate, which we believe is the most significant assumption utilized in our assessment. Holding all other assumptions constant, an increase in the discount rate of 450 basis points would not cause the fair value of the Creative Circle reporting unit to be below its carrying amount, and an increase of 150 basis points would not cause the fair value of the Creative Circle trademark to be below its carrying amount. See Note 2. Summary of Critical and Significant Accounting Policies - Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this report for details on these critical accounting policies and related estimates.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 COMPARED WITH THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019
In this section, we discuss the results of our operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. For a discussion of 2019 compared with the year ended December 31, 2018, please refer to Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for 2019.
Revenues
Revenues for the year were $4.0 billion, an increase of 0.7 percent from 2019, which was achieved despite lower demand from our commercial customers related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our operating performance was driven by the high growth of our federal government business and the growth of our commercial business off trough-level revenues experienced in May of 2020. Revenues from our commercial business, which accounted for 74.6 percent of total revenues, were down 5.7 percent year over year. Revenues from our federal government business, which accounted for 25.4 percent of total revenues, were up 25.8 percent year over year reflecting increased volume on certain existing programs, new contract awards and the contribution of the acquired businesses (mainly from Blackstone Federal, which was acquired in January of this year). The table below shows our revenues by business and by segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in millions):
Commercial Business - Revenues from our Commercial business (Apex and Oxford segments combined) were down 5.7 percent year over year resulting from lower customer demand attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic. Consulting revenues were up 13.5% from 2019, reflecting our increased focus on expanding our high-end consulting offerings. Our predominately commercial IT services divisions (Apex Systems and Oxford Core), which accounted for approximately 86.7 percent of commercial revenues, were down 2.6 percent year over year. Our creative marketing and permanent placement divisions, which accounted for 13.3 percent of commercial revenues were down 21.9 percent year over year.
From an industry perspective, commercial revenues fall into five broad industry verticals: (i) financial services, (ii) consumer and industrials, (iii) healthcare, (iv) technology, media and telecom and (v) business and government services. Four of our five industry verticals showed declines year over year; and financial services, our largest industry vertical (22.7 percent of commercial revenues), was up 12.2 percent.
Federal Government Business - Revenues from our Federal Government business (ECS segment) were up 25.8 percent year over year. The increase was driven by a number of factors, including increased volume on certain existing programs, new contract awards and the contribution from the businesses acquired.
Gross Profit and Gross Margins
The table below shows gross profit and gross margin by business and by segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in millions):
Gross profit is comprised of revenues less costs of services, which consist primarily of compensation for our contract professionals, allowable materials and reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses. Consolidated gross profit was down 3.6 percent year over year on flat revenues. Our consolidated gross margin compressed approximately 120 basis points related to changes in business mix. This included a higher mix of
revenues from the Federal Government business, which carries a lower gross margin than commercial revenues. Additionally, gross margin on Federal Government revenues was lower year over year due to a higher mix of revenues from certain programs under cost reimbursable contracts, which have lower margins than other contract types. Gross margin on commercial revenues was down slightly due to lower revenues from high-margin revenue streams (mainly creative marketing and permanent placement), partially offset by the higher mix of consulting revenues, which carries a higher margin than assignment revenues.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expenses consist primarily of compensation expense for our field operations and corporate staff, rent, information systems, marketing, telecommunications, public company expenses and other general and administrative expenses. SG&A expenses were $727.2 million (18.4 percent of revenues), a year-over-year reduction of $43.1 million and a 120 basis point reduction in SG&A expenses as a percent of revenues. This improvement related to effective expense management and cost containment in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which included lower incentive compensation and travel and entertainment expenses.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets was $51.7 million, up from $51.1 million in 2019. This increase relates to the effects of recently acquired businesses.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $39.7 million, down 25.0 percent from $52.9 million in 2019. This improvement was the result of (i) a reduction in LIBOR, (ii) a 25 basis point reduction in the spread on our credit facility resulting from our debt refinancing in the fourth quarter of 2019, (iii) lower amortization of deferred loan costs and (iv) lower average borrowings outstanding in 2020.
Interest expense was comprised of $25.4 million of interest on the unsecured senior notes, $12.6 million of interest on the credit facility and $1.7 million of deferred loan costs amortization. The weighted-average borrowings outstanding were $1.0 billion and $1.1 billion for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The weighted-average interest rate in 2020 was 3.6 percent, down from 4.3 percent in 2019.
Write-off of Loan Costs
As a result of the 2019 amendment to our senior credit facility and the pay down of borrowings under that facility with the proceeds from the issuance of unsecured senior notes, in 2019 we wrote-off $18.9 million deferred loan costs related to the senior credit facility.
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes was $70.4 million for 2020, up from $62.0 million in 2019. The effective tax rate for the year was 26.0 percent, which was slightly lower than last year.
Net Income
Net income increased $25.6 million year over year or 14.7 percent to $200.3 million for 2020 from $174.7 million in 2019. Net income for 2019 included a charge of $18.9 million ($13.9 million after income taxes) related to a write-off of deferred loan costs on our credit facility resulting from our debt refinancing in the fourth quarter of 2019. Excluding this write-off in the prior year, net income would have been up 6.2 percent, which primarily related to lower SG&A and interest expenses.
ECS Segment Contract Backlog
Contract backlog is a useful measure of potential future revenues for our ECS segment. Contract backlog represents the estimated amount of future revenues to be recognized under awarded contracts including task orders and options. Contract backlog does not include potential value from contract awards that have been protested by competitors until the protest is resolved in our favor. Contract backlog does not include any estimate of future work expected under indefinite delivery, indefinite quantity contracts or U.S. General Services Administration schedules. Contract backlog is segregated into funded contract backlog and negotiated unfunded contract backlog, which together make up total contract backlog.
Funded contract backlog for contracts with U.S. government agencies primarily represents contracts for which funding has been formally awarded less revenues previously recognized on these contracts and does not include the unfunded portion of contracts where funding is incrementally awarded or authorized by the U.S. government even though the contract may call for performance over a number of years. Funded contract backlog for contracts with non-government agencies represents the estimated value of contracts, which may cover multiple future years, less revenues previously recognized on these contracts.
Negotiated unfunded contract backlog represents the estimated future revenues to be earned from negotiated contract awards for which funding has not yet been awarded or authorized and from unexercised priced contract options.
Contract backlog estimates are subject to change and may be affected by the execution of new contracts, the extension or early termination of existing contracts, the non-renewal or completion of current contracts and adjustments to estimates for previously included contracts. Changes in the funded contract backlog are also affected by the funding cycles of the government.
ECS Segment Book-to-Bill Ratio
The book-to-bill ratio for our ECS segment was 1.0 to 1.0 for 2020. The book-to-bill ratio was calculated as the sum of the change in total contract backlog during the period plus revenues for the period, divided by revenues for the period. The contract backlog coverage ratio (backlog at December 31, 2020 divided by trailing 12 months of ECS segment's revenues) was 2.6 to 1.0.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our working capital at December 31, 2020 was $578.2 million, and our cash and cash equivalents were $274.4 million (including $28.7 million held in foreign countries). Our cash flows from operating activities, which benefit from our highly variable cost structure, have been our primary source of liquidity and have been sufficient to fund our working capital and capital expenditure needs. At December 31, 2020, we had full availability under our $250.0 million revolving credit facility. We believe that our cash on hand, expected operating cash flows and availability under our revolving credit facility will be sufficient to fulfill our obligations, working capital requirements and capital expenditures for the next 12 months.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $424.8 million in 2020, compared with $313.2 million in 2019. Net cash provided by operating activities before changes in operating assets and liabilities was $329.5 million, compared with $359.0 million in 2019. Changes in operating assets and liabilities resulted in net cash generation of $95.3 million in 2020, compared with net cash usage of $45.8 million in 2019. The net cash generation in 2020 included the deferral of $85.7 million in federal payroll taxes as provided by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act.
Net cash used in investing activities was $219.0 million in 2020, compared with $149.1 million in 2019. Net cash used in investing activities in 2020 included $186.2 million for acquisitions and $32.6 million in capital expenditures. Cash used in investing activities in 2019 included $116.4 million for acquisitions and $32.7 million in capital expenditures.
Net cash used in financing activities was $29.0 million in 2020, compared with $110.5 million in 2019. Net cash used in financing activities in 2020 consisted primarily of $27.9 million used for repurchases of our common stock. Net cash used in financing activities in 2019 consisted primarily of $83.2 million net pay down of debt, $20.0 million used for repurchases of our common stock and $7.8 million in debt issuance costs related to the issuance of $550.0 million of unsecured senior notes in November 2019 (see details in section below).
Senior Secured Credit Facility - The senior secured credit facility ("Credit Facility") consists of a term B loan and a senior secured revolving credit facility with a maximum borrowing capacity of $250.0 million ("Revolver"). At December 31, 2020, the Company had $490.8 million outstanding under its term B loan, no outstanding borrowings under the Revolver and $4.0 million in undrawn stand-by letters of credit to secure certain obligations. Borrowings under the term B loan bear interest at LIBOR plus 1.75 percent, or the bank’s base rate plus 0.75 percent. Borrowings under the Revolver bear interest at LIBOR plus 1.25 to 2.25 percent, or the bank’s base rate plus 0.25 to 1.25 percent, depending on leverage levels. A commitment fee of 0.20 to 0.35 percent is payable on the undrawn portion of the Revolver. There are no required minimum principal payments on the Credit Facility until maturity, and it is secured by substantially all of the Company's assets and includes various restrictive covenants.
Unsecured Senior Notes - The Company has $550.0 million of unsecured senior notes due in 2028 ("Senior Notes"). The Senior Notes bear interest at 4.625 percent, which is payable in arrears on May 15 and November 15 of each year. The Senior Notes are unsecured obligations and are subordinate to the Company's Credit Facility to the extent of the collateral securing such facility. The Senior Notes also contain certain customary limitations including, among other terms and conditions, the Company's ability to incur additional indebtedness, engage in mergers and acquisitions, transfer or sell assets and make certain distributions.
Commitments and Contingencies - The following table sets forth, on an aggregate basis, the amounts of specified contractual cash obligations required to be paid in the future periods shown (in millions):
_______
(1) Long-term debt obligations include interest calculated based on the rates in effect at December 31, 2020.
(2) Represents the future minimum lease payments for non-cancelable operating leases.
(3) Purchase obligations are non-cancelable job board service agreements and software subscriptions, maintenance and license agreements.
For additional information about these contractual cash obligations, see Notes 4. Leases, 5. Acquisitions and 8. Long-Term Debt, in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Certain acquisitions completed in 2020 contained provisions requiring the Company to pay contingent consideration in cash based on the achievement of certain specified earnings results in 2021 (see Note 5. Acquisitions in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data). At December 31, 2020, the fair value of the contingent consideration liability is $5.0 million and the maximum potential amount is $19.0 million.
We have retention policies for our workers’ compensation liability exposures. The workers' compensation loss reserves are based upon an actuarial report obtained from a third-party and determined based on claims filed and claims incurred but not reported. We account for claims incurred but not yet reported based on estimates derived from historical claims experience and current trends of industry data. Changes in estimates, differences in estimates and actual payments for claims are recognized in the period that the estimates changed or the payments were made. The workers' compensation loss reserves were $2.3 million and $2.4 million, net of anticipated insurance and indemnification recoveries of $10.9 million and $13.8 million, at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We have undrawn stand-by letters of credit outstanding to secure obligations for workers’ compensation claims and other obligations. The undrawn stand-by letters of credit at December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $4.0 million and $3.9 million, respectively.
We have a deferred compensation plan liability of $14.4 million and $11.8 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, which was primarily included in other long-term liabilities. We established a rabbi trust to fund the deferred compensation plan (see Note 15. Fair Value Measurements in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data).
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Accounting Standards Updates
See Note 3. Accounting Standards Update in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for a discussion of new accounting pronouncements.