Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis or Plan of Operation
Forward-Looking Statements
This Report on Form 10-K contains certain statements that are “forward-looking” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (the “Litigation Reform Act”). These forward looking statements and other information are based on our beliefs as well as assumptions made by us using information currently available.
The words “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “will,” “should” and similar expressions, as they relate to us, are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Such statements reflect our current views with respect to future events and are subject to certain risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary materially from those described herein as anticipated, believed, estimated, expected, intended or using other similar expressions.
- 8-
In accordance with the provisions of the Litigation Reform Act, we are making investors aware that such forward-looking statements, because they relate to future events, are by their very nature subject to many important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements contained in this Report on Form 10-K. For example, we may encounter competitive, technological, financial and business challenges making it more difficult than expected to continue to develop and market our products; the market may not accept our existing and future products; we may not be able to retain our customers; we may be unable to retain existing key management personnel; and there may be other material adverse changes in our operations or business. Certain important factors affecting the forward-looking statements made herein also include, but are not limited to (i) continued downward pricing pressures in our targeted markets, (ii) the continued acquisition of our customers by certain of our competitors, and (iii) continued periods of net losses, which could require us to find additional sources of financing to fund operations, implement our financial and business strategies, meet anticipated capital expenditures and fund research and development costs. In addition, assumptions relating to budgeting, marketing, product development and other management decisions are subjective in many respects and thus susceptible to interpretations and periodic revisions based on actual experience and business developments, the impact of which may cause us to alter our marketing, capital expenditure or other budgets, which may in turn affect our financial position and results of operations. For all of these reasons, the reader is cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking statements contained herein, which speak only as of the date hereof. In addition, you should read and carefully consider the Risk Factors discussed in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K. We assume no responsibility to update any forward-looking statements as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise except as required by law.
Overview
On January 31, 2020 (the “Closing Date”), we completed the sale of substantially all of our assets (the “Asset Sale”) for a total purchase price of $7,250,000 pursuant to an Asset Purchase Agreement entered into between us and Mitsubishi Chemical Performance Polymers, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“MCPP”). Prior to the Closing Date, we developed and manufactured advanced polymer materials which provide critical characteristics in the design and development of medical devices. Our biomaterials were marketed and sold to medical device manufacturers who used our advanced polymers in devices designed for treating a broad range of anatomical sites and disease states.
As a result of the Asset Sale, we ceased operating as a developer, manufacturer, marketer and seller of advanced polymers. Subsequent to the Closing Date, we became engaged in efforts to identify an operating company to acquire or merge with through an equity-based exchange transaction that would likely result in a change in control. As our efforts in engaging with an operating company subsequent to the Closing Date has not yet commenced, our activities are subject to significant risks and uncertainties, including the need to raise additional capital if we are unable to identify an operating company desiring to acquire or merge with us.
Fiscal Year
Our fiscal year ends on March 31. Reference in this annual report on Form 10-K to a fiscal year is reference to the fiscal year ended March 31. For example, references to “fiscal 2020” or our “2020 fiscal year” refer to the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 2 to our financial statements. However, certain of our accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by our management, and such judgments are reflected in the amounts reported in our financial statements. In applying these policies, our management uses its judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of estimates. Those estimates are based on our historical experience, terms of existing contracts, our observance of market trends, information provided by our strategic partners and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. Actual results may differ significantly from the estimates contained in our financial statements. Our critical accounting policies are as follows:
● Revenue Recognition. We adopted the Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”) 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” as of April 1, 2018, using the modified retrospective method, and concluded that, consistent with prior reporting, we have two separate revenue streams: (i) product sales, and (ii) royalty and licensing revenues. Results for reporting periods after April 1, 2018 are presented under ASC 606, while prior period amounts are not adjusted and continue to be reported in accordance with legacy accounting guidance under ASC 605, “Revenue Recognition.” The adoption of ASC 606 had no impact upon adoption, to our net income for the year ended March 31, 2019.
ASC 606 defines a five-step process to recognize revenues at the time and in an amount that reflects the consideration expected to be received for the performance obligations that have been provided. ASC 606 defines contracts as written, oral and through customary business practice. Under this definition, the Company considers contracts to be created at the time that an order to purchase product is agreed upon regardless of whether or not there is a written contract or when a contract is entered into for licensing and royalties.
Prior to the Closing Date, we had two separate and distinct performance obligations offered to our customers: a product sales performance obligation and a licensing and royalty performance obligation. These performance obligations were related to separate revenue streams and at no point were they combined into a single transaction.
We generated the majority of our revenue from product sales, and to a lesser extent from fees generated from licensing and royalty arrangements primarily with two customers. Our revenue related to product sales was recognized upon shipment, provided that a purchase order had been received or a contract had been executed, there were no uncertainties regarding customer acceptance, the sales price was fixed or determinable and collection was deemed reasonably assured. If uncertainties regarding customer acceptance existed, we would recognize revenues when those uncertainties were resolved and title had been transferred to the customer. Amounts collected or billed prior to satisfying the above revenue recognition criteria were recorded as deferred revenue. Our revenue related to licensing and royalty arrangements was recognized in accordance with the terms of the arrangements which typically provide for quarterly payment of exclusivity fees and royalties earned on the sale of customer products on a quarterly basis.
As a result of the Asset Sale, we ceased operating as a developer, manufacturer, marketer and seller of advanced polymers subsequent to the Closing Date. As a result, we did not generate revenues for the periods subsequent to January 31, 2020 through the date of filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Subsequent to the Closing Date, we became engaged in efforts to identify an operating company to acquire or merge with through an equity-based exchange transaction that would likely result in a change in control (a “Merger Transaction”). As a result, management has no intention of engaging in revenue generating activity until such time that a Merger Transaction occurs. There can be no assurance that we will engage in a Merger Transaction.
● Accounts Receivable Valuation. We perform various analyses to evaluate accounts receivable balances and record an allowance for bad debts based on the estimated collectability of the accounts such that the amounts reflect estimated net realizable value. Account balances are charged off against the allowance after significant collection efforts have been made and potential for recovery is not considered probable. As of March 31, 2020, we have approximately $63,000 in accounts receivable from 12 customers (the “Retained Accounts Receivable”). The Retained Accounts Receivable balance was a result of product sales made prior to the Closing Date and retained by us pursuant to the terms of the Asset Sale agreements. Subsequent to March 31, 2020, all Retained Accounts Receivable balances were collected.
● Inventory Valuation. Prior to the Closing Date, we value our inventory at the lower of our actual cost or the current estimated market value. We regularly reviewed inventory quantities on hand and inventory commitments with suppliers and recorded a provision for excess and obsolete inventory based primarily on our historical usage for the prior twelve-month period. Although we made every effort to ensure the accuracy of our forecasts of future product demand, any significant unanticipated change in demand or technological developments could have had a significant impact on the value of our inventory and our reported operating results. As a result of management’s intention to engage in no further revenue generating activity, we ceased to maintain or acquire inventory as of the Closing Date of the Asset Sale.
● Long-Lived Assets. Prior to the Closing Date, we evaluated our long-lived assets, which included property and equipment, for impairment as events and circumstances may have indicated that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. We evaluated the realizability of our long-lived assets based primarily on reviews of results of sales of similar assets and independent appraisals. As a result of the indicators of impairment described above, we evaluated the recoverability of our property and equipment as of March 31, 2019 and determined that there existed no impairment of our long-lived assets. As of the Closing Date of the Asset Sale, all long-lived assets were sold and we no longer own or intend to acquire any other long-lived assets.
● Stock-Based Compensation. As a result of the Asset Sale, management and our Board of Directors have decided that no further stock option grants will be made until such time that a merger Transaction can be effected, if ever. Prior to the Closing Date, we made certain assumptions in order to value our stock-based compensation. The valuation of employee stock options is an inherently subjective process, since market values are generally not available for long-term, non-transferable employee stock options. Accordingly, an option pricing model is utilized to derive an estimated fair value. In calculating the estimated fair value of our stock options we use the Black-Scholes pricing model, which requires the consideration of the following six variables for purposes of estimating fair value:
● the stock option exercise price;
● the expected term of the option;
● the grant date price of our common stock, which is issuable upon exercise of the option;
● the expected volatility of our common stock;
● the expected dividends on our common stock (we do not anticipate paying dividends in the foreseeable future); and
● the risk free interest rate for the expected option term.
- 10-
We are also required to estimate the level of pre-vesting award forfeitures expected to occur and record compensation expense only for those awards that are ultimately expected to vest. This requirement applies to all awards that are not yet vested. Due to the exercise of substantially all of our options, we have estimated a zero forfeiture rate. As of March 31, 2020, there were fully vested options exercisable into 160,000 shares of our common stock pursuant to the 2003 Stock Option Plan. As a result of the termination of all of our employees on the Closing Date of the Asset Sale, all options exercisable into 160,000 shares of our common stock were terminated on April 30, 2020 pursuant to the provisions of the 2003 Stock Option Plan.
Results of Operations
As a result of the Asset Sale described above, which closed on January 31, 2020, our sole business operations of developing, manufacturing, marketing and selling of advanced polymers ceased. Accordingly, we have recorded all operations for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2020 and 2019 as discontinued operations. The following separately presents our results of continuing operations, which are composed of costs necessary to operate as a public company; and results of our discontinued operations, composed of revenue and costs of operating the advanced polymer business.
Results of Continuing Operations
Our loss from continuing operations represents those costs necessary to operate a public company. During the fiscal years ended March 31, 2020 and 2019, these costs were approximately $246,000 and $172,000, respectively, an increase of approximately $74,000 or 43.0%. These costs were composed of accounting fees, professional fees, regulatory fees, board of directors’ fees, and director and officer liability insurance premiums.
Results of Discontinued Operations
Given that the Asset Sale closing date was January 31, 2020, the results from discontinued operations for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 represents only 10 months of operating activity as compared to 12 months of operating activity for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2019. Accordingly, the comparative analysis of operating activity for discontinued operations may not be meaningful.
Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2020 vs. March 31, 2019
Revenues
Total revenues from discontinued operations for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 were approximately $2,698,000 as compared with approximately $3,347,000 for the prior year period. Product sales from discontinued operations for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 were approximately $1,839,000 as compared with approximately $2,409,000 for the prior year period. License and royalty fees from discontinued operations for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 were approximately $859,000 as compared with approximately $938,000 for the prior year period. The decrease in total revenues, revenues by product and license and royalty fees is primarily a result of reporting 10 months of operating activity for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 as compared to 12 months of operating activity for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2019. Management did not recognize any adverse trends in revenue generating activity.
Gross Profit
Gross profit on total revenues from discontinued operations for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 was approximately $1,979,000, or 73.4% of total revenues, compared with approximately $2,470,000, or 73.8% of total revenues, for the prior year period. Gross profit dollars for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 decreased as compared to the prior year period as a result of reporting 10 months of operating activity for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 as compared to 12 months of operating activity for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2019. Gross profit as a percentage of total revenues remained relatively stable.
Gross profit on product sales from discontinued operations for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 was approximately $1,120,000, or 60.9% of product sales, compared with approximately $1,532,000, or 63.6% of product sales, for the prior year period. Gross profit dollars for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 decreased as compared to the prior year period as a result of reporting 10 months of operating activity for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 as compared to 12 months of operating activity for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2019. Gross profit as a percentage of total revenues for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 increased slightly as compared to the prior year period.
Research, Development and Regulatory Expenses
Research, development and regulatory expenses of discontinued operations for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 were approximately $314,000 as compared with approximately $345,000 for the prior year period, a decrease of approximately $31,000, or 9.0%. The decrease in research, development and regulatory expenses is primarily a result of reporting 10 months of operating activity for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 as compared to 12 months of operating activity for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2019. Management did not recognize any adverse trends in research, development and regulatory activity.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses of discontinued operations for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 were approximately $1,277,000 as compared with approximately $1,202,000 for the comparable prior year period, an increase of approximately $75,000 or 6.2%. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses is primarily a result of a bonus of approximately $151,000 awarded to our chief executive officer. This increase was offset by the effect of reporting 10 months of operating activity for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 as compared to 12 months of operating activity for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2019. Management did not recognize any adverse trends in selling, general and administrative activity.
Interest Expense
Interest expense of discontinued operations for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 was approximately $398,000 as compared to approximately $417,000 for the comparable prior year period, a decrease of approximately $19,000 or 4.6%. The decrease in interest expense is primarily a result of reporting 10 months of operating activity for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 as compared to 12 months of operating activity for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2019.I
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
As of March 31, 2020, we had cash of approximately $5,538,000, an increase of approximately $5,366,000 when compared with a balance of approximately $172,000 as of March 31, 2019.
During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, we had net cash of approximately $5,333,000 provided by operating activities as compared with net cash of approximately $31,000 used in operating activities for the comparable prior year period. Our uses of cash for operating activities have primarily consisted of professional and consulting fees. As a result of the Asset Sale, we realized a gain of approximately $5,708,000 during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020.
During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, we had net cash of approximately $16,000 used in investing activities as compared to net cash of approximately $88,000 provided by investing activities during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2019.
During the year ended March 31, 2020, we had net cash of approximately $49,000 provided by financing activities due to the issuance of common stock upon the exercise of stock options and warrants which increases were offset by the repayment of $140,000 of principal on our related party promissory notes.
On January 31, 2020 (the “Closing Date”), we completed the sale of substantially all of our assets (the “Asset Sale”) for a total gross purchase price of $7,250,000 pursuant to an Asset Purchase Agreement entered into between us and Mitsubishi Chemical Performance Polymers, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“MCPP”). Prior to the Closing Date, we developed and manufactured advanced polymer materials which provide critical characteristics in the design and development of medical devices. As a result of the Asset Sale, we ceased operating as a developer, manufacturer, marketer and seller of advanced polymers. Subsequent to the Closing Date, we became engaged in efforts to identify potential operating companies interested in merging into us through an equity-based exchange transaction that would likely result in a change in control. As our efforts in engaging with an operating company subsequent to the Closing Date has not resulted in the execution of a definitive agreement to consummate such a transaction, our activities are subject to significant risks and uncertainties, including the need to raise additional capital if we are unable to identify an operating company desiring to acquire or merge with us.
- 12-
Our financial statements have been presented on the basis that we are a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. At March 31, 2020, we recorded our normal business operations as discontinued operations as a result of the previously described Asset Sale. On the Closing Date we received net proceeds from the Asset Sale of approximately $6,100,000. After giving effect to (i) collection of accounts receivable retained as of January 31, 2020, (ii) payment of accounts payable assumed as of January 31, 2020; and (iii) retention of a reasonable amount of cash for anticipated future obligations and operations, our Board of Directors approved a special cash distribution of $0.18 per share. The cash distribution of approximately $5,087,000 was paid on April 23, 2020 to shareholders of record as of April 16, 2020. As a result, we expect our funds will not be sufficient to meet our needs for more than twelve months from the date of issuance of these financial statements. Accordingly, management believes there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Management is seeking to identify an operating company for the purpose of effecting a merger or business combination, or to acquire assets or shares of an entity actively engaged in a business that generates sustained revenues. Although we have investigated certain opportunities to determine whether they would have the potential to add value to us for the benefit of our stockholders, we have not yet entered into any binding arrangements.
We do not intend to restrict our consideration to any particular business or industry segment. Because we have limited resources, the scope and number of suitable candidates to merge with is relatively limited. Because we may participate in a business opportunity with a newly formed firm, a firm that is in the development stage, or a firm that is entering a new phase of growth, we may incur further risk due to the inability of the target’s management to have proven its abilities or effectiveness, or the lack of an established market for the target’s products or services, or the inability to reach profitability in the next few years.
Any business combination or transaction will likely result in a significant issuance of shares and substantial dilution to our present stockholders. As it is expected that the closing of such a transaction will result in a change in control, such transaction is expected to be accounted for as a reverse merger, with the operating company being considered the legal acquiree and accounting acquirer, and we would be considered the legal acquirer and the accounting acquiree. As a result, at and subsequent to closing of any such transaction, the financial statements of the operating company would become our financial statements for all periods presented.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of March 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.