Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis or Plan of Operation
Forward-Looking Statements
This Report on Form 10-K contains certain statements that are “forward-looking” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (the “Litigation Reform Act”). These forward looking statements and other information are based on our beliefs as well as assumptions made by us using information currently available.
The words “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “will,” “should” and similar expressions, as they relate to us, are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Such statements reflect our current views with respect to future events and are subject to certain risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary materially from those described herein as anticipated, believed, estimated, expected, intended or using other similar expressions.
In accordance with the provisions of the Litigation Reform Act, we are making investors aware that such forward-looking statements, because they relate to future events, are by their very nature subject to many important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements contained in this Report on Form 10-K. For example, given the cessation of our operations as a developer, manufacturer, marketer and seller of advanced polymers on January 31, 2020, resulting from the sale of substantially all of our assets to an independent third party, we became engaged in efforts to identify either an (i) operating company to acquire or merge with through an equity-based exchange transaction or (ii) investor interested in purchasing a majority interest in our common stock, whereby either transaction would likely result in a change in control. If we are unable to effect a transaction with an operating company or investor, we may be required to cease all operations, including liquidation through bankruptcy proceedings. For all of these reasons, the reader is cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking statements contained herein, which speak only as of the date hereof. In addition, you should read and carefully consider the Risk Factors discussed in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K. We assume no responsibility to update any forward-looking statements as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise except as required by law.
Overview
On January 31, 2020 (the “Closing Date”), we completed the sale of substantially all of our assets (the “Asset Sale”) for a total purchase price of $7,250,000 pursuant to an Asset Purchase Agreement entered into between us and Mitsubishi Chemical Performance Polymers, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“MCPP”). Prior to the Closing Date, we developed and manufactured advanced polymer materials which provide critical characteristics in the design and development of medical devices. Our biomaterials were marketed and sold to medical device manufacturers who used our advanced polymers in devices designed for treating a broad range of anatomical sites and disease states.
As a result of the Asset Sale, we ceased operating as a developer, manufacturer, marketer and seller of advanced polymers. Subsequent to the Closing Date, we became engaged in efforts to identify an operating company to acquire or merge with through an equity-based exchange transaction that would likely result in a change in control. As our efforts in engaging with an operating company subsequent to the Closing Date has not yet commenced, our activities are subject to significant risks and uncertainties, including the need to raise additional capital if we are unable to identify an operating company desiring to acquire or merge with us.
Management is seeking to identify an operating company and engage in a merger or business combination of some kind, or acquire assets or shares of an entity actively engaged in a business that generates sustained revenues. Although we have investigated certain opportunities to determine whether they would have the potential to add value to us for the benefit of our stockholders, we have not yet entered into any binding arrangements.
We do not intend to restrict our consideration to any particular business or industry segment. Because we have limited resources, the scope and number of suitable candidates to merge with is relatively limited. Because we may participate in a business opportunity with a newly formed firm, a firm that is in the development stage, or a firm that is entering a new phase of growth, we may incur further risk due to the inability of the target’s management to have proven its abilities or effectiveness, or the lack of an established market for the target’s products or services, or the inability to reach profitability in the next few years.
Any business combination or transaction will likely result in a significant issuance of shares and substantial dilution to our present stockholders. As it is expected that the closing of such a transaction will result in a change in control, such transaction is expected to be accounted for as a reverse merger, with the operating company being considered the legal acquiree and accounting acquirer, and we would be considered the legal acquirer and the accounting acquiree. As a result, at and subsequent to closing of any such transaction, the financial statements of the operating company would become our financial statements for all periods presented.
Fiscal Year
Our fiscal year ends on March 31. Reference in this annual report on Form 10-K to a fiscal year is reference to the fiscal year ended March 31. For example, references to “fiscal 2021” or our “2021 fiscal year” refer to the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 3 to our financial statements. However, certain of our accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by our management, and such judgments are reflected in the amounts reported in our financial statements. In applying these policies, our management uses its judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of estimates. Those estimates are based on our historical experience, terms of existing contracts, our observance of market trends, information provided by our strategic partners and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. Actual results may differ significantly from the estimates contained in our financial statements. Our critical accounting policies are as follows:
● Stock-Based Compensation. As a result of the Asset Sale, management and our Board of Directors have decided that no further stock option grants will be made until such time that a merger Transaction can be effected, if ever. Prior to the Closing Date, we made certain assumptions in order to value our stock-based compensation. The valuation of employee stock options is an inherently subjective process, since market values are generally not available for long-term, non-transferable employee stock options. Accordingly, an option pricing model is utilized to derive an estimated fair value. In calculating the estimated fair value of our stock options we use the Black-Scholes pricing model, which requires the consideration of the following six variables for purposes of estimating fair value:
● the stock option exercise price;
● the expected term of the option;
● the grant date price of our common stock, which is issuable upon exercise of the option;
● the expected volatility of our common stock;
● the expected dividends on our common stock (we do not anticipate paying dividends in the foreseeable future); and
● the risk free interest rate for the expected option term.
We are also required to estimate the level of pre-vesting award forfeitures expected to occur and record compensation expense only for those awards that are ultimately expected to vest. This requirement applies to all awards that are not yet vested. Due to the exercise of substantially all of our options, we have estimated a zero forfeiture rate. As of March 31, 2020, there were fully vested options exercisable into 160,000 shares of our common stock pursuant to the 2003 Stock Option Plan. As a result of the termination of all of our employees on the Closing Date of the Asset Sale, all options exercisable into 160,000 shares of our common stock were terminated on April 30, 2020 pursuant to the provisions of the 2003 Stock Option Plan.
Results of Operations
As a result of the Asset Sale described above, which closed on January 31, 2020, our sole business operations of developing, manufacturing, marketing and selling of advanced polymers ceased. Accordingly, we have recorded all operations for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 as discontinued operations. We did not have discontinued operations for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 The following presents our results of continuing operations for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 as compared to the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, which are composed of costs necessary to operate as a public company. Since we did not have discontinued operations for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, there is no basis for comparison to discontinued operations for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, which discontinued operations were composed of revenues and costs in the operation of the former advanced polymer business.
Results of Continuing Operations
During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, our operating expenses were approximately $326,000 as compared with $246,000 for the comparable prior year period, an increase of approximately $80,000, or 32.5%. Our operating expenses and loss from continuing operations represents those costs necessary to operate a public company, which are primarily composed of management consultant fees, accounting fees, professional fees, regulatory fees, and director and officer liability insurance premiums. The increase in these operating costs is primarily a result of consulting fees paid to our chief executive officer, who was engaged and paid as a consultant for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 as compared to being engaged and paid as an employee for the ten month period ended January 31, 2020.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
As of March 31, 2020, we had cash of approximately $128,000, a decrease of approximately $5,410,000 when compared with a balance of approximately $5,538,000 as of March 31, 2020.
During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, we had net cash of approximately $323,000 used in operating activities. Our cash flows used in operating activities is primarily a result of our loss from continuing operations of approximately $326,000 and payment of a net obligation of customer advances of approximately $69,000, which were offset by collections on accounts receivable of approximately $63,000. During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 we had net cash of approximately $5,333,000 provided by operating activities. The increase in net cash provided by operating activities is primarily a result of the realized gain of approximately $5,708,000 offset by a loss from discontinued operations of approximately $10,000. In addition, the net cash provided by operating activities included approximately $605,000 in collection of accounts receivable which were offset by the payment of accounts payable and accrued expenses in the approximate amount of $764,000.
There was no cash used in or provided by investing activities during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, we had net cash of approximately $16,000 used in investing activities.
During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, we had net cash of approximately $5,087,000 used in financing activities as a result of the cash distribution of approximately $5,087,000 on April 23, 2020 to our stockholders of record as of April 16, 2020. During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, we had net cash of approximately $49,000 provided by financing activities due to the issuance of common stock upon the exercise of stock options and warrants which increases were offset by the repayment of $140,000 of principal on our related party promissory notes.
On January 31, 2020 (the “Closing Date”), we completed the sale of substantially all of our assets (the “Asset Sale”) for a total gross purchase price of $7,250,000 pursuant to an Asset Purchase Agreement entered into between us and Mitsubishi Chemical Performance Polymers, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“MCPP”). Prior to the Closing Date, we developed and manufactured advanced polymer materials which provide critical characteristics in the design and development of medical devices. As a result of the Asset Sale, we ceased operating as a developer, manufacturer, marketer and seller of advanced polymers. Subsequent to the Closing Date, we became engaged in efforts to identify potential operating companies interested in merging into us through an equity-based exchange transaction that would likely result in a change in control. As our efforts in engaging with an operating company subsequent to the Closing Date has not resulted in the execution of a definitive agreement to consummate such a transaction, our activities are subject to significant risks and uncertainties, including the need to raise additional capital if we are unable to identify an operating company desiring to acquire or merge with us.
Our financial statements have been presented on the basis that we are a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. At March 31, 2020, we recorded our normal business operations as discontinued operations as a result of the previously described Asset Sale. We did not have discontinued operations during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. On the Closing Date we received net proceeds from the Asset Sale of approximately $6,100,000. After giving effect to (i) collection of accounts receivable retained as of January 31, 2020, (ii) payment of accounts payable assumed as of January 31, 2020; and (iii) retention of a reasonable amount of cash for anticipated future obligations and operations, our Board of Directors approved a special cash distribution of $0.18 per share. The cash distribution of approximately $5,087,000 was paid on April 23, 2020 to stockholders of record as of April 16, 2020. As a result, we expect our funds will not be sufficient to meet our needs for more than twelve months from the date of issuance of these financial statements. Accordingly, management believes there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Management is seeking to identify an operating company for the purpose of effecting a merger or business combination, or to acquire assets or shares of an entity actively engaged in a business that generates sustained revenues. Although we have investigated certain opportunities to determine whether they would have the potential to add value to us for the benefit of our stockholders, we have not yet entered into any binding arrangements.
We do not intend to restrict our consideration to any particular business or industry segment. Because we have limited resources, the scope and number of suitable candidates to merge with is relatively limited. Because we may participate in a business opportunity with a newly formed firm, a firm that is in the development stage, or a firm that is entering a new phase of growth, we may incur further risk due to the inability of the target’s management to have proven its abilities or effectiveness, or the lack of an established market for the target’s products or services, or the inability to reach profitability in the next few years.
Any business combination or transaction will likely result in a significant issuance of shares and substantial dilution to our present stockholders. As it is expected that the closing of such a transaction will result in a change in control, such transaction is expected to be accounted for as a reverse merger, with the operating company being considered the legal acquiree and accounting acquirer, and we would be considered the legal acquirer and the accounting acquiree. As a result, at and subsequent to closing of any such transaction, the financial statements of the operating company would become our financial statements for all periods presented.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of March 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.