ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our historical consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included in this Annual Report. In addition to historical information, some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a commercial pharmaceutical company offering differentiated products to patients. Our commercial portfolio of branded products focuses on three areas: neurology, hospital, and pain and inflammation. We have built our commercial portfolio through a combination of increased opportunities with existing products, as well as through the acquisition or licensing of additional approved products. Our primary marketed products are:
INDOCIN® (indomethacin) Suppositories
A suppository form and oral solution of indomethacin, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), approved for:
• Moderate to severe rheumatoid arthritis including acute flares of chronic disease
• Moderate to severe ankylosing spondylitis
INDOCIN® (indomethacin) Oral Suspension
• Moderate to severe osteoarthritis
• Acute painful shoulder (bursitis and/or tendinitis)
• Acute gouty arthritis
CAMBIA® (diclofenac potassium for oral solution)
A prescription medicine used to treat migraine attacks in adults. CAMBIA does not prevent or lessen the number of migraines one has, and it is not for other types of headaches. It contains diclofenac potassium, a non-steriodal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID).
SPRIX® (ketorolac tromethamine) Nasal Spray
A prescription NSAID indicated in adult patients for the short term (up to five days) management of moderate to moderately severe pain that requires analgesia at the opioid level.
Zipsor® (diclofenac potassium) Liquid filled capsules
A prescription NSAID used for relief of mild-to-moderate pain in adults (18 years of age and older)
Other commercially available products include OXAYDO® (oxycodone HCI, USP) tablets for oral use only -CII.
The following are our full year 2020 and recent 2021 key events:
On January 10, 2020, we completed the sale of Gralise® (gabapentin) to Golf Acquiror LLC, an affiliate to Alvogen, Inc. (Alvogen), for cash proceeds of $130.3 million. The total value included $75.0 million in cash at closing, with the balance receivable as 75% of Alvogen’s first $70.0 million of Gralise net sales after the closing (consideration receivable). Alvogen also paid for certain inventories relating to Gralise. On June 3, 2020, we entered into an agreement with Alvogen to settle the remaining balance of $39.7 million in consideration receivable, whereby we reduced the consideration receivable by $0.9 million and Alvogen paid $38.8 million in cash. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a gain of $126.7 million on the sale of Gralise.
On February 13, 2020, we completed the sale of our remaining rights, title and interest in and to the NUCYNTA franchise to Collegium Pharmaceutical, Inc. (Collegium) for $375.0 million, less royalties, in cash at closing. Collegium assumed certain contracts, liabilities and obligations relating to the NUCYNTA products, including those related to manufacturing and supply, post-market commitments and clinical development costs. Collegium also paid for certain inventories relating to the products. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a loss of $14.7 million on the sale of NUCYNTA.
On February 13, 2020, we repaid in full our outstanding aggregate principal amount of senior secured notes (Senior Notes) pursuant to a Note Purchase Agreement dated March 12, 2015 (Note Purchase Agreement) and all subsequent amendments to the Note Purchase Agreement. As a result, for the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a loss on debt extinguishment of the Senior Notes of $8.2 million composed of the $4.9 million prepayment fee and $3.3 million of unamortized debt discount and debt issuance costs.
On February 19, 2020, we entered into separate, privately negotiated agreements with a limited number of holders of the 2021 Notes and 2024 Notes to repurchase approximately $188.0 million aggregate principal amount of the outstanding 2021 Notes and 2024 Notes. On April 8, 2020, we announced the completion of its cash tender offers, initiated on March 11, 2020, in which we settled approximately $76.7 million aggregate principal amount of the remaining $77.0 million of combined outstanding 2021 Notes and 2024 Notes. As a result of both transactions, for the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a $47.9 million loss on debt extinguishment of the Convertible Notes, which represented the difference between the carrying value and the fair value of the Convertible Notes just prior to the repurchase plus transaction costs. We also recognized reacquisition of $19.6 million in additional paid-in capital related to the equity component of the Convertible Notes based on the excess of the fair value of total considerations provided against the fair value of the Convertible Notes just prior to the repurchase.
In May 2020, we sold our Collegium warrants investment for an aggregate purchase price of $6.0 million to Armistice Capital Mater Fund, Ltd. As a result, we derecognized the remaining carrying value of $6.5 million of the financial asset and recognized a net loss of approximately $0.5 million, recorded within other gain (loss) on the Condensed Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
On May 20, 2020, we completed a Merger (the Zyla Merger) with Zyla Life Sciences (Zyla) pursuant to an Agreement and Plan of Merger (Merger Agreement), dated as of March 16, 2020. Upon consummation of the Zyla Merger, each issued and outstanding share of Zyla common stock converted into 2.5 shares of Assertio Holding’s common stock (the Exchange
Ratio), and each outstanding option or warrant to purchase Zyla common stock converted into the right to purchase shares of Assertio’s common stock. Pursuant to the Zyla Merger, we acquired INDOCIN Products, SPRIX, and OXAYDO, as well as ZORVOLEX® and VIVLODEX® (which are collectively known as the SOLUMATRIX products).
Subsequent to the Zyla Merger in May 2020, we began implementing reorganization plans of our workforce and other restructuring activities to realize the synergies of the Zyla Merger and to re-align resources to strategic areas and drive growth. The reorganization plan primarily focused on reduction of staff at our headquarters offices (Zyla Merger Reorganization). As a result, $5.6 million of severance and benefits costs, which included $1.0 million of stock-based compensation expense associated with equity modifications for certain executives, and $0.2 million of other exit costs were recognized as restructuring charges, related to the Zyla Merger, during the year ended December 31, 2020. We do not expect to incur significant costs related to the Zyla Merger Reorganization beyond 2020.
In September 2020, we terminated our Second Amended and Restated Nano-Reformulated Compound License Agreement (the “iCeutica License”), with iCeutica Inc. and iCeutica Pty Ltd. (collectively, “iCeutica”). The iCeutica License allowed us to utilize certain technology and intellectual property related to iCeutica’s SOLUMATRIX technology and certain other rights of iCeutica. The intellectual property related to SOLUMATRIX technology will no longer be used by us and we will no longer manufacture products using SOLUMATRIX technology.
On December 15, 2020, we announced a restructuring plan designed to substantially reduce our operating footprint through the reduction of our workforce (the December 2020 Plan). We believe the December 2020 Plan will allow us to adapt to the current market environment by reducing costs and better positioning us to continue to provide our differentiated products to patients and maximize shareholder value. The reorganization plan included a reduction of staff at our headquarters office and remote sales force. As a result, $9.6 million of severance and benefits costs and $1.6 million of other exit costs for the write off of fixed assets no longer in use and the early termination of fleet leases, were recognized as restructuring charges, related to the December 2020 Plan, during the year ended December 31, 2020. We expect to substantially complete the workforce reduction by the end of the first quarter of 2021.
On February 9, 2021, we completed a registered direct offering with certain institutional investors and accredited investors to sell 22,600,000 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $0.62 per share. The gross proceeds from the
offering were approximately $14.0 million. After placement agent fees and other offering expenses payable by us, we received net proceeds of approximately $13.1 million. On February 12, 2021, we completed a registered direct offering with certain institutional investors and accredited investors to sell 35,000,000 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $0.98 per share. The gross proceeds from the offering were approximately $34.3 million. After placement agent fees and other offering expenses payable by us, we received net proceeds of approximately $32.2 million. We intend to use proceeds from both offerings for general corporate purposes, including general working capital.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND SIGNIFICANT ESTIMATES
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) regulations for annual reporting. Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form our basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe the following critical accounting policies reflect the more significant judgements and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
A more detailed discussion of our critical accounting policies may be found in “Note 1. Organization and Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report, and the impact and risks associated with our accounting policies are discussed throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K and in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition
Under Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASC 606), we recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of the promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable we will collect the consideration that we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services transferred to our customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation, when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied. We assess the term of the contract based upon the contractual period in which we have enforceable rights and obligations.
Variable consideration arising from sales or usage-based royalties, promised in exchange for a license of the our Intellectual Property, is recognized at the later of (i) when the subsequent product sales occur or (ii) the performance obligation, to which some or all of the sales-based royalty has been allocated, has been satisfied.
We recognize a contract asset relating to our conditional right to consideration for completed performance obligations. Accounts receivable are recorded when the right to consideration becomes unconditional. A contract liability is recorded for payments received in advance of the related performance obligation being satisfied under the contract.
Product Sales
We sell commercial products to wholesale distributors and specialty pharmacies. Product sales revenue is recognized when title has transferred to the customer and the customer has assumed the risks and rewards of ownership, which typically occurs on delivery to the customer. Our performance obligation is to deliver product to the customer, and the performance obligation is completed upon delivery. The transaction price consists of a fixed invoice price and variable product sales allowances, which include rebates, discounts and returns. Product sales revenues are recorded net of applicable sales tax and reserves for these product sales allowances (gross-to-net sales allowances). Receivables related to product sales are typically collected one to two months after delivery.
Product sales allowances consist primarily of provisions for product returns, wholesaler and pharmacy discounts, prompt pay discounts, patient discount programs, chargebacks, managed care rebates, and government rebates. We consider products sales allowances to be variable consideration and estimate and recognize product sales allowances as a reduction of product sales in the same period the related revenue is recognized. Product sales allowances are based on actual or estimated amounts owed on the related sales. These estimates take into consideration the terms of our agreements with customers, historical product returns, rebates or discounts taken, estimated levels of inventory in the distribution channel, the shelf life of the product and specific known market events, such as competitive pricing and new product introductions. We use the most likely method in estimating product sales allowances. If actual future results vary from our estimates, we may need to adjust the estimates, which could have an effect on product sales and earnings in the period of adjustment. Our product sales allowances include:
Product Return - We allow customers to return product for credit with respect to that product within 6 months before and up to 12 months after the product expiration date. We estimate product returns and associated credit on Zipsor, CAMBIA, NUCYNTA, Gralise, Lazanda and products acquired from Zyla, INDOCIN Products, ZORVOLEX, VIVLODEX and OXAYDO. Estimates for returns are based on historical return trends by product or by return trends of similar products, taking into consideration the shelf life of the product at the time of shipment, shipment and prescription trends, estimated distribution channel inventory levels and consideration of the introduction of competitive products. We do not assume financial responsibility for returns of NUCYNTA previously sold by Janssen Pharma or Lazanda product previously sold by Archimedes Pharma US Inc. Under the Commercialization Agreement with Collegium for NUCYNTA, the divestiture of Lazanda to Slán and the divestiture of Gralise to Alvogen, we are only financially responsible for product returns for products that were sold by us, which are identified by specific lot numbers. Shelf lives, from the respective manufacture dates, for our products range from 24 months to 48 months.
Because of the shelf life of our products and its return policy of issuing credits with respect to product that is returned within six months before and up to 12 months after its product expiration date, there may be a significant period of time between when the product is shipped and when we issue credit on a returned product. Accordingly, we may have to adjust these estimates, which could have an effect on product sales and earnings in the period of adjustments.
Wholesaler and Pharmacy Discounts - We offer contractually determined discounts to certain wholesale distributors and specialty pharmacies that purchase directly from it. These discounts are either taken off invoice at the time of shipment or paid to the customer on a quarterly basis one to two months after the quarter in which product was shipped to the customer.
Prompt Pay Discounts - We offer cash discounts to its customers (generally 2% of the sales price) as an incentive for prompt payment. Based on our experience, we expect our customers to comply with the payment terms to earn the cash discount.
Patient Discount Programs - We offer patient discount co-pay assistance programs in which patients receive certain discounts off their prescriptions at participating retail and specialty pharmacies. The discounts are reimbursed by us approximately one month after the prescriptions subject to the discount are filled.
Medicaid Rebates - We participate in Medicaid rebate programs, which provide assistance to certain low income patients based on each individual state’s guidelines regarding eligibility and services. Under the Medicaid rebate programs, we pay a rebate to each participating state, generally two to three months after the quarter in which prescriptions subject to the rebate are filled.
Chargebacks - We provide discounts to authorized users of the Federal Supply Schedule (FSS) of the General Services Administration under an FSS contract with the Department of Veterans Affairs and 340B eligible entities. These federal 340B entities purchase products from the wholesale distributors at a discounted price, and the wholesale distributors then charge back to us the difference between the current retail price and the price the federal entity paid for the product.
Managed Care Rebates - We offer discounts under contracts with certain managed care providers. We generally pay managed care rebates one to three months after the quarter in which prescriptions subject to the rebate are filled.
Medicare Part D Coverage Gap Rebates - We participate in the Medicare Part D Coverage Gap Discount Program under which it provides rebates on prescriptions that fall within the “donut hole” coverage gap. We generally pay Medicare Part D Coverage Gap rebates two to three months after the quarter in which prescriptions subject to the rebate are filled.
We believe our estimates related to gross-to-net sales adjustments for wholesaler and pharmacy fees and discounts, prompt payment discounts, patient discount programs and other government chargebacks do not have a high degree of estimation complexity or uncertainty as the related amounts are settled within a relatively short period of time. We believe that
our estimated product return allowances, managed care rebates and Medicaid rebates are judgmental and are subject to change based on our experience and certain quantitative and qualitative factors.
Acquisitions
We account for acquired businesses using the acquisition method of accounting under ASC 805, Business Combinations (ASC 805), which requires that assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recorded at date of acquisition at their respective fair values. The fair value of the consideration paid, including contingent consideration, is assigned to the underlying net assets of the acquired business based on their respective fair values. Any excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
Significant judgments are used in determining the estimated fair values assigned to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed and in determining estimates of useful lives of long-lived assets. Fair value determinations and useful life estimates are based on, among other factors, estimates of expected future net cash flows, estimates of appropriate discount rates used to present value expected future net cash flows, the assessment of each asset’s life cycle, and the impact of competitive trends on each asset’s life cycle and other factors. These judgments can materially impact the estimates used to allocate acquisition date fair values to assets acquired and liabilities assumed and the resulting timing and amounts charged to, or recognized in current and future operating results. For these and other reasons, actual results may vary significantly from estimated results.
Any changes in the fair value of contingent consideration resulting from a change in the underlying inputs is recognized in operating expenses until the contingent consideration arrangement is settled. Changes in the fair value of contingent consideration resulting from the passage of time are recorded within interest expense until the contingent consideration is settled.
If the acquired net assets do not constitute a business under the acquisition method of accounting, the transaction is accounted for as an asset acquisition and no goodwill is recognized. In an asset acquisition, the amount allocated to acquired in-process research and development (IPR&D) with no alternative future use is charged to expense at the acquisition date.
On May 20, 2020, we completed the Zyla Merger, which was accounted under ASC 805. See “Note 2. Acquisitions” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
We evaluate long-lived assets, including property and equipment and acquired intangible assets consisting of product rights, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. An impairment loss would be recognized when estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition are less than its carrying amount. The impairment loss is calculated as the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value. Estimating future cash flows and fair value related to an intangible asset involves significant estimates and assumptions. If our assumptions are not correct, there could be an impairment loss or, in the case of a change in the estimated useful life of the asset, a change in amortization expense.
As of December 31, 2020, we determined there were indicators of impairment present related to the declining revenues due to the adverse impact of COVID-19 on our business as well as unfavorable changes in product payor mix, resulting in our announcement of a restructuring plan. These factors contributed to higher operating losses and cash used by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year. In addition, during the fourth quarter of 2020, our market capitalization declined from approximately $72.0 million as of September 30, 2020 to $38.0 million as of December 31, 2020. As a result of these recent events, we determined indicators of impairment were present and, accordingly, performed a test for recoverability of long-lived assets to be held and used pursuant to ASC 360, Impairment Testing: Long Lived Assets Classified as Held and Used. After grouping the long-lived assets, including purchased developed technology and trademarks, at the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows that are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities, we estimated the future net undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated from the use of the long-lived asset group and its eventual disposition. We then compared the estimated undiscounted cash flows to the carrying amount of the long-lived asset group. Based on this test, we determined that the estimated undiscounted cash flows were in excess of the carrying amount of the long-lived asset group and, accordingly, the long-lived asset group is fully recoverable.
As of December 31, 2019, we determined there were indicators of impairment present related to the NUCYNTA intangible asset based on current unfavorable commercial outlook resulting in a downward revision to the expected future cash flows from the NUCYNTA franchise, which made the carrying amount not recoverable. As a result, we recognized an
impairment loss of $189.8 million on the NUCYNTA intangible asset to reduce the carrying value of $564.8 million to its estimated fair value of $375.0 million at December 31, 2019. The evaluation of fair value was determined under ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement (ASC 820) as the price that would be received to sell the asset in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date of December 31, 2019. The fair value was based on a combination of an income approach and the observable transaction price from Collegium’s purchase of the NUCYNTA franchise in February 2020. The income approach consisted of the present value of future cash flows that a market participant would expect to receive from holding the asset in its current use. This included assumptions of a market participant’s view such as, but not limited to, future product net sales, related operating expenses, competitive landscape, and a discount rate to reflect the risk inherent in the future cash flows. The use of alternative estimates and assumptions could increase or decrease the estimated fair value of the assets and could potentially impact the company's results of operations.
Goodwill
Under the purchase method of accounting pursuant to ASC 805, Goodwill is calculated as the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Goodwill is recognized within other long-term assets, and is not amortized but subject to an annual review for impairment. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level at least annually or when a triggering event occurs that could indicate a potential impairment by assessing qualitative factors or performing a quantitative analysis in determining whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of net assets are below their carrying amounts. A reporting unit is the same as, or one level below, an operating segment. Our operations are currently comprised of a single reporting unit.
As of December 31, 2020, we determined, due to declining revenues and a decrease in our market capitalization, that it is more likely than not that the fair value of net assets are below their carrying amounts and, therefore, we performed the required goodwill impairment test under ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other. First, we estimated the fair value of the reporting unit to which goodwill is assigned using a combination of the income and market approach. We then compared the carrying amount of the reporting unit, including goodwill, to its fair value. Since the fair value was less than the reporting unit’s carrying amount, we calculated the goodwill impairment as the difference between the reporting unit’s fair value and the carrying amount, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill. Accordingly, we recorded an impairment charge of $17.4 million, recognized within total costs and expenses in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income, to impair the carrying amount of goodwill as of December 31, 2020.
Income Taxes
We record the estimated future tax effects of temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and amounts reported in our accompanying consolidated balance sheets, as well as operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. We follow the guidelines set forth in the applicable accounting guidance regarding the recoverability of any tax assets recorded on the consolidated balance sheet and provide any necessary allowances as required. Determining necessary allowances requires us to make assessments about the timing of future events, including the probability of expected future taxable income and available tax planning opportunities. When we determine that it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized in the future, the deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance. The valuation allowance is sufficient to reduce the deferred tax assets to the amount that we determine is more likely than not to be realized. At this time, we have recorded a full valuation allowance against the net deferred tax assets.
We are subject to examination of our income tax returns by various tax authorities on a periodic basis. We regularly assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from such examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes. We have applied the provisions of the applicable accounting guidance on accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, which requires application of a more-likely-than-not threshold to the recognition and de-recognition of uncertain tax positions. If the recognition threshold is met, the applicable accounting guidance permits us to recognize a tax benefit measured at the largest amount of tax benefit that, in our judgment, is more than 50 percent likely to be realized upon settlement. It further requires that a change in judgment related to the expected ultimate resolution of uncertain tax positions be recognized in earnings in the period of such change.
We recognize tax liabilities in accordance with ASC Topic 740, Tax Provisions and we adjust these liabilities when our judgment changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available. Due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from our current estimate of the tax liabilities. These differences will be reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense in the period in which they are determined.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table reflects our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Revenues
The following table reflects total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
(1)Products acquired in connection with Zyla Merger represent product sales, net for the period May 20, 2020 through December 31, 2020.
(2)Includes product sales for Gralise, which was divested in January 2020; product sales adjustments for previously divested products NUCYNTA and Lazanda; and, product sales for non-promoted products OXAYDO and SOLUMATRIX, which were acquired from Zyla in May 2020.
Product sales, net
For the year ended December 31, 2020, product sales primarily consisted of sales from INDOCIN Products, CAMBIA, Zipsor and SPRIX. We began shipping and recognizing product sales for INDOCIN Products, SPRIX, and non-promoted products, OXAYDO and SOLUMATRIX, upon the Zyla Merger on May 20, 2020.
CAMBIA net product sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $4.1 million as compared to the same period in 2019 primarily due to lower volume and unfavorable payor mix.
Zipsor net product sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $0.8 million as compared to the same period in 2019 primarily due to the effect of prior year results being negatively impacted by short-dated product sales returns offset by increased patient discount programs in the current year.
Product sales for our non-promoted products, SOLUMATRIX and OXAYDO, acquired upon the Zyla Merger were $7.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. In September 2020, we terminated our iCeutica License and as a result will no longer manufacture products using SOLUMATRIX technology.
We completed the sale of Gralise to Alvogen on January 10, 2020, and therefore ceased recognizing product sales related to Gralise effective on the transaction close date. Product sales related to Gralise for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $0.3 million and relate to sales reserve estimate adjustments related to sales recognized in prior periods. Product sales of Gralise for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $63.1 million.
We ceased recording product sales and related costs for NUCYNTA after commencing the Commercialization Agreement with Collegium on January 8, 2018. Product sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 reflect adjustments made for previously recorded sales reserve estimates. In addition, we ceased recording revenues and related costs associated with Lazanda after it divested the product to Slán in November 2017. Product sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 reflect adjustments made for previously recorded sales reserve estimates.
Commercialization Agreement Revenue, net
The following table reflects commercialization agreement revenue, net for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
(1) The contract liability amortization represents the recognition of revenue related to the warrants received in November 2018 which are being recognized over the term of the contract.
Beginning January 1, 2019, royalties from Collegium were deemed to be variable consideration subject to the sales-based royalty exception related to intellectual property. Other components of revenue recognized by us from the Commercialization Agreement include the amortization of contract assets arising from the transfer of inventory to Collegium net of contract liabilities arising from the warrants and prepayments received, and variable consideration revenue for reimbursement of certain shared costs. On February 13, 2020, we completed the sale of our remaining rights, title and interest in and to the NUCYNTA franchise to Collegium.
Royalties & Milestone Revenue
In November 2010, we entered into a license agreement with Tribute Pharmaceuticals Canada Ltd. (now Nuvo Pharmaceuticals, Inc.) granting it the rights to commercially market CAMBIA in Canada. We receive royalties on net sales as well as certain one-time contingent milestone payments. We recognized revenue related to CAMBIA in Canada of $1.5 million and $2.1 million, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019. The revenue recognized in 2019 included a $0.3 million one-time amendment fee to support the continued collaboration with our partner in Canada following their acquisition and a $0.5 million milestone payment. We may receive additional one-time contingent milestone payments upon the achievement of scaling twelve-month cumulative sales targets and certain development milestones in the future.
Cost of Sales (excluding amortization of intangible assets)
Cost of sales consists of costs of the active pharmaceutical ingredient, contract manufacturing and packaging costs, royalties payable to third parties, inventory write downs, a product quality testing, internal employee costs related to the manufacturing process, distribution costs and shipping costs related to our product sales. Cost of sales excludes the amortization of intangible assets described below under “Amortization of Intangible Assets.” Fair value of inventories acquired with the Zyla Merger include an inventory step-up within the value of inventories. The inventory step-up value is amortized, as the related inventory is sold, and included in cost of sales.
Cost of sales increased from $9.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 to $19.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase during 2020 was primarily due to Zyla-related product costs of sales, partially offset by lower cost of sales as a result of the Gralise and NUCYNTA divestitures during the year ended December 31, 2020. The cost of sales for 2020 included $4.1 million of amortization of inventory step-up related to Zyla acquired inventories sold.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development (R&D) expenses include salaries, clinical trial costs, consultant fees, supplies, manufacturing costs for research and development programs and allocations of corporate costs. It is difficult to predict the scope and magnitude of future research and development expenses for our product candidates in research and development, as it is difficult to determine the nature, timing and extent of clinical trials and studies and the FDA’s requirements for a particular drug. As potential products proceed through the development process, each step is typically more extensive, and therefore more expensive, than the previous step. Therefore, success in development generally results in increasing expenditures until actual product approval.
Research and development expenses decreased $5.9 million from $10.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to lower R&D headcount and related costs, and lower clinical and manufacturing research and development costs due to the divestiture of Gralise and NUCYNTA.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses primarily consist of personnel, contract personnel, marketing and promotion expenses associated with our commercial products, personnel expenses to support our administrative and operating activities, facility costs, and professional expenses, such as legal fees. In addition, the change in fair value of our contingent consideration liability, which is remeasured quarterly based on the likelihood of the contingent earn-out payments, is recognized within SG&A.
SG&A expenses decreased $4.5 million from $108.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $104.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the prior year’s $10.1 million loss on disposal of equipment, higher spend on sales and marketing program-related costs, and higher costs for opioid-related litigation, investigations, and regulations as compared to 2020. These higher costs were partially offset during the current year by increased transaction related costs, including costs associated with the Zyla Merger.
Pursuant to the Zyla Merger, we assumed a contingent consideration liability for the obligation to make future royalties to Iroko based upon annual INDOCIN Product net sales over $20.0 million. The fair value of the contingent consideration liability is remeasured quarterly based on the likelihood of the contingent earn-out payments. The change in fair value of the contingent consideration for the period from May 20, 2020 through December 31, 2020 was $1.5 million.
In connection with the Multidistrict Opioid Litigation, the State Opioid Litigation and the Opioid-Related Requests and Subpoenas described in “Note 12. Commitments and Contingencies - Legal Matters” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we expect to incur additional costs and expenses related to Assertio Therapeutics’ ongoing opioid-related litigation and investigations, which may be significant and which may increase in future periods.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
The following table reflects amortization of intangible assets for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the February 2020 divestiture of our rights, title and interest to the NUCYNTA franchise of products to Collegium. As a result, we derecognized the remaining carrying value of the NUCYNTA product rights and ceased recognizing related amortization.
In connection with the Zyla Merger, we acquired identified intangible assets comprised of definite-lived product rights for INDOCIN Products, SPRIX, and OXAYDO which are being amortized on a straight-line basis over their respective estimated useful lives. The respective fair values were determined to be $154.1 million, $39.0 million, and $0.3 million, as of the Zyla Merger date of May 20, 2020.
Loss on Impairment of Goodwill and Intangible Asset
Goodwill was tested for impairment in accordance with ASC 350 as of December 31, 2020, and we determined the fair value of our reporting unit was less than its carrying amount by more than the book value of goodwill of $17.4 million. Accordingly, we recognized a loss on impairment of goodwill of $17.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized an impairment loss of $189.8 million on the NUCYNTA intangible asset to reduce the carrying value of $564.8 million to its estimated fair value of $375.0 million as of December 31, 2019.
Restructuring Charges
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, restructuring charges and one-time termination costs incurred were $17.8 million and $3.9 million, respectively.
On December 15, 2020, we announced the December 2020 Plan. The reorganization plan included a reduction of staff at our headquarters office and remote sales force. As a result, $9.6 million of severance and benefits costs and $1.6 million of other exit costs for the write off of fixed assets no longer in use and the early termination of fleet leases, were recognized as restructuring charges, related to the December 2020 Plan, during the year ended December 31, 2020. We expect to substantially complete the workforce reduction by the end of the first quarter of 2021.
Subsequent to the Zyla Merger in May 2020, we began implementing reorganization plans of our workforce and other restructuring activities to realize the synergies of the Zyla Merger and to re-align resources to strategic areas and drive growth. The reorganization plan primarily focused on reduction of staff at our headquarters offices (Zyla Merger Reorganization). As a result, $5.6 million of severance and benefits costs, which included $1.0 million of stock-based compensation expense associated with equity modifications for certain executives, and $0.2 million of other exit costs were recognized as restructuring charges, related to the Zyla Merger, during the year ended December 31, 2020. We do not expect to incur significant costs related to the Zyla Merger Reorganization beyond 2020.
In April 2020, we executed a limited reduction to our sales force due to the impact of COVID-19 on our ability to see in-person providers who prescribe our products. As a result, $0.6 million of severance and benefits as well as other costs was recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020. This initiative was completed during 2020.
In November 2019, we announced an acceleration of cost-saving initiatives that included a decision to discontinue our relationship with our contract sales organization, a reduction in the use of certain outside vendors and consultants, and the reorganization of certain functions resulting in a reduction of staff at our headquarters office and remote positions during the fourth quarter of 2019 (the 2019 Plan). As a result, $0.2 million and $3.9 million of severance and benefits costs for the reduction of staff were recognized as restructuring charges, related to the 2019 Plan, during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The 2019 cost-saving initiative was substantially complete as of December 31, 2020.
Other Income (Expense), net
The following table reflects Other income (expense), net for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Other net income increased $64.7 million from $28.1 million in other expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $36.6 million in other income for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the current year gain on the sale of Gralise. The current year Gralise gain was partially offset by the 2020 loss on debt extinguishment as a result of the repurchase and tender offer of the 2021 and 2024 Notes and the settlement of the Senior Notes. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a loss on the sale of NUCYNTA.
The following table reflects interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
The decrease in interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to the settlement of the remaining principal of our Senior Notes and the repurchase of a portion of our 2021 and 2014 Notes during the year ended December 31, 2020. Interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2020 included our 13% Senior Secured Notes due 2024 acquired with the Zyla Merger.
Income Tax Benefit
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized an income tax benefit of $17.4 million, an effective tax rate of 38.16% on income from continuing operations. The difference between the income tax provision of $17.4 million and the tax at the statutory rate of 21.0% on current year operations is principally due to the carryback of our 2020 federal net operating loss (“NOL”) to our 2018 and 2019 tax years under the NOL carryback provisions enacted as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act in early 2020 and the current year reversal of valuation allowance related to the utilization of our deferred tax assets (“DTA”) to offset the deferred tax liabilities (“DTL”) of Zyla recorded through acquisition accounting.
During 2019, we recognized an income tax benefit of $5.3 million, an effective tax rate of 2.37% on income from continuing operations. The difference between the income tax provision of $5.3 million and the tax at the statutory rate of 21.0% is principally due to the change in the valuation allowance, the release of FIN 48 liabilities based on lapsing of statute of limitation, and tax benefits being recorded as a result of intraperiod tax allocation.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Historically and through December 31, 2020, we have financed our operations and business development efforts primarily from product sales, private and public sales of equity securities, including convertible debt securities, the proceeds of secured borrowings, the sale of rights to future royalties and milestones, upfront license, milestone and fees from collaborative and license partners.
On February 9, 2021, we completed a registered direct offering with certain institutional investors and accredited investors to sell 22,600,000 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $0.62 per share. The gross proceeds from the offering were approximately $14.0 million. After placement agent fees and other offering expenses payable by us, we received net proceeds of approximately $13.1 million. On February 12, 2021, we completed a registered direct offering with certain institutional investors and accredited investors to sell 35,000,000 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $0.98 per share. The gross proceeds from the offering were approximately $34.3 million. After placement agent fees and other offering expenses payable by us, we received net proceeds of approximately $32.2 million. We intend to use proceeds from both offerings for general corporate purposes, including general working capital.
On July 31, 2020, we voluntarily redeemed $10.0 million of aggregate principal plus accrued interest on our Secured Notes due 2024, which was assumed as part of the Zyla Merger. Additionally upon the close of the Zyla Merger, we assumed and immediately paid off a $3.0 million promissory note and a $10.0 million credit agreement.
In May 2020, we sold our Collegium warrants investment for an aggregate purchase price of $6.0 million to Armistice Capital Mater Fund, Ltd.
On February 13, 2020, we completed the sale of our remaining rights, title and interest in and to the NUCYNTA franchise to Collegium Pharmaceutical, Inc. (Collegium) for $375.0 million, less royalties, in cash at closing.
On January 10, 2020, we completed the sale of Gralise® (gabapentin) to Golf Acquiror LLC, an affiliate to Alvogen, Inc. (Alvogen), for cash proceeds of $130.3 million. The total value included $75.0 million in cash at closing, with the balance receivable as 75% of Alvogen’s first $70.0 million of Gralise net sales after the closing (consideration receivable). Alvogen also paid for certain inventories relating to Gralise. On June 3, 2020, we entered into an agreement with Alvogen to settle the remaining balance of $39.7 million in consideration receivable, whereby we reduced the consideration receivable by $0.9 million and Alvogen paid $38.8 million in cash.
In April 2015, we issued $575.0 million aggregate principal amount of senior secured notes (Senior Notes) for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $562.0 million. In connection with the divestiture of Gralise and NUCYNTA we used proceeds to repay the outstanding principal of $162.5 million as of December 31, 2019 and as a result we had repaid in full all outstanding indebtedness, and terminated all commitments and obligations, under its Note Purchase Agreement as of March 31, 2020. In connection with the termination of the Note Purchase Agreement, we were released from all security interests, liens and encumbrances under the Note Purchase Agreement. We were in compliance with our covenants with respect to the Senior Notes through the period of the effective payoff on February 13, 2020.
In September 2014, we issued $345.0 million aggregate principal amount of convertible notes due 2021 (the 2021 Notes) resulting in net proceeds to us of $334.2 million. In August 2019, we exchanged $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2021 Notes for a combination of (a) its new $120.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.00% Convertible Senior Notes due August 15, 2024 (the 2024 Notes), (b) an aggregate cash payment of $30.0 million, and (c) an aggregate of 15.8 million shares of our common stock. We did not receive any cash proceeds from the issuance of the 2024 Notes or the issuance of the shares of our common stock. On February 19, 2020, we utilized proceeds from the sale of Gralise and NUCYNTA to repurchase approximately $188.0 million aggregate principal amount of 2021 Notes and 2024 Notes. On March 11, 2020, we initiated a tender offer to repurchase any and all of our remaining $77.0 million of combined outstanding 2021 Notes and 2024 Notes. On April 8, 2020, upon close of the tender offer, we repurchased substantially all of the remaining outstanding $77.0 million aggregate principal amount of 2021 Notes and 2024 Notes, with only $0.3 million of 2021 Notes remaining as of December 31, 2020.
We may incur operating losses in future years. We believe that our existing cash will be sufficient to fund our operations for the next twelve months from the date of this filing. We base this expectation on our current operating plan, which may change as a result of many factors.
Our cash needs may vary materially from our current expectations because of numerous factors, including:
•acquisitions or licenses of complementary businesses, products, technologies or companies;
•sales of our marketed products;
•expenditures related to our commercialization of our products;
•milestone and royalty revenue we receive under our collaborative development arrangements;
•interest and principal payments on our current and future indebtedness;
•financial terms of definitive license agreements or other commercial agreements we may enter into
•changes in the focus and direction of our business strategy and/or research and development programs;
•potential expenses relating to ongoing litigation matters, including relating to Assertio Therapeutics’ former drug Glumetza and prior opioid product franchise, for which we have not accrued any reserves due to an inability to estimate the magnitude and/or probability of such expenses; and,
•effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations.
The inability to raise any additional capital that may be required to fund our future operations or product acquisitions and strategic transactions which we may pursue could have a material adverse effect on our company.
The following table summarizes our cash flow activities (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities was $65.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to cash provided by operating activities of $90.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in cash flow from operating activities in 2020 was primarily due to the sale of Gralise and NUCYNTA at the beginning of the year combined with cash used for working capital post the Zyla merger. Additionally, cash flow from operating activities in 2019 included receipt of $32.0 million from the Purdue settlement in January 2019.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities was $512.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to cash used for investing of $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash flow from investing activities in 2020 was primarily due to the $369.0 million and $130.3 million in cash consideration received for the sales of NUCYNTA and Gralise, respectively. Net cash provided by investing activities during the 2020 also included $7.6 million of cash acquired with the Zyla Merger and $6.0 million of proceeds from the sale of investments.
Cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to purchases and maturities of marketable securities.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities was $468.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 and $157.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash used in financing activities during 2020 was primarily due to the repurchase of $264.7 million of our outstanding 2021 Notes and 2024 Notes, the settlement of $171.8 million of our Senior Notes. Additionally upon the Zyla Merger, we assumed and immediately paid off a $3.0 million promissory note and a $10.0 million credit agreement.
Contractual Obligations
We are a smaller reporting company, as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act, and therefore are not required to provide additional information on our contractual obligations and contingent liabilities.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
RECENTLY ADOPTED ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
See “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplemental Data - Note 1. Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” for additional information on recent accounting pronouncements.