Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following information should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying Notes included below in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Business Overview
Astrotech Corporation (Nasdaq: ASTC) (“Astrotech,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” or “our”), a Delaware corporation organized in 1984, is a mass spectrometry company that launches, manages, and commercializes scalable companies based on its innovative core technology through its wholly-owned subsidiaries:
•
Astrotech Technologies, Inc. (“ATI”) owns and licenses the intellectual property related to the Astrotech Mass Spectrometer Technology™ (the “AMS Technology”).
•
1st Detect Corporation (“1st Detect”) is a manufacturer of explosives and narcotics trace detectors developed for use at airports, cargo and other secured facilities, and borders worldwide. 1st Detect holds an exclusive AMS Technology license from ATI for air passenger and cargo security applications.
•
AgLAB, Inc. (“AgLAB”) is developing a series of mass spectrometers for use in the hemp and cannabis market with initial focus on optimizing yields in the extraction and distillation process. AgLAB holds an exclusive AMS Technology license from ATI for agriculture applications.
•
BreathTech Corporation (“BreathTech”) is developing a breath analysis tool to screen for volatile organic compound (“VOC”) metabolites found in a person’s breath that could indicate they may have an infection, including COVID-19 or pneumonia. BreathTech holds an exclusive AMS Technology license from ATI for breath analysis applications.
Our Business Units
Astrotech Technologies, Inc.
ATI owns and licenses the AMS Technology, the platform mass spectrometry technology originally developed by 1st Detect. In contrast, the AMS Technology has been designed to be inexpensive, small, and easy to use. Unlike other technologies, the AMS Technology works under ultra-high vacuum, which eliminates competing molecules, yielding higher resolution and fewer false alarms. The intellectual property includes 28 granted patents and two additional patents in process along with extensive trade secrets. With a number of diverse market opportunities for the core technology, ATI is structured to license the intellectual property for different fields of use. ATI currently licenses the AMS Technology to three wholly-owned subsidiaries of Astrotech on an exclusive basis, including to 1st Detect for use in the security and detection market, to AgLAB for use in the agriculture market, and to BreathTech for use inbreath analysis.
1st Detect Corporation
1st Detect, a licensee of ATI for the security and detection market, has developed the TRACER 1000™, the world’s first mass spectrometer (“MS”) based explosives trace detector (“ETD”) certified by the European Civil Aviation Conference (“ECAC”), designed to replace the ETDs used at airports, cargo and other secured facilities, and borders worldwide. The Company believes that ETD customers are unsatisfied with the currently deployed ETD technology, which is driven by ion mobility spectrometry (“IMS”). The Company believes that IMS-based ETDs are fraught with false positives, as they often misidentify personal care products and other common household chemicals as explosives, causing facility shutdowns, unnecessary delays, frustration, and significant wasted security resources. In addition, there are hundreds of different types of explosives, but IMS-based ETDs have a very limited threat detection library reserved only for those several explosives of largest concern. Adding additional compounds to the detection library of an IMS-based ETD fundamentally reduces the instrument’s performance, further increasing the likelihood of false alarms. In contrast, adding additional compounds does not degrade the TRACER 1000’s detection capabilities, as it has a virtually unlimited and expandable threat library.
In order to sell the TRACER 1000 to airport and cargo security customers in the European Union, ECAC certification is required. Certain other countries also accept ECAC certification. We received ECAC certification for the TRACER 1000 on February 21, 2019. We are now taking orders from airports and cargo facilities outside of the U.S. that accept ECAC certification.
In the United States, the Company is working with the U.S Transportation Security Administration (“TSA”) towards air cargo certification. On March 27, 2018, the Company announced that the TRACER 1000 was accepted into TSA’s Air Cargo Screening Technology Qualification Test (“ACSQT”) and, on April 4, 2018, the Company announced that the TRACER 1000 was beginning testing with TSA for passenger screening at airports. On November 14, 2019, the Company announced that the TRACER 1000 had been selected by the TSA’s Innovation Task Force to conduct live checkpoint screening at Miami International Airport. With similar protocols as ECAC testing, the Company has received valuable feedback from all programs. Following ECAC certification and the Company's early traction within the cargo market, testing for cargo security continued with the TSA. With the COVID-19 pandemic, all testing within the TSA was put on hold; however, cargo testing resumed during the summer of 2020, and the Company subsequently announced on September 9, 2020 that the TRACER 1000 passed the non-detection testing portion of the TSA’s ACSQT. TSA cargo detection testing is ongoing and is the next and final step
to be listed on the Air Cargo Screening Technology List (“ACSTL”) as an “approved” device. If approved, the TRACER 1000 will be approved for cargo sales in the United States.
Finally, on October 28, 2020, the Company announced that it had surpassed $1.0 million in purchase orders for the TRACER 1000 and an additional $1.0 million in future service and support commitments, also announcing DHL (Deutsche Post AG) as its largest flagship customer.
AgLAB Inc.
AgLAB, an exclusive licensee of ATI for the agriculture market, has developed the AgLAB-1000™ series of mass spectrometers for use in the hemp and cannabis market with initial focus on optimizing yields in the extraction and distillation process. The AgLAB product line is a derivative of the Company’s core AMS Technology. The AMS Technology provides a significant competitive advantage due to its small size, rugged design, quick analysis, ease of use, and affordability.
BreathTech Corporation
BreathTech is developing the BreathTest-1000™, a breath analysis tool to screen for VOC metabolites found in a person’s breath that could indicate they may have an infection, including COVID-19 or pneumonia. While vaccines have been deployed to prevent the transmission of COVID-19, only a small fraction of the world has been vaccinated and new variants continue to pose a significant and evolving threat. New tools to aid in the battle against COVID-19 remain of the utmost importance to help defeat the disease, and BreathTech, in conjunction with the Cleveland Clinic, are at the forefront of developing a quick and easy device to help aid in the further spread of the disease.
Development of the BreathTest-1000 follows the Company’s results in pre-clinical trials for the BreathDetect-1000™, a rapid self-serve breathalyzer that was designed to detect bacterial infections in the respiratory tract, including pneumonia. The pre-clinical trials were conducted in collaboration with UT Health San Antonio in 2017.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic.
We are subject to risks and uncertainties as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business is uncertain and difficult to predict, as the disease and the responses that we, other businesses, and governments are taking continue to evolve. Furthermore, capital markets and economies worldwide have also been negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and it remains possible that it could cause a prolonged global economic recession. Policymakers around the globe have responded with fiscal policy actions to support the economy as a whole. The magnitude and overall effectiveness of these actions have been somewhat positive, but continuing actions remain uncertain and pose some degree of risk.
To date, we have seen delays with respect to the TSA certification process and parts of our supply chain as a result of COVID-19. In addition, although passenger demand for air travel has recently rebounded to a certain extent, the overall recovery of the airline industry and ancillary services remains highly uncertain and is dependent upon, among other things, the number of cases declining around the globe, public health impacts of new COVID-19 variants, the continued administration of the vaccine to unvaccinated populations, and the duration of immunity granted by the current vaccine.
It is possible that the continued spread of COVID-19 could cause further disruption in our supply chain; cause delay, or limit the ability of customers to perform, including in making timely payments to the Company; cause further delay in regulatory certification testing of our instruments; impact investment performance; and cause other unpredictable events. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may in the future materially impact our financial condition, liquidity, or results of operations is uncertain.
Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”)
On March 27, 2020, the United States government enacted the CARES Act. The CARES Act is an emergency economic stimulus package that includes spending and tax breaks to strengthen the United States economy and fund a nationwide effort to curtail the effect of COVID-19. While the CARES Act provides sweeping tax changes in response to the COVID-19
pandemic, some of the more significant provisions which impacted the Company’s financial statements included removal of certain limitations on utilization of net operating losses and increasing the ability to deduct interest expense, as well as amending certain provisions of the previously enacted Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. The Company also qualified for certain relief measures such as the Paycheck Protection Program Promissory Note and Agreement (the “PPP Promissory Note”), alternative minimum tax credit refunds, employee retention credit, and payroll tax deferral.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Estimates and assumptions are reviewed periodically. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that directly affect the amounts reported in the Company’s consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Management continuously evaluates its critical accounting policies and estimates, including those used in evaluating the recoverability of long-lived assets, recognition of revenue, valuation of inventory, and the recognition and measurement of loss contingencies, if any.
Revenue Recognition
Astrotech recognizes revenue employing the generally accepted revenue recognition methodologies described under the provisions of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606 “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (“Topic 606”), which we adopted in fiscal year 2019. The methodology used is based on contract type and how products and services are provided. The guidelines of Topic 606 establish a five-step process to govern the recognition and reporting of revenue from contracts with customers. The five steps are: (i) identify the contract with a customer, (ii) identify the performance obligations within the contract, (iii) determine the transaction price, (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations within the contract, and (v) recognize revenue when or as the performance obligations are satisfied.
An additional factor is reasonable assurance of collectability. This necessitates deferral of all or a portion of revenue recognition until collection. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, we had two material revenue sources that comprised substantially all of our $334 thousand in revenue. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, we recognized revenue from one material customer for a total of $488 thousand.
We disaggregate revenue by reporting segment to depict the nature of revenue in a manner consistent with our business operations and to be consistent with other communications and public filings. Refer to Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements for additional details of revenues by reporting segment.
Contract Assets and Liabilities. We enter into contracts to sell products and provide services, and we recognize contract assets and liabilities that arise from these transactions. We recognize revenue and corresponding accounts receivable according to Topic 606 and, at times, recognize revenue in advance of the time when contracts give us the right to invoice a customer. We may also receive consideration, per the terms of a contract, from customers prior to transferring goods to the customer. We record customer deposits as deferred revenue. Additionally, we may receive payments, most typically for service and warranty contracts, at the onset of the contract and before services have been performed. In such instances, we record a deferred revenue liability. We recognize these contract liabilities as sales after all revenue recognition criteria are met.
Practical Expedients. In cases where we are responsible for shipping after the customer has obtained control of the goods, we have elected to treat the shipping activities as fulfillment activities rather than as a separate performance obligation. Additionally, we have elected to capitalize the cost to obtain a contract only if the period of amortization would be longer than
one year. We only give consideration to whether a customer agreement has a financing component if the period of time between transfer of goods and services and customer payment is greater than one year.
Product Sales. We recognize revenue from sales of products upon shipment or delivery when control of the product transfers to the customer, depending on the terms of each sale, and when collection is probable. In the circumstance where terms of a product sale include subjective customer acceptance criteria, revenue is deferred until we have achieved the acceptance criteria unless the customer acceptance criteria are perfunctory or inconsequential. We generally offer customers payment terms of less than one year.
Freight. We record shipping and handling fees that we charge to our customers as revenue and related costs as cost of revenue.
Multiple Performance Obligations. Certain agreements with customers include the sale of equipment involving multiple elements in cases where obligations in a contract are distinct and thus require separation into multiple performance obligations, revenue recognition guidance requires that contract consideration be allocated to each distinct performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. The value allocated to each performance obligation is then recognized as revenue when the revenue recognition criteria for each distinct promise or bundle of promises has been met.
The standalone selling price for each performance obligation is an amount that depicts the amount of consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring the good or service. When there is only one performance obligation associated with a contract, the entire amount of consideration is attributed to that obligation. When a contract contains multiple performance obligations the standalone selling price is first estimated using the observable price, which is generally a list price net of applicable discount or the price used to sell the good or service in similar circumstances. In circumstances when a selling price is not directly observable, we will estimate the standalone selling price using information available to us, including our market assessment and expected cost, plus margin.
The timetable for fulfilment of each of the distinct performance obligations can range from completion in a short amount of time and entirely within a single reporting period to completion over several reporting periods. The timing of revenue recognition for each performance obligation may be dependent upon several milestones, including physical delivery of equipment, completion of site acceptance test, and in the case of after-market consumables and service deliverables, the passage of time.
Foreign Currency
Our international operations are subject to certain opportunities and risks, including from foreign currency fluctuations and governmental actions. During fiscal year 2021, we conducted business in ten countries. We closely monitor our operations in each country in which we do business and seek to adopt appropriate strategies that are responsive to changing economic and political environments. We currently conduct business in the U.S. dollar and the Euro. Weaknesses in one currency in which we do business are often offset by strengths in the other currency. Revenues, costs, and expenses are translated at the applicable rate on the date of the transaction. Translation gains and losses, if any, are calculated on accounts receivable or accounts payable outstanding at the rate applicable at the end of the period. We include gains and losses resulting from foreign currency transactions in income, while we exclude those resulting from translation of financial statements from income and include them as a component of accumulated other comprehensive loss when applicable. Transaction gains and losses, which were included in our consolidated statement of operations, amounted to a gain of approximately $3 thousand for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 and a loss of approximately $10 thousand for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020.
Warranty Provision
Astrotech offers its customers warranties on the products that it sells. These warranties typically provide for repairs and maintenance of the products if problems arise during a specified time period after original shipment. Concurrent with the sale of products, we record a provision for estimated warranty expenses with a corresponding increase in cost of goods sold. We periodically adjust this provision based on historical experience and anticipated expenses. We charge actual expenses of repairs under warranty, including parts and labor, to this provision when incurred. The current obligation for warranty provision is included in accrued expenses and other liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets, whose activity for each of the two fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 is summarized in the following table:
Research and Development
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development costs are used to improve system functionality, streamline and simplify the user experience, and extend our capabilities into customer-defined, application-specific opportunities. Research and development expenses for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 were $2.7 million and $3.4 million, respectively. This decrease was primarily attributable to a reduction in compensation and related expenses.
Net Loss per Common Share
Basic net loss per common share is calculated by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period. Diluted net loss per common share is the same as basic net loss per common share as the potential dilutive shares are considered to be anti-dilutive (see Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements).
Cash and Cash Equivalents
We consider short-term investments with original maturities of three months or less to be cash equivalents. Cash equivalents are comprised primarily of operating cash accounts, money market investments, and certificates of deposit.
Accounts Receivable
The carrying value of our accounts receivable, net of an allowance for doubtful accounts, represents their estimated net realizable value. Astrotech estimates an allowance for doubtful accounts based on type of customer, age of outstanding receivable, historical collection trends, and existing economic conditions. If events or changes in circumstances indicate that a specific receivable balance may be unrealizable, further consideration is given to the collectability of those balances, and the allowance is adjusted accordingly. Receivable balances deemed uncollectible are written off against the allowance. We anticipate collecting all unreserved receivables within one year. As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, there was no allowance for doubtful accounts deemed necessary.
Inventory
We compute inventory cost on a first-in, first-out basis, and inventory is valued at the lower-of-cost or net realizable value. The valuation of inventory also requires us to estimate obsolete and excess inventory as well as inventory that is not of saleable quality.
Property and Equipment, net
Property and equipment are stated at cost, net of depreciation and amortization. All furniture, fixtures, and equipment are depreciated using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the respective assets, which is generally five years. Purchased software is typically depreciated over three years. Leasehold improvements are amortized over the shorter of the useful life of the improvement or the term of the lease. Repairs and maintenance are expensed when incurred.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We continuously evaluate our long-lived assets for impairment to assess whether the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Our evaluation is based on an assessment of potential indicators of impairment, such as an adverse change in the business climate that could affect the value of an asset, current or forecasted operating or cash flow losses that demonstrate continuing losses associated with the use of an asset, and a current expectation that, more likely than not, an asset will be disposed of before the end of its previously estimated useful life. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell. Recoverability of long-lived assets is dependent on a number of conditions, including uncertainty about future events and demand for our services. Due to the termination of our corporate office lease in August 2021, we recorded an impairment of long-lived assets of $173 thousand for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, which is included in disposal of corporate lease in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. There was no impairment of long-lived assets recognized during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Astrotech’s financial instruments consist of cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, accounts receivable, accounts payable, and accrued liabilities. Our management believes the carrying amounts of these assets and liabilities approximates their fair value. For more information about our accounting policies surrounding fair value investments, see Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements.
Available-for-Sale Investments
Investments that are designated as available-for-sale are reported at fair value, with unrealized gains and losses recorded in accumulated other comprehensive loss. We determine the cost of investments sold based on a first-in, first-out cost basis at the individual security level. We also consider specific adverse conditions related to the financial health of, and the business outlook for, the investee, which may include industry and sector performance, changes in technology, operational and financing cash flow factors, and changes in the investee’s credit rating. We record other than temporary impairments on marketable equity securities and marketable equity method investments in gains (losses) on equity investments, net of previously recorded gains (losses). For more information on investments, see Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements.
Operating Leases
We adopted Accounting Standards Update No. 2016-02, “Leases (Topic 842)” (ASU 2016-02) effective July 1, 2019. ASU 2016-02 requires that we determine, at the inception of an arrangement, whether the arrangement is or contains a lease, based on the unique facts and circumstances present. Operating lease assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and operating lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and operating lease liabilities are recognized at the commencement date of the lease based upon the present value of lease payments over the lease term. When determining the lease term, we include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain, at inception, that we will exercise that option. The interest rate implicit in lease contracts is typically not readily determinable; accordingly, we use our incremental borrowing rate, which is the rate that would be incurred to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment, based upon the information available at the commencement date. The lease payments used to determine our operating lease assets may include lease incentives, stated rent increases and escalation clauses linked to rates of inflation, when determinable, and are recognized in determining our ROU assets. Our operating leases are reflected in the operating lease, right-of-use asset; lease liabilities, current; and lease liabilities, non-current in our consolidated balance sheets.
Lease expense for minimum lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. As a result of our adoption of ASU 2016-02, we no longer recognize deferred rent on the consolidated balance sheet. Short-term leases, defined as leases that have a lease term of 12 months or less at the commencement date, are excluded from this treatment and are recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. Variable lease payments are amounts owed by us to a lessor that are not fixed, such as reimbursement for common area maintenance costs for our facility lease, and are expensed when incurred.
Financing leases, formerly referred to as capitalized leases, are treated similarly to operating leases except that the asset subject to the lease is included in the appropriate fixed asset category, rather than recorded as a right-of-use asset, and depreciated over its estimated useful life, or lease term, if shorter. For more information on Leases, see Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based awards to employees based on the fair value of the award on the grant date. The fair value of stock options is estimated using the expected dividend yields of our stock, the expected volatility of the stock, the expected length of time the options remain outstanding, and the risk-free interest rates. Changes in one or more of these factors may significantly affect the estimated fair value of the stock options. We recognize forfeitures as they occur. The fair value of awards that are likely to meet goals, if any, are recorded as an expense over the vesting period. For more information on share-based compensation, see Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the liability method, whereby deferred tax asset or liability account balances are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and the tax bases of assets and liabilities using current tax laws and rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in the period that includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance is established when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Preferred Stock
We have issued Series D convertible preferred stock. Series D Preferred Shares are convertible to common stock on a one-to-one basis. The Preferred D are not callable by the Company. The holders of the preferred stock are entitled to receive, and we shall pay, dividends on shares equal to and in the same form as dividends actually paid on shares of the common stock when, and if, such dividends are paid on shares of common stock. No other dividends are paid on the preferred shares. Preferred shares have no voting rights. Upon liquidation, dissolution, or winding-up of the Company, whether voluntary or involuntary, the preferred shares have preference over common stock. The holder of Series D Preferred Shares has the option to convert said shares to common stock at the holder’s discretion.
The holders of the preferred stock have agreed with the Company that they will not convert the preferred stock until such time as the 2021 Certificate Amendment is accepted for filing with the state of Delaware.
Treasury Stock
The Company records treasury stock at the cost to acquire it and includes treasury stock as a component of stockholders’ equity. During fiscal year 2021, we sold all treasury stock held by the Company.
Accounting Pronouncements
In December 2019, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2019-12, “Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes” (“ASU 2019-12”), which removes certain exceptions related to the approach for intra-period tax allocation, the methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period, and the recognition of deferred tax liabilities for outside basis differences. ASU 2019-12 also amends other aspects of the guidance to help simplify and promote consistent application of GAAP. ASU No. 2019-12 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020 (for Astrotech, the fiscal year ending June 30, 2022), and interim periods within those fiscal years. ASU 2019-12 is not expected to have a material impact on our financial statements.
In May 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-04, "Earnings Per Share (Topic 260), Debt-Modifications and Extinguishments (Subtopic 470-50), Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718), and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)" (“ASU 2021-04”), which provides authoritative guidance for the accounting for modifications or exchanges of freestanding equity-classified written call options (for example, warrants) that remain equity classified after modification or exchange. ASU 2021-04 provides that for an entity that presents earnings per share in accordance with Topic 260, the effects of a modification or an exchange of a freestanding equity-classified written call option that is recognized as a dividend should be an adjustment to net income (or net loss) in the basic earnings per share calculation. The amended guidance becomes mandatorily effective for all entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years, and should be applied prospectively to modifications or exchanges occurring on or after the effective date. While we do not expect the adoption of ASU 2021-04 to materially impact our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures because we do not currently anticipate modifications to our outstanding equity-classified written call options, the impact on our consolidated financial statements and disclosures will depend on the facts and circumstances of any specific future transactions.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended June 30, 2021 and 2020
Selected financial data for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 of our operations are as follows:
Revenue - Total revenue decreased by $154 thousand, or 32%, to $334 thousand for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, compared to $488 thousand for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. Substantially all of the fiscal year 2021 and 2020 revenue was from the sales of our TRACER 1000 units to DHL (Deutsche Post AG). The decrease in revenue was caused by pandemic-related delays in the delivery of certain microchips used in the production of our TRACER 1000 systems. Even though production has resumed, we continue to see impacts to the supply chain from the microchip shortages.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Profit - Cost of revenue is comprised of labor, materials, shipping, warranty reserve, and overhead allocation. Gross profit is comprised of revenue less cost of revenue. Cost of revenue decreased $151 thousand, or 34%, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. Gross profit decreased $3 thousand and gross margin increased 3% during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. We expect that gross margin will continue to improve as we increase production and benefit from associated volume discounts, and as we further refine our technology.
Operating Expenses - Our operating expenses decreased $207 thousand, or 3%, during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. Significant changes to operating expenses include the following:
•
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses - Our selling, general and administrative expenses were consistent for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase in legal expenses related to our ongoing derivative litigation was partially offset by a decrease in office rent and related expenses associated with the former corporate office. In addition, due to COVID-19, our expenses related to travel and conferences also declined.
•
Research and Development Expenses - Research and development expenses decreased $745 thousand, or 22%, for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. This decrease is mainly due to a decrease in headcount as we continue to shift our focus from research and development and toward commercialization of our products.
•
Disposal of long-lived assets increased $513 thousand due to the termination of our corporate office lease and the disposal of the leasehold improvement assets and right-of-use assets and lease liabilities associated with that lease. As a result of this termination, our net cash savings over the remainder of the lease was estimated to be approximately $870 thousand.
Interest and other (expense), net - Interest expense for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $235 thousand, compared to interest expense of $197 thousand for the year ended June 30, 2020. This change was driven by interest expense on a term note to the Company by our CEO executed in February 2020.
Gain from extinguishment of PPP loan - Gain from extinguishment of PPP loan was $542 thousand for the year ended June 30, 2021 due to receiving full forgiveness of our PPP Promissory Note from the Small Business Admission (“SBA”) in April 2021.
Income Taxes - Our income tax benefit did not change for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020.
FINANCIAL CONDITION, CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY
Consolidated Balance Sheet
Total assets for the year ended June 30, 2021 were $65.6 million compared to total assets of $5.9 million as of the end of fiscal year 2020. The following table sets forth the significant components of the consolidated balance sheet as of June 30, 2021, compared with June 30, 2020:
Current assets - Current assets increased $60.4 million as of June 30, 2021, compared to June 30, 2020, as a result of cash raised through a series of equity offerings. Current assets also increased due to purchases of inventory needed to build our TRACER 1000 systems.
Property and equipment, net - Property and equipment increased $164 thousand as of June 30, 2021, compared to June 30, 2020 due to leasehold improvement assets and equipment purchases associated with our new research and development facility in Austin.
Assets held for disposal, net - Assets held for disposal decreased $237 thousand during fiscal year 2021 as these were fixed assets that were disposed of in relation to the termination of our corporate office lease in Austin.
Operating leases, right-of-use asset - Operating leases, right-of-use asset decreased $602 thousand in fiscal year 2021 due to the termination of our lease in Austin and the expiration of our lease in Webster.
Current liabilities - Current liabilities decreased $139 thousand as of June 30, 2021, compared to June 30, 2020, as increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses were offset by decreases in term note payable related to our PPP Promissory Note forgiveness and lease liabilities related to the termination of our office leases in Austin and Webster.
Other long-term liabilities - Other long-term liabilities decreased $740 thousand for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to June 30, 2020 due to the same decreases in term note payable and lease liabilities stated above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following is a summary of the change in our cash and cash equivalents:
Cash and Cash Equivalents
At June 30, 2021, we held cash and cash equivalents of $35.9 million and our net working capital was approximately $60.9 million. At June 30, 2020, we held cash and cash equivalents of $3.3 million and our net working capital was approximately $0.3 million. Cash and cash equivalents increased by approximately $32.6 million during the year ended June 30, 2021 due to the series of equity offerings as mentioned above.
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $7.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to cash used in operating activities of $6.9 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase in cash used in operating activities was primarily due to an increase in inventory as we purchased raw materials to ramp up production with our contract manufacturer Sanmina, partially to fulfill outstanding purchase orders for our TRACER 1000.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended June 30, 2021 increased $27.6 million, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase in cash used in investing activities was due to purchasing short-term available-for-sale investments in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2021.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $67.6 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to cash provided by financing activities of $8.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase in cash provided by financing activities was the result of the sale of common stock through equity offerings.
Debt
As of June 30, 2021, the Company held debt through term notes payable totaling $2.5 million. Our PPP Promissory Note of $542 thousand was forgiven by the SBA in April 2021.
Liquidity
Our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 indicated substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern. During the fiscal year 2021, we successfully completed several public offerings of our common stock, raising net proceeds of approximately $67.6 million. We believe this solves our liquidity issue, and we no longer have substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We will continue to evaluate opportunities to further strengthen our liquidity, including selling the Company or a portion thereof, licensing some of our technology, raising additional funds through the capital markets, debt financing, equity financing, merging, or engaging in a strategic partnership.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of June 30, 2021.