ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020. The results of operations and other information included herein are not necessarily indicative of the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows that may be expected in future periods. This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including matters discussed in this Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements relating to our plans, estimates and beliefs that involve important risks and uncertainties. See "Safe Harbor Statements Under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act" and Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors for a discussion of uncertainties and assumptions that may cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in the forward-looking statements.
This section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K can be found in Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The financial condition and results of operations discussed in this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations are those of Astec Industries, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries, collectively, the "Company," "Astec," "we," "our" or "us."
Business Overview
We design, engineer, manufacture and market equipment and components used primarily in road building and related construction activities, as well as certain other products. Our products are used in each phase of road building, from quarrying and crushing the aggregate to application of the road surface for both asphalt and concrete. We also manufacture certain equipment and components unrelated to road construction, including equipment for the mining, quarrying, construction and demolition industries and port and rail yard operators; industrial heat transfer equipment; commercial whole-tree pulpwood chippers; horizontal grinders; blower trucks; commercial and industrial burners; and combustion control systems.
Our products are marketed both domestically and internationally primarily to asphalt producers; highway and heavy equipment contractors; utility contractors; sand and gravel producers; construction, demolition, recycle and crushing contractors; mine and quarry operators; port and inland terminal authorities; power stations and domestic and foreign government agencies. In addition to equipment sales, we manufacture and sell replacement parts for equipment in each of our product lines and replacement parts for some competitors' equipment. The distribution and sale of replacement parts is an integral part of our business.
Executive Summary
Highlights of our financial results as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of the prior year include the following:
•Net sales were $1,024.4 million, a decrease of 12.4%
•Gross profit was $240.1 million, an increase of 0.3%
•Income from operations increased $17.9 million to $43.0 million
•Net income attributable to Astec increased to $46.9 million, or 110.3%
•Diluted earnings per share were $2.05, an increase of 109.2%
Significant Items Impacting Operations in 2020
Segment Updates
The Company consists of a total of 33 companies that are included in our consolidated financial statements, of which 25 represent our manufacturing sites and sites that operate as sales offices for our manufacturing locations. During the first quarter of 2020, we completed an internal reorganization focused on transitioning from a decentralized management structure to a more centralized structure with major directives and decisions being made at the segment and/or parent company level. As a result of this reorganization, we realigned our reportable segments moving from three to two reportable segments (plus Corporate) - Infrastructure Solutions and Materials Solutions. Our two reportable business segments comprise sites based upon the nature of the products or services produced, the type of customer for the products, the similarity of economic characteristics, the manner in which management reviews results and the nature of the production process, among other considerations.
The Corporate category consists of our parent company and Astec Insurance Company ("Astec Insurance"), a captive insurance company, which do not meet the requirements for separate disclosure as an operating segment or inclusion in one of the other reporting segments. We evaluate performance and allocate resources to our operating segments based on profit or loss from operations before United States ("U.S.") federal income taxes, state deferred taxes and corporate overhead and, thus, these costs are included in the Corporate category.
Amounts previously reported under the previous segment structure have been restated to conform to the new segment structure. Additionally, in both internal and external communications, we are transitioning references to each individual site by a name associated with its location, as compared to previous references to the individual subsidiary company name.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused significant disruptions to national and global economies. Our U.S. based businesses are designated as essential businesses for critical infrastructure companies by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and, as such, have remained open throughout the pandemic. Two of our foreign operations in the Materials Solutions segment, located in Northern Ireland and South Africa, as dictated by their local governments, temporarily ceased manufacturing activities in late March 2020. The South Africa site reopened on May 4, 2020, and the Northern Ireland facility reopened on May 11, 2020. Our top priority is to protect our employees and their families, our customers and suppliers and our operations from any adverse impacts by taking precautionary measures as directed by health authorities and local governments. In early March 2020, we formed a COVID-19 task force, which continually monitors information from government agencies, our sites, customers, suppliers and other sources. We have enacted several policies to combat the spread of the virus and keep our employees and visitors safe, including work at home initiatives, limits on employee travel, visitors policies, cleaning and disinfecting procedures and mandated temperature checks for visitors and employees. We are utilizing technology to hold meetings virtually as business permits.
During 2020, our sales and profits were negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and it may continue to negatively disrupt our business and results of operations in the future. The full extent of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations and the markets we serve remains highly uncertain and will depend largely on future developments related to the COVID-19 pandemic, including infection rates increasing or returning in various geographic areas, the ultimate duration of the COVID-19 pandemic, actions by government authorities to contain the outbreak or treat its impact, such as re-imposing previously lifted measures or putting in place additional restrictions, and the widespread distribution and acceptance of an effective vaccine, among other things. These developments are constantly evolving and cannot be accurately predicted. See Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Facility Closures
AMM - In 2018, management decided to close and cease operations at AMM, located in Germany. Operations ceased in 2019, and its land and building were sold in January 2020.
Albuquerque - In late 2019, we announced the closing of our Albuquerque site due to market conditions and underutilization of the manufacturing facility. Responsibilities for manufacturing and marketing of Albuquerque product lines were transferred to other facilities within the Infrastructure Solutions segment in late 2019 and early 2020. The Albuquerque site was closed as of March 31, 2020, and its land and building were sold in the third quarter of 2020.
Enid - In late 2019, we impaired and discontinued Enid's oil and gas drilling product lines and sold the remaining assets in the third quarter of 2020. In October 2020, we sold the assets related to Enid's remaining water well line of business. Enid's land and building are currently being marketed for sale.
Mequon - In June 2020, we announced the closing of our Mequon facility in order to simplify and consolidate operations. The Mequon facility ceased production operations in August 2020, and we entered into a real estate sales agreement for the sale of the land and building at the Mequon site. The sale closed in December 2020, and we entered into a short-term lease of the facilities to complete the transfer of the manufacturing and marketing for the Mequon product lines to other facilities within the Materials Solutions segment in late 2020.
Tacoma - In January 2021, we announced plans to close our Tacoma facility in order to simplify and consolidate operations. We expect the Tacoma facility to cease operations in the second quarter of 2021. Manufacturing and marketing of Tacoma product lines are expected be transferred to other facilities within the Infrastructure Solutions segment in mid-2021.
Acquisitions
Blair - We entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement, dated as of July 20, 2020, by and between Oshkosh Corporation for the purchase of the CON-E-CO ("Blair") concrete equipment company in Nebraska. The purchase price was $13.8 million, after adjustments, and was paid in cash.
St. Bruno - We entered into a Share Purchase Agreement, dated as of August 3, 2020, by and between BMH Systems Corporation ("St. Bruno") for the purchase of the concrete equipment company in Quebec, Canada. The purchase price was $15.7 million, after adjustments, and was paid in cash.
Grathwol - On November 2, 2020, we closed a transaction pursuant to which we purchased certain assets of Grathwol Automation, LLC ("Grathwol"). Grathwol is engaged in the business of developing and providing advanced telematics and remote diagnostics for construction equipment and related products and services.
The acquisitions of Blair and St. Bruno broaden our line of concrete batch plant manufacturing, which is expected to strengthen the Infrastructure Solutions segment. The Grathwol asset purchase is intended to support the enhancement of our products and services through controls and automation.
Corporate Strategic Objectives
In 2020, new business strategies, as well as a new operating structure, were implemented across the Company. The three pillars that frame our business strategy are "Simplify, Focus and Grow". We will "Simplify" by leveraging our global footprint and scale while maintaining strong customer relationships, reducing the complexity of the organizational structure, consolidating and rationalizing our product portfolio and optimizing the supply chain by leveraging our size and scale. Our "Focus" will be to strengthen the customer-centric approach by providing a holistic set of solutions while driving commercial and operational excellence as well as enhanced accountability through a performance-based culture with key performance indicators and incentives. We will "Grow" by capitalizing on global growth opportunities, reinvigorating innovation with a new product development approach and leveraging technology and digital connectivity to enhance our customer experience and effectively allocate capital to drive increased shareholder value.
Industry and Business Condition
Our financial performance is affected by a number of factors, including the cyclical nature and varying conditions of the markets we serve. Demand in these markets fluctuates in response to overall economic conditions and is particularly sensitive to the amount of public sector spending on infrastructure development, privately funded infrastructure development and changes in the prices of liquid asphalt, oil and natural gas and steel. In addition, many of our markets are highly competitive, and our products compete worldwide with a number of other manufacturers and dealers that produce and sell similar products.
Federal funding provides a significant portion of all highway, street, roadway and parking construction in the United States. We believe that federal highway funding influences the purchasing decisions of our customers, who are typically more amenable to making capital equipment purchases with long-term federal legislation in place. Federal transportation funding under the Fixing America's Surface Transportation Act ("FAST Act"), which was set to expire on September 30, 2020, was temporarily extended for one year through September 30, 2021. We believe a multi-year highway program (such as the FAST Act) will have the greatest positive impact on the road construction industry and allow our customers to plan and execute longer-term projects. Given the inherent uncertainty in the political process, the level of governmental funding for federal highway projects will similarly continue to be uncertain. Although continued funding under the FAST Act or funding of a bill passed by the current administration is expected, it may be at lower levels than originally approved or anticipated.
Significant portions of our revenues from the Infrastructure Solutions segment relate to the sale of equipment involved in the production, handling, recycling or application of asphalt mix. Liquid asphalt is a by-product of oil refining. An increase or decrease in the price of oil impacts the cost of asphalt, which is likely to alter demand for asphalt and therefore affect demand for certain of our products. While increasing oil prices may have a negative financial impact on many of our customers, our equipment can use a significant amount of recycled asphalt pavement, thereby partially mitigating the effect of increased oil prices on the final cost of asphalt for the customer. We continue to develop products and initiatives to reduce the amount of oil and related products required to produce asphalt. Oil price volatility makes it difficult to predict the costs of oil-based products used in road construction such as liquid asphalt and gasoline. Oil prices have routinely fluctuated in recent years and are expected to continue to fluctuate in the future. In 2021, we expect that with increasing demand from the rebound of industrial activity after the slowdown experienced in 2020 with the COVID-19 pandemic that prices will increase in 2021.
Steel is a major component of our equipment. With a drop in demand, similar to oil, steel prices declined during the first half of 2020 with increased pricing starting in the later part of the year. We expect steel pricing to significantly strengthen entering 2021 amidst demand improvement and continued supply constraints. We continue to utilize strategies that include forward-looking contracts and advanced steel purchases to ensure supply and minimize the impact of price volatility.
Results of Operations: 2020 vs. 2019
Net Sales
Net sales decreased $145.2 million or 12.4% to $1,024.4 million in 2020 from $1,169.6 million in 2019. Sales are generated primarily from new equipment purchases made by customers for use in construction of privately funded infrastructure, public sector spending on infrastructure and sales of equipment for the aggregate, mining, quarrying and recycling markets. Excluding the $20.0 million wood pellet plant sale recorded in the second quarter of 2019, total net sales decreased $125.2 million or 10.9%.
Domestic sales for 2020 were $817.0 million or 79.8% of net sales compared to $908.5 million or 77.7% of net sales for 2019, a decrease of $91.5 million or 10.1%. Excluding the 2019 sale of a wood pellet plant, domestic sales for 2020 were $817.0 million or 79.8% of net sales compared to $888.5 million or 77.3% of net sales for 2019, a decrease of $71.5 million or 8.0%. We experienced decreased domestic sales for both our Infrastructure Solutions and Materials Solutions segments during 2020, including for the discontinuation of oil and gas drilling product lines and exit of our Enid site.
International sales for 2020 were $207.4 million or 20.2% of net sales compared to $261.1 million or 22.3% of net sales for 2019, a decrease of $53.7 million or 20.6%. Sales of Infrastructure Solutions related equipment between periods increased while equipment sold by the Materials Solutions segment decreased between 2019 and 2020. Reported sales for 2020 were lower by $19.7 million for our Omagh site, which experienced a government mandated temporary closure. The remaining sales decreases came from various other government mandated shutdowns in the countries in which we operate.
Parts sales for 2020 were $300.5 million or 29.3% of net sales compared to $319.1 million or 27.3% of net sales for 2019, a decrease of $18.6 million or 5.8%. The Infrastructure Solutions segment experienced increased parts sales in 2020 as compared to 2019 while parts sales by the Materials Solutions segment decreased.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for 2020 was $240.1 million or 23.4% of net sales as compared to $239.4 million or 20.5% of net sales in 2019, an increase of $0.7 million or 0.3%. Excluding the 2019 sale of a wood pellet plant, the 2020 gross profit was $240.1 million or 23.4% of net sales compared to $219.4 million or 19.1% of net sales for 2019, an increase of $20.7 million or 9.4%. Overall gross margins were positively impacted by a change in sales mix that resulted in increased sales of higher margin products as a percentage of total sales in 2020.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense for 2020 was $166.9 million or 16.3% of net sales compared to $183.9 million or 15.7% of net sales for 2019, a decrease of $17.0 million or 9.2%, primarily due to decreased consulting fees, travel and employee-related expenses and the closure of our Mequon site during 2020, which reduced costs by $5.6 million. These decreases were partially offset by increased costs from the acquisitions of Blair and St. Bruno.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses decreased $5.1 million or 18.8% to $22.1 million in 2020 from $27.2 million in 2019. During 2020, we presented various new and/or improved equipment models from the 2019 research and development spending while continuing our 2020 effort on research and development of new products and improvements to existing product lines as well as adaptation of those products to other markets. Due to COVID-19 constraints and the ongoing restructuring, these expenses were reduced during 2020.
Restructuring, Impairment and Other Asset Charges, Net
In late 2019, we began the process of restructuring and right-sizing in conjunction with our overall strategic transformation. Restructuring, impairment and other asset charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are presented below:
In the first quarter of 2020, as part of our ongoing assessment to consider whether events or circumstances had occurred that could more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value, we performed an interim goodwill impairment test as of March 31, 2020 over the mobile asphalt equipment reporting unit. Based on the results of this testing, we recorded a $1.6 million pre-tax non-cash impairment charge in the Infrastructure Solutions segment to fully impair the mobile asphalt equipment reporting unit's goodwill.
During 2020, we impaired one of our Company's airplanes in advance of preparation for sale. The airplane is recorded as held for sale as of December 31, 2020.
Gain on sale of property and equipment primarily reflects a gain on the sale of land and building from the Mequon site for $4.7 million recorded in December 2020.
Other Income
Other income increased $2.3 million or 766.7% to $2.6 million in 2020 from $0.3 million in 2019 due primarily to the recognition of a gain on the sale of a business of $1.6 million from the disposal of Enid's oil, gas and water well product lines. In addition, we recorded a curtailment gain on the postretirement benefit plan for our Mequon site in conjunction with the closure.
Income Tax
Income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.2 million compared to income tax expense of $3.0 million for 2019. The effective tax rates for 2020 and 2019 were (2.6)% and 11.9%, respectively. Our tax rates are affected by recurring items which are generally consistent from period to period, as well as discrete items that may occur in any given period but are not consistent from period to period. The items having the most significant impact on the effective tax rate for 2020 include a benefit of $9.5 million from a carryback of its 2018 net operating loss ("NOL") to prior years. The Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security ("CARES") Act, enacted and signed into law on March 27, 2020, contained modifications to NOL carryback provisions and allowed us to carryback our 2018 NOL recorded at a 21% statutory tax rate to prior tax years. This carryback to tax years with a higher statutory rate of 35% resulted in the tax benefit. Also impacting the effective tax rate was a benefit of $4.3 million for research and development tax credits and expense of $4.0 million related to unrecognized tax benefits for tax positions taken in 2020.
Backlog
The backlog of orders at December 31, 2020 was $360.5 million compared to $263.7 million at December 31, 2019, an increase of $96.8 million or 36.7%. The increase in the backlog of orders was due to an increase in domestic backlog of $86.2 million or 44.3% and an increase in international backlog of $10.6 million or 15.4%. The Infrastructure Solutions segment's backlogs increased $28.6 million or 15.1% from 2019; and the Materials Solutions segment's backlog increased $68.2 million or 92.0% from 2019 levels.
Net Sales by Segment
Infrastructure Solutions: Sales in this segment decreased $61.8 million or 8.1%. Domestic sales for the Infrastructure Solutions segment decreased $65.8 million or 10.1% for 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by the lost sales impact from the closure and exit of Enid of $21.1 million and the non-recurring sale of the Georgia Pellet Plant in the second quarter of 2019 of $20.0 million. The remaining decrease in domestic sales for the Infrastructure Solutions segment was due to general economic uncertainties. International sales for the Infrastructure Solutions segment increased $4.0 million or 3.6% for 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. Parts sales for the Infrastructure Solutions segment increased 2.2% for 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. Infrastructure Solutions also increased for the incremental sales associated with the Blair and St. Bruno acquisitions.
Materials Solutions: Sales in this segment decreased $83.4 million or 20.6%. The decrease was driven by the temporary site closures of Omagh and Johannesburg during 2020 for COVID-19 combined with general economic uncertainties. Domestic sales for the Materials Solutions segment decreased by $25.7 million or 10.1% for 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, which was driven by the lower sales of our crushing and screening projects. International sales for the Materials Solutions segment decreased $57.7 million or 38.2% for 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 due to COVID-19 plant related temporary shutdowns, as well as the impact from the strong U.S. dollar causing our products produced in the United States to be more expensive. Parts sales for this segment decreased 18.8% for 2020 compared to the same period in 2019.
Segment Profit (Loss)
Infrastructure Solutions: Segment profit for the Infrastructure Solutions segment was $53.8 million for 2020 compared to $33.8 million for the same period in 2019, an increase of $20.0 million or 59.2%. Segment profit was impacted by an increase in gross profit of $6.9 million due to a 270 basis point increase in gross margins between periods (22.7% and 20.0% for 2020 and 2019, respectively). Segment gross margins increased over the prior year due to $32.6 million of net realizable inventory write-offs that did not recur partially offset by the one-time pellet plant recovery sale, as well as, the closure and exit of Enid. The increase in segment profit is also attributable to a decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses of $10.1 million driven by lower consulting fees and travel related costs and a decrease of $4.8 million in engineering expenses due to COVID-19 related constraints. The segment profit increases were partially offset by net increases in restructuring, impairment and other property and equipment charges of $3.7 million in 2020 compared to 2019.
Materials Solutions: Segment profit for Materials Solutions was $32.1 million for 2020 compared to $22.8 million for the same period in 2019, an increase of $9.3 million or 40.8%. The increase in segment profit between periods was due primarily to an increase in the gross margin of 4.0% between periods. Additionally, the increase in segment profit was partially improved by decreased general and administrative expenses of $5.7 million, decreased selling expenses of $6.8 million due to right-sizing activities and benefit from net credits in restructuring, impairment and other property and equipment charges of $1.6 million primarily due to the gain on sale of land and building at our Mequon facility in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Corporate: Corporate operations incurred expenses of $40.1 million for 2020 compared to expenses of $35.6 million for 2019, an unfavorable change of $4.5 million or 12.6%, due primarily to an increase in consulting expenses of $3.1 million associated with information technology projects and other support projects and net restructuring, impairment and other property and equipment charges of $2.8 million offset by a reduction in income taxes of $4.4 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity and capital resources are cash on hand, borrowing capacity under a $150.0 million revolving credit facility (the "Credit Facility") and cash flows from operations. We had $158.6 million of cash available for operating purposes as of December 31, 2020, of which $22.8 million was held by our foreign subsidiaries. We did not have any outstanding borrowings on the Credit Facility at December 31, 2020 or 2019. In addition, no borrowings were made under the Credit Facility during 2020. Our outstanding letters of credit totaling $7.6 million decreased borrowing availability to $142.4 million under the revolving credit facility as of December 31, 2020. The revolving credit facility agreement contains certain financial covenants, including provisions concerning required levels of annual net income and minimum tangible net worth. We were in compliance with the financial covenants of the agreement at December 31, 2020.
Our Brazilian subsidiary maintains a separate term loan for working capital purposes with a bank in Brazil, which is secured by its manufacturing facility. Prior to 2020, equipment financing loans were also outstanding.
Certain of our international subsidiaries in Africa, Australia, Brazil, Canada and Northern Ireland each have separate credit facilities with local financial institutions to finance short-term working capital needs, as well as to cover foreign exchange contracts, performance letters of credit, advance payment and retention guarantees. In addition, the Brazilian subsidiary also enters into order anticipation agreements with a local bank on a periodic basis. Both the outstanding borrowings under the credit facilities of the international subsidiaries and the order anticipation agreements are recorded in "Short-term debt" on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Each of the credit facilities are generally guaranteed by Astec Industries, Inc. and/or secured with certain assets of the local subsidiary except in Brazil where the credit facilities are supported by letters of credit issued under the Credit Facility.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities increased $28.9 million in 2020 compared to 2019. Net income was the primary driver of the increase in operating cash flows and when combined with changes in large non-cash charges resulted in a total increase of $36.4 million. These increases were partially offset primarily by a lower decrease in inventory than prior year 2019 and reductions in customer deposits.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used by investing activities in 2020 were primarily due to acquisitions and expenditures for property and equipment. These cash uses were partially offset by proceeds from the sale of property and equipment and the sale of our Enid subsidiary.
Net cash used by investing activities in 2019 were primarily due to property and equipment expenditures.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Financing activities in 2020 were primarily a use of cash for the payment of dividends while the use of cash in 2019 was primarily due to net repayments of our Credit Facility borrowings and the payment of dividends.
Financial Condition
Our current assets increased to $565.8 million at December 31, 2020 from $506.3 million at December 31, 2019, an increase of $59.5 million. The increase is due primarily to increases in cash and cash equivalents of $109.7 million offset by decreases in inventories of $44.8 million and trade receivables and contract assets, net of $4.4 million. Accounts receivable days outstanding increased from 39.3 in 2019 to 45.3 in 2020.
Our current liabilities decreased to $170.3 million at December 31, 2020 from $172.8 million at December 31, 2019, a decrease of $2.5 million. The decrease is primarily due to decreases in accounts payable of $4.5 million, decreases in customer deposits of $8.7 million and decreases in accrued payroll and related liabilities of $3.9 million offset by increases in other accrued liabilities of $13.6 million.
Contractual Obligations
Contractual obligations and the period in which payments are due as of December 31, 2020 are as follows:
The above table excludes our liability for unrecognized tax benefits, which totaled $9.7 million at December 31, 2020, since the timing of cash settlements to the respective taxing authorities, if any, cannot be reliably predicted.
We did not make any contributions to our pension plan for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we made contributions of approximately $1.6 million to our pension plan. Currently, we have not planned any contributions to the pension plan in 2021. Our funding policy is to make at least the minimum annual contributions required by applicable regulations.
Contingencies
Management has reviewed all claims and lawsuits and has made adequate provision for any losses that are probable and can be reasonably estimated. Based upon currently available information and with the advice of counsel, management believes that the ultimate outcome of our current claims and legal proceedings, individually and in the aggregate, will not have a material adverse effect on our financial position, cash flows or results of operations. However, claims and legal proceedings are subject to inherent uncertainties and rulings unfavorable to us could occur. If an unfavorable ruling were to occur, there exists the possibility of a material adverse effect on our financial position, cash flows or results of operations.
See Note 16, Commitments and Contingencies of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for discussion of contingent liabilities for customer purchases, various guarantees including letters of credit, advance payments and retention guarantees as well as contingencies related to legal proceedings in which we are involved.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
See Note 16, Commitments and Contingencies of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for discussion of contingent liabilities for customer purchases and various guarantees including letters of credit, advance payments and retention guarantees.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Application of these principles requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the amounts as reported in the consolidated financial statements. Accounting policies that are critical to aid in understanding and evaluating the results of operations and financial position include the following:
Inventory Valuation: Inventories are valued at the lower of first-in first-out cost or net realizable value. The most significant component of our inventories is steel. Open market prices and tariffs are subject to volatility and determine our cost of steel. During periods when open market prices decline, we may need to reduce the carrying value of the inventory. In addition, certain items in inventory become obsolete over time, and we reduce the carrying value of these items to their net realizable value. These reductions are determined by management based on estimates, assumptions and judgments made from the information available at that time. See Note 2, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for a description of our process used to value inventories at the lower of first-in first-out cost or net realizable value. We do not believe it is reasonably likely that the inventory values will materially change in the near future.
Revenue Recognition: Revenue is generally recognized when we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring control of goods or providing services. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring goods or providing services. We generally obtain purchase authorizations from our customers for a specified amount of product at a specified price with specified delivery terms. A significant portion of our equipment sales represents equipment produced in our plants under short-term contracts for a specific customer project or equipment designed to meet a customer's specific requirements. Most of the equipment sold by us is based on standard configurations, some of which are modified to meet customer needs or specifications. We provide customers with technical design and performance specifications and perform pre-shipment testing to ensure the equipment performs according to design specifications, regardless of whether we provide installation services in addition to selling the equipment. Significant down payments are required on many equipment orders with other terms allowing for payment shortly after shipment, typically 30 days. Taxes assessed by a governmental authority that are directly imposed on revenue-producing transactions between us and our customers, such as sales, use, value-added and some excise taxes, are excluded from revenue. Costs of obtaining sales contracts with an expected duration of one year or less are expensed as incurred. As contracts are typically fulfilled within one year from the date of the contract, revenue adjustments for a potential financing component or the costs to obtain the contract are not made. Other contract assets and liabilities are typically not material.
Depending on the terms of the arrangement with the customer, recognition of a portion of the consideration received may be deferred and recorded as a contract liability if we have to satisfy a future obligation, such as to provide installation assistance, service work to be performed in the future without charge, floor plan interest to be reimbursed to our dealer customers, payments for extended warranties, for annual rebates given to certain high volume customers or for obligations for future estimated returns to be allowed based upon historical trends.
Certain contracts include terms and conditions through which we recognize revenues upon completion of equipment production, which is subsequently stored at one of our plants at the customer's request. Revenue is recorded on such contracts upon the customer's assumption of title and transfer of control and when collectability is probable that we will collect substantially all of the amount due. In addition, there must be a fixed schedule of delivery of the goods consistent with the customer's business practices, we must not have retained any specific performance obligations such that the earnings process is not complete and the goods must have been segregated from our inventory prior to revenue recognition.
We have certain sales containing multiple performance obligations, whereby revenue attributable to the sale of a product is recognized when the product is shipped, and the revenue attributable to services provided with respect to the product (such as installation services) is recognized when the service is performed. Consideration is allocated to deliverables using observable market prices from stand-alone performance obligations or a cost plus margin approach when one is not available. Otherwise, we use third-party evidence of selling price or our best estimate of the selling price for the deliverables. We evaluate sales with multiple performance obligations to determine whether revenue related to individual elements should be recognized separately or as a combined unit. In addition to the previously mentioned general revenue recognition criteria, we only recognize revenue on individual delivered elements when there is objective and reliable evidence that the delivered element has a determinable value to the customer on a standalone basis and there is no right of return.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets: Goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment annually or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate that such goodwill might be impaired. See Note 2, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies, and Note 7, Goodwill, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for a detail of the testing management performed for goodwill impairment, goodwill reported by segment and impairment charges recorded in 2020.
Intangible assets with definite lives are tested for impairment if conditions exist that indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. Risk factors that may be considered include an economic downturn in the general economy, a geographic market or the commercial and residential construction industries, a change in the assessment of future operations as well as the cyclical nature of our industry and the customization of the equipment we sell, each of which may cause adverse fluctuations in operating results. Other risk factors considered would be an increase in the price or a decrease in the availability of oil that could reduce the demand for our products in addition to the significant fluctuations in the purchase price of raw materials that could have a negative impact on the cost of production and gross profit as well as others more fully described in the Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. An impairment charge is recorded when the carrying value of the definite lived intangible asset is not recoverable by the cash flows generated from the use of the asset. Some of the inputs used in the impairment testing are highly subjective and are affected by changes in business factors and other conditions. Changes in any of the inputs could have an effect on future tests and result in impairment charges.
The useful lives of identifiable intangible assets are determined after considering the specific facts and circumstances related to each intangible asset. Factors considered when determining useful lives include the contractual term of any agreement, the history of the asset, our long-term strategy for the use of the asset, any laws or other local regulations which could impact the useful life of the asset, and other economic factors, including competition and specific market conditions. Intangible assets that are deemed to have definite lives are amortized, generally on a straight-line basis, over their useful lives, ranging from 2 to 19 years.
Income Taxes: Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. We periodically assess the need to establish valuation allowances against our deferred tax assets to the extent we no longer believe it is more likely than not that the tax assets will be fully utilized. Judgment is required in determining the provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities and the valuation allowance recorded against net deferred tax assets. Liabilities for uncertain income tax positions are based on a two-step process. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step requires an estimate and measurement of the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement. It is inherently difficult and subjective to estimate such amounts, as we must determine the probability of various possible outcomes. We reevaluate these uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis or when new information becomes available. These reevaluations are based on factors including, but not limited to, changes in facts or circumstances, changes in tax law, successfully settled issues under audit, expirations due to statutes and new audit activity. Such a change in recognition or measurement could result in the recognition of a tax benefit or an increase to accrued taxes.
Recent Accounting Changes and Pronouncements
See Note 2, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements applicable to us and the impact of those standards on our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.