Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes to those financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contain statements of a forward-looking nature relating to future events or our future financial performance. As a result of many factors, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a company formed to commercialize flexible PV modules using our proprietary technology. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated $66,613 of revenue. Product sales accounted for 100% of total revenue. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $421,782,785.
In January 2017, Ascent was awarded a contract to supply high-voltage SuperLight thin-film CIGS PV blankets. These 50W, fully laminated, flexible blankets were manufactured using a new process that was optimized for high performance in near-space conditions at elevated temperatures, and are custom designed for easy modular integration into series and parallel configurations to achieve the desired voltage and current required for such application.
In February 2017 Ascent announced the discontinuation of our EnerPlex consumer business by disposing of the EnerPlex brand, and related intellectual properties and trademarks, to our battery product supplier, Sun Pleasure Co. Limited (“SPCL”). This transaction was completed in an effort to better allocate our resources and to continue to focus on our core strength in the high-value specialty PV market. Following the transfer, Ascent no longer produces or sells Enerplex-branded consumer products. In November 2017, Ascent introduced the next generation of our USB-based portable power systems with the XD™ series. The first product introduced was the XD-12 which, like previous products, is a folding, lightweight, easily stowable, PV system with USB power regulation. Unique to this generation of PV portable power is more PV power (12 Watts) and a 2.0 Amp smart USB output to enable the XD-12 to charge most smartphones, tablets, and USB-enabled devices as fast as a wall outlet. The enhanced smart USB circuit works with the device to be charged so that the device can determine the maximum power it is able to receive from the XD-12 and ensures the best possible charging performance directly from the sun.
Also, in 2017, for a space customer, Ascent manufactured a new micro-module, approximately 12.8mm x 50mm (0.5in x 2.0in) in size that is ideal for both laboratory-scale environmental testing, and for subsequent integration into flight experiments.
In February 2018, the Company introduced the second product in our XD series. Delivering up to 48 Watts of solar power, the durable and compact Ascent XD-48 Solar Charger is the ideal solution for charging many portable electronics and off-grid power systems. The XD-48’s versatility allows it to charge both military and consumer electronics directly from the sun wherever needed. Like the XD-12, the XD-48 has a compact and portable design, and its rugged, weather-resistant construction withstands shocks, drops, damage and even minor punctures to power through the harshest conditions.
In March 2018, Ascent successfully shipped to a European based customer for a lighter-than-air, helium-filled airship project based on our newly developed ultra-light modules with substrate material than half of the thickness of our standard modules. In 2019, Ascent completed a repeat order from the same customer who had since established its airship development operation in the US. In 2020, Ascent received a third and enlarged order from the same customer and is scheduled to complete the order in Q2 2021.
We continue to design and manufacture PV integrated portable power applications for commercial and military users. Due to the high durability enabled by the monolithic integration employed by our technology, the capability to customize modules into different form factors and the industry leading light weight and flexibility provided by our modules, we believe that the potential applications for our products are extensive.
Commercialization and Manufacturing Strategy
We manufacture our products by affixing a thin CIGS layer to a flexible, plastic substrate using a large format, roll-to-roll process that permits us to fabricate our flexible PV modules in an integrated sequential operation. We use proprietary monolithic integration techniques which enable us to form complete PV modules with little to no costly back end assembly of inter cell connections. Traditional PV manufacturers assemble PV modules by bonding or soldering discrete PV cells together. This manufacturing step typically increases manufacturing costs and at times proves detrimental to the overall yield and reliability of the finished product. By reducing or eliminating this added step using our proprietary monolithic integration techniques, we believe we can achieve cost savings in, and increase the reliability of, our PV modules. All tooling necessary for us to meet our near-term production requirements is installed in our Thornton, Colorado plant. In 2012, we further revised our strategy to focus on applications for emerging and high-value specialty PV markets, including off grid, aerospace, military and defense and consumer-oriented products.
We plan to continue the development of our current PV technology to increase module efficiency, improve our manufacturing tooling and process capabilities and reduce manufacturing costs. We also plan to continue to take advantage of research and development contracts to fund a portion of this development.
Significant Trends, Uncertainties and Challenges
We believe the significant trends, uncertainties and challenges that directly or indirectly affect our financial performance and results of operations include:
•
Our ability to generate customer acceptance of and demand for our products;
•
Successful ramping up of commercial production on the equipment installed;
•
Our products are successfully and timely certified for use in our target markets;
•
Successful operating of production tools to achieve the efficiencies, throughput and yield necessary to reach our cost targets;
•
The products we design are saleable at a price sufficient to generate profits;
•
Our ability to raise sufficient capital to enable us to reach a level of sales sufficient to achieve profitability on terms favorable to us;
•
Effective management of the planned ramp up of our domestic and international operations;
•
Our ability to successfully develop and maintain strategic relationships with key partners, including OEMs, system integrators, distributors, retailers and e-commerce companies, who deal directly with end users in our target markets;
•
Our ability to maintain the listing of our common stock on the OTC Market;
•
Our ability to implement remediation measures to address material weaknesses in internal control;
•
Our ability to achieve projected operational performance and cost metrics;
•
Our ability to enter into commercially viable licensing, joint venture, or other commercial arrangements;
•
The extent to which our interests align with or deviate from our controlling stockholders;
•
Availability of raw materials; and
•
COVID-19 and the uncertainty around the continued duration and effect of the worldwide pandemic.
Basis of Presentation: The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“US GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the policies below as critical to our business operations and to the understanding of our financial results:
Significant Accounting Policies
Inventories: All inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost determined using the weighted average method. Inventory balances are frequently evaluated to ensure they do not exceed net realizable value. The computation for net realizable value takes into account many factors, including expected demand, product life cycle and development plans, module efficiency, quality issues, obsolescence and others. Management's judgment is required to determine reserves for obsolete or excess inventory. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had inventory reserve balances of $598,392 and $584,269, respectively. If actual demand and market conditions are less favorable than those estimated by management, additional inventory write downs may be required.
Impairment of Long-lived assets: We analyze our long-lived assets (property, plant and equipment) and definitive-lived intangible assets (patents) for impairment, both individually and as a group, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. Events that might cause impairment would include significant current period operating or cash flow losses associated with the use of a long-lived asset or group of assets combined with a history of such losses, significant changes in the manner of use of assets and significant negative industry or economic trends. An undiscounted cash flow analysis is calculated to determine if an impairment exists. If an impairment is determined to exist, any related loss is calculated using the difference between the fair value and the carrying value of the assets. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not incur impairments of our manufacturing facilities and equipment.
Convertible Preferred Stock: The Company evaluates its preferred stock instruments under FASB ASC 480, "Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity" to determine the classification, and thereby the accounting treatment, of the instruments. Please refer to Note 14 for further discussion on the classification of each instrument.
Derivatives: The Company evaluates its financial instruments under FASB ASC 815, "Derivatives and Hedging" to determine whether the instruments contain an embedded derivative. When an embedded derivative is present, the instrument is evaluated for a fair value adjustment upon issuance and at the end of every period. Any adjustments to fair value are treated as gains and losses in fair values of derivatives and are recorded on the Statement of Operations. Please refer to Notes 10 and 12 for further discussion on the embedded derivatives of each instrument.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan: The Company has elected to account for the forgivable loan received under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) provisions of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act as a debt instrument and to accrue interest on the outstanding loan balance. Additional interest at a market rate (due to the stated interest rate of the PPP loan being below market) is not imputed, as the transactions where interest rates prescribed by governmental agencies are excluded from the scope of accounting guidance on imputing interest. The proceeds from the loan will remain recorded as a liability until either (1) the loan is, in part of wholly, forgiven and the Company has been legally released or (2) the Company repays the loan to the lender.
Revenue Recognition:
Product revenue. We recognize revenue for module and other equipment sales at a point in time following the transfer of control of such products to the customer, which typically occurs upon shipment or delivery depending on the terms of the underlying contracts. For module and other equipment sales contracts that contain multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation identified in the contract based on relative standalone selling prices, or estimates of such prices, and recognize the related revenue as control of each individual product is transferred to the customer, in satisfaction of the corresponding performance obligations.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company recognized product revenue of $66,613 and $638,380, respectively.
Government contract revenue. Revenue from government research and development contracts is generated under terms that are cost plus fee or firm fixed price. We generally recognize this revenue over time using cost-based input methods, which recognize revenue and gross profit as work is performed based on the relationship between actual costs incurred compared to the total estimated costs of the contract. In applying cost-based input methods of revenue recognition, we use the actual costs incurred relative to the total estimated costs to determine our progress towards contract completion and to calculate the corresponding amount of revenue to recognize.
Cost based input methods of revenue recognition are considered a faithful depiction of our efforts to satisfy long-term government research and development contracts and therefore reflect the performance obligations under such contracts. Costs incurred that do not contribute to satisfying our performance obligations are excluded from our input methods of revenue recognition as the amounts are not reflective of our transferring control under the contract. Costs incurred towards contract completion may include direct costs plus allowable indirect costs and an allocable portion of the fixed fee. If actual and estimated costs to complete a contract indicate a loss, provision is made currently for the loss anticipated on the contract.
Research, Development and Manufacturing Operations Costs: Research, development and manufacturing operations expenses were approximately $1,165,193 and $1,310,948 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Research, development and manufacturing operations expenses include: 1) technology development costs, which include expenses incurred in researching new technology, improving existing technology and performing federal government research and development contracts, 2) product development costs, which include expenses incurred in developing new products and lowering product design costs, and 3) pre-production and production costs, which include engineering efforts to improve production processes, material yields and equipment utilization, and manufacturing efforts to produce saleable product. Research, development and manufacturing operations costs are expensed as incurred, with the exception of costs related to inventoried raw materials, work-in-process and finished goods, which are expensed as Cost of revenue as products are sold.
Share-Based Compensation: We measure and recognize compensation expense for all share-based payment awards made to employees, officers, directors, and consultants based on estimated fair values. The value of the portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as expense over the requisite service period in our statements of operations included herein. Share-based compensation is based on awards ultimately expected to vest, reduced by estimated forfeitures. Forfeitures are estimated at the time of grant and revised, as necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. For purposes of determining estimated fair value of share-based payment awards on the date of grant, we use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model (“Black-Scholes Model”) for option awards. The Black-Scholes Model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions. Because our employee stock options may have characteristics significantly different from those of traded options, and because changes in the subjective input assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimate, in management’s opinion, the existing models may not provide a reliable single measure of the fair value of our employee stock options. Management will continue to assess the assumptions and methodologies used to calculate estimated fair value of share-based compensation. Circumstances may change and additional data may become available over time, which result in changes to these assumptions and methodologies, which could materially impact our fair value determination. We estimate the fair value of our restricted stock awards at our stock price on the grant date.
The accounting guidance for share-based compensation may be subject to further interpretation and refinement over time. There are significant differences among option valuation models, and this may result in a lack of comparability with other companies that use different models, methods and assumptions. If factors change and we employ different assumptions in the accounting for share-based compensation in future periods, or if we decide to use a different valuation model, the compensation expense we record in the future may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the current period and could materially affect our loss from operations, net loss and net loss per share.
Use of Estimates: The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP") requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging Contracts in Entity s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity s Own Equity. ASU 2020-06 will simplify the accounting for convertible instruments by reducing the number of accounting models for convertible debt instruments and convertible preferred stock. Limiting the accounting models results in fewer embedded conversion features being separately recognized from the host contract as compared with current GAAP. Convertible instruments that continue to be subject to separation models are (1) those with embedded conversion features that are not clearly and closely related to the host contract, that meet the definition of a derivative, and that do not qualify for a scope exception from derivative accounting and (2) convertible debt instruments issued with substantial premiums for which the premiums are recorded as paid-in capital. ASU 2020-06 also amends the guidance for the derivatives scope exception for contracts in an entity’s own equity to reduce form-over-substance-based accounting conclusions. ASU 2020-06 will be effective for public companies for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim
periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Management has not yet evaluated the impact that the adoption of ASU 2020-06 will have on the Company’s consolidated financial statement presentation or disclosures.
Other new pronouncements issued but not effective as of December 31, 2020 are not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues. Our revenues were $66,613 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $638,380 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $571,767. The decrease in sales is due primarily to significantly reduced operations during the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company was in a dormant status for the most part of the year as the focus in 2020 was to recapitalize and restructure the Company’s balance sheet. The intensification of the COVID-19 pandemic since March 2020 also significantly impacted our restructuring effort, thereby delaying our ability to restart our operations in a timely manner.
Cost of revenues. Our cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $174,588 compared to $490,755 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of 64%. The decrease in cost of revenues is mainly due to the decrease in materials and labor costs as a result of a decrease in production for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. Cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 is comprised primarily of direct labor and overhead. Management believes our factory is currently significantly under-utilized, and a substantial increase in revenue would result in marginal increases to direct labor and overhead included in the cost of revenues. As such, management’s focus going forward is to improve gross margin through increased sales and improved utilization of our factory. We are currently pursuing high-value PV markets.
Research, development and manufacturing operations. Research, development and manufacturing operations costs were $1,165,193 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1,310,948 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of 11%. The decrease in cost is due primarily to reduced operations during the year ended December 31, 2020. Research, development and manufacturing operations costs include costs incurred for product development, pre-production and production activities in our manufacturing facility. Research, development and manufacturing operations costs also include costs related to technology development and governmental contracts.
Selling, general and administrative. Selling, general and administrative expenses were $1,029,720 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1,846,944 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of 44%. The decrease in costs is due primarily to reduced operations in the current period.
Other Income/Expense, net. Other income was $4,071,990 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to other expense $1,615,213 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an improvement of $5,687,203. The improvement is due primarily to the gain on sale of our facility and settlement of liabilities.
Net Income/Loss. Our Net Income was $1,617,444 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a Net Loss of $4,868,261 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an improvement of $6,485,705. The improvement is due primarily to the gain on sale of our facility and settlement of liabilities.
The improvement of $6,485,705 in Net Income/Loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 can be summarized in variances in significant account activity as follows:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company has continued limited PV production at its manufacturing facility. The Company does not expect that sales revenue and cash flows will be sufficient to support operations and cash requirements until it has fully implemented its product strategy. During the year ended December 31, 2020 the Company used $2,881,138 in cash for operations.
Additional projected product revenues are not anticipated to result in a positive cash flow position for the year 2021 overall and, as of December 31, 2020, the Company has negative working capital. As such, cash liquidity sufficient for the year ending December 31, 2021 will require additional financing.
The Company continues to accelerate sales and marketing efforts related to its military solar products and specialty PV application strategies through expansion of its sales and distribution channels. The Company has begun activities related to securing additional financing through strategic or financial investors, but there is no assurance the Company will be able to raise additional capital on acceptable terms or at all. If the Company's revenues do not increase rapidly, and/or additional financing is not obtained, the Company will be required to significantly curtail operations to reduce costs and/or sell assets. Such actions would likely have an adverse impact on the Company's future operations.
As a result of the Company’s recurring losses from operations, and the need for additional financing to fund its operating and capital requirements, there is uncertainty regarding the Company’s ability to maintain liquidity sufficient to operate its business effectively, which raises substantial doubt as to the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The Company has scaled down its operations, due to cash flow issues, and does not expect to ramp up until significant financing is obtained.
Management cannot provide any assurances that the Company will be successful in accomplishing any of its plans. These consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Statements of Cash Flows Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our cash used in operations was $2,881,138 compared to $2,715,418 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $165,720. The increase is due primarily to our recapitalization and restructuring effort which began in June 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by investing activities was $254,444 compared to cash provided by investing activities of $827,491 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This change was primarily the result of a decrease in proceeds from the sale of assets. During the year ended December 31, 2020, negative operating cash flows of $2,881,138 were primarily funded through $2,500,000 in preferred stock issuances.
Off Balance Sheet Transactions
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.