Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on June 2, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination utilizing cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, the partial exercise of the Over-Allotment Option and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt. Although we are not limited to a particular industry or sector for purposes of consummating a Business Combination, we intend to initially focus our search on identifying a prospective target business in the technology, media and telecommunications (“TMT”) industries in the United States and other developed countries. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Recent Developments
On February 2, 2021, we entered into a business combination agreement by and among Holicity, Holicity Merger Sub Inc., our wholly-owned subsidiary (“Merger Sub”), and Astra Space, Inc. (“Astra”) (as it may be amended and/or restated from time to time, the “Business Combination Agreement”). The business combination was unanimously approved by our board of directors (the “Board”) on January 29, 2021. If the Business Combination Agreement is approved by our stockholders and Astra’s stockholders, and the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement are consummated, Merger Sub will merge with and into Astra with Astra surviving the merger as our wholly-owned subsidiary (the “Astra Merger”). In addition, in connection with the consummation of the Astra Merger (the “Closing”), we will be renamed “Astra Space, Inc.” and are referred to herein as “New Astra” as of the time following such change of name.
Pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, we agreed to acquire all of the outstanding equity interests of Astra for approximately $2.03 billion in aggregate consideration to be paid at the effective time of the Astra Merger (the “Effective Time”). The consideration for the Astra Merger will be paid through stock in New Astra as follows: each share of Astra common stock and each share of preferred stock of Astra (“Astra Preferred Stock”) that is issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time (other than dissenting shares and shares of Astra common stock held in the treasury of Astra immediately prior to the Effective Time) shall be converted into the right to receive, with respect to any Astra Class A common stock or Astra Preferred Stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time, a number of shares of our Class A common stock equal to the “Per Share Merger Consideration Value” divided by $10.00 per share, where the “Per Share Merger Consideration Value” is (a)(x) $2,030,000,000.00 plus (y) the aggregate exercise price of all of the options to purchase shares of Astra common stock (“Astra Options”) and warrants to purchase shares of Astra common stock (“Astra Warrants”) described in the Business Combination Agreement divided by (b) the number of all outstanding shares, as of the date hereof, of Astra common stock (including (A) shares of Astra common stock issuable upon conversion of the Astra Preferred Stock outstanding on the date hereof, (B) any shares of Astra common stock issued or issuable upon the exercise of all Astra Options and Astra Warrants outstanding on the date of the Business Combination Agreement and (C) the vesting of Astra restricted shares outstanding as of the date of the Business Combination Agreement). Each share of Astra Class A common stock and each share of Astra Preferred Stock that is issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time (other than dissenting shares and shares of Astra Class A common stock held in the treasury of Astra immediately prior to the Effective Time) shall be converted into the right to receive a number of shares of our Class A common stock equal to (i) the Per Share Merger Consideration Value, divided by (ii) $10.00 per share and each share of Astra Class B common stock and each share of Founders Preferred Stock of Astra (other than dissenting shares and shares of Astra Class B common stock held in the treasury of Astra immediately prior to the Effective Time) shall be converted into the right to receive a number of shares our Class B Common Stock equal to (i) the Per Share Merger Consideration Value, divided by (ii) $10.00 per share.
Pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, at the Effective Time, (i) each Astra Option that is outstanding and unexercised immediately prior to the Effective Time shall be assumed and converted into a newly issued option exercisable for Class A common stock of New Astra, (ii) each Astra Warrant that is issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time and has not been terminated pursuant to its terms will be assumed and converted into a warrant exercisable for Class A common stock of New Astra on the same terms and conditions as applied to the existing Astra Warrants, and (iii) in respect of each unvested share of restricted stock or restricted stock unit that is unvested immediately prior to the effective time of the Astra Merger (A) each share of restricted stock or restricted stock unit (other than those held by an individual who has waived the right to accelerate the vesting of such stock or stock unit) will become immediately vested and the holder will be entitled to receive the applicable per share merger consideration, less applicable tax withholding, if any and (B) each share of restricted stock or restricted stock unit held by an individual who has waived the right to accelerate the vesting of such stock or stock unit will be cancelled and converted into restricted shares of New Astra stock, subject to the same terms and conditions as the Astra awards.
The shares of Class B common stock of New Astra will have the same economic terms as the shares of Class A common stock of New Astra, but the shares of Class B common stock of New Astra will have 10 votes per share, whereas the shares of Class A common stock will have one (1) vote per share. The outstanding shares of Class B common stock of New Astra will be subject to a “sunset” provision permitted whereby such shares of Class B common Stock of New Astra will automatically convert to shares of Class A common stock if the Founders and other qualified holders of Class B common stock collectively cease to beneficially own at least twenty percent (20%) of the number of shares of Class B common stock of New Astra collectively held by the Founders and their permitted transferees as of the Effective Time.
The closing of the Astra Merger is subject to certain customary conditions, including, among other things: (i) approval by our stockholders and Astra’s stockholders of the Business Combination Agreement, the Astra Merger and certain other actions related thereto; (ii) the expiration or termination of the waiting period (or any extension thereof) applicable under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976 as amended; (iii) the Company having at least $250 million of cash at the closing of the Astra Merger, consisting of cash held in its trust account and the aggregate amount of cash actually invested in (or contributed to) Holicity pursuant to the Subscription Agreements (as defined below), after giving effect to redemptions of public shares, if any, but before giving effect to the consummation of the closing of the Astra Merger and the payment of Astra’s and our outstanding transaction expenses as contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement; (iv) the shares of Class A common stock of New Astra to be issued in connection with the Astra Merger having been approved for listing on The Nasdaq Capital Market (“Nasdaq”) subject only to official notice of issuance thereof; (v) no material adverse effect, as defined in the Business Combination Agreement, has occurred with respect to Astra; and (vi) each Founder is employed by and devotes his full time and attention to Astra, and has not died or become disabled.
We intend to finance the Astra Merger in part with net proceeds from the initial public offering discussed below. Should the Astra Merger not be successful, the Company will continue to search for another business combination.
In addition to the Busines Combination Agreement, there are additional agreements in connection with the Astra Merger, including, among others, the Subscription Agreements, as described elsewhere on the Form 8-K that the Company filed with the SEC on February 2, 2021.
Initial Public Offering
Our registration statement for the initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) was declared effective on August 4, 2020. On August 7, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 27,500,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $275.0 million. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 5,000,000 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.50 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $7.5 million.
On August 11, 2020, the underwriters purchased 2,500,000 Over-Allotment Units pursuant to the partial exercise of the Over-Allotment Option. The Over-Allotment Units were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $25.0 million. Simultaneously with the sale of the Over-Allotment Units, we consummated a private sale (the “Over-Allotment Private Placement”) of an additional 333,333 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor, at a purchase price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds of approximately $0.5 million.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the partial exercise of the Over-Allotment Option and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $300.0 million was placed in the Trust Account and we had $1.7 million of cash held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering, and available for working capital purposes. We incurred $16.9 million in transaction costs, including $6.0 million of underwriting fees, $10.5 million of deferred underwriting fees and $0.4 million of other costs.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of Private Placement Units, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or August 7, 2022 (the “Combination Period”), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us (less taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any) and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject, in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the other requirements of applicable law.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from June 2, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and, after our Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from June 2, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $655,161, which consists of operating costs of $702,118, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $46,957.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $1.0 million of cash and working capital of $0.9 million.
Prior to the completion of the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity needs had been satisfied through the Sponsor’s payment of $25,000 of our liabilities in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares, and a promissory note (the “Note”) issued by the Sponsor. We repaid the Note on August 7, 2020.
On August 7, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 27,500,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $275.0 million. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 5,000,000 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.50 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $7.5 million.
On August 11, 2020, the underwriters purchased 2,500,000 Over-Allotment Units pursuant to the partial exercise of the Over-Allotment Option. The Over-Allotment Units were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $25.0 million. Simultaneously with the sale of the Over-Allotment Units, we consummated a private sale (the “Over-Allotment Private Placement”) of an additional 333,333 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor, at a purchase price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds of approximately $0.5 million.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the partial exercise of the Over-Allotment Option and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $300.0 million was placed in the Trust Account and we had $1.7 million of cash held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering, and available for working capital purposes. We incurred $16.9 million in transaction costs, including $6.0 million of underwriting fees, $10.5 million of deferred underwriting fees and $0.4 million of other costs.
As of December 31, 2020, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $300,046,957. We intend to utilize substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less deferred underwriting commissions and income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
For the period from June 2, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $691,869. Net loss of $655,161 was adjusted by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $46,957 and changes in operating assets and liabilities which used $6,668 of cash from operating activities, partially offset by formation costs paid by the Sponsor of $3,581.
We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the initial stockholders or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-balance sheet financing arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay our Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, administrative and support services. We began incurring these fees on August 4, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination or our liquidation.
Registration Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants, and securities that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans, if any, will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement dated as of August 4, 2020. These holders are entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. However, the registration rights agreement provides that we will not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until the termination of the applicable lock-up period for the securities to be registered. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were granted a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus relating to the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 4,125,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at $10.00 per Unit. The underwriters exercised a portion of their Over-Allotment Option on August 11, 2020.
The underwriters were paid a cash underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $6.0 million in the aggregate, upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the partial exercise of the Over-Allotment Option. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $10.5 million in the aggregate, will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as a critical accounting policy:
Redeemable Shares of Class A Common Stock
All of the 30,000,000 shares of Class A common stock included in the Units sold as part of the Initial Public Offering contain a redemption feature as described in the prospectus for the public offering. In accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s Accounting Standards Codification Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity”, redemption provisions not solely within the control of Holicity Inc. require the security to be classified outside of permanent equity. Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation provides a minimum net tangible asset threshold of $5,000,001. Holicity Inc. recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and will adjust the carrying value of the security at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable shares will be affected by charges against additional paid-in capital.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.