ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Certain statements in this Report represent forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements include but are not limited to statements regarding our strategy, future operations, financial condition, results of operations, projected costs, and plans and objectives of management. Actual results may differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements due to, among others, the risks and uncertainties described in this Report and in our other SEC filings.
We have attempted to identify these forward-looking statements with the words “believes,” “estimates,” “plans,” “expects,” “anticipates,” “may,” “will,” “could,” “should” and other similar expressions. Although these forward-looking statements reflect management’s current plans and expectations, which we believe reasonable as of the filing date of this Report, they inherently are subject to certain risks and uncertainties. Additionally, we are is under no obligation to update any of the forward-looking statements after the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K to conform such statements to actual results.
Overview
We are a leading provider of cloud-based Human Capital Management (HCM) solutions, delivered as software-as-a-service (SaaS) for small and mid-sized businesses (SMBs). From recruitment to retirement, our solutions help more than 80,000 SMBs across the United States grow their businesses. About 10,000 of our clients are direct and the approximately 70,000 remaining are indirect as they have contracts with Reseller Partners that white label our solutions.
We strive to be the most trusted HCM resource to entrepreneurs and are focused on less densely populated U.S. metropolitan cities where fewer of our competitors have a presence. Our solution strategy solves three primary challenges that prevent businesses from growing: HR complexity, allocation of human and financial capital, and the ability to build great teams. We have invested in, and we intend to continue to invest in, research and development to expand our solutions. Asure HCM, our user-friendly solution, reduces the administrative burden on employers and increases employee productivity while managing the complete employment lifecycle. The primary functions of our solutions address:
•Payroll and Tax - Asure Payroll & Tax is an integrated cloud-based solution that provides a foundation for our clients’ digital HR strategy. We automate all the complex and ever-changing regulations associated with payroll and taxes in all U.S. jurisdictions - from wages, benefits, overtime, and garnishments to tips, direct deposits, Fair Labor Standard Act ("FLSA"), and federal, state, and local payroll taxes.
•Human Resources - Asure HR’s cloud-based functionality handles HR complexities that SMBs face, including employee self-service so employees can access all their information (e.g., pay history and company documents). With Asure HR’s dashboard, clients have convenient single-system access to every facet of the employee’s lifecycle. This solution improves benefits management by syncing to carriers and integrating with employee self-managed enrollment and life-event change adjustments.
•Time and Attendance - Asure Time & Attendance is primarily cloud based and combines with complementary hardware (time clocks and data collection devices) to provide cost savings and potential ROI gains in the form of a more strategic use of labor dollars and the elimination of time theft. Mobile time tracking helps executives better understand where and when their employees are working, providing insight into labor schedules and labor costs. With our mobile solution, employees can punch in and out from remote locations, as geo-positioning verifies the physical coordinates. Biometric time clocks, including facial recognition, reduce time theft and help combat "buddy punching." Automated system notifications, real-time dashboards, and flexible configuration options all work to streamline operations. Finally, employees, supervisors and executives have real-time access to data and business intelligence to optimize labor costing, improve labor scheduling, and control labor costs.
•HR Services - Our recurring HR Services allows clients to focus on running their businesses because we take responsibility for all of the traditional payroll and HR functions. We provide three core levels of HR services, ranging from a cloud-based online compliance library, to an on-demand call center for all HR questions, and to a fully outsourced HR function. We also support discreet functions like payroll administration and the benefit enrollment process.
•Data Integration - Our solutions also enable data integration with related third-party systems, such as 401(k), benefits, and insurance provider systems.
In addition to state-of-the-art platforms that are hosted in Amazon AWS and regular upgrades and releases, we provide clients with easy access to our skilled support team. Our services and support representatives are knowledgeable not just in the Asure solution, but also about best practices and change management strategies in the payroll and HCM industry. Many of Asure’s staff have professional certifications in payroll (Certified Payroll Professionals, CPPs) and human resources (Professional in Human Resources, PHR, and Senior Professional in Human Resource, SPHR, certifications). From installation to training and post-live support, our professional services team delivers a proficient client experience on a national scale.
We sell our solutions through both direct and partner models. Prospective clients learn about Asure in a variety of ways, including advertising, web site searches, sales calls, public relations, referral channels, direct marketing, and social media. When prospective clients show an interest in Asure, they are connected with a sales representative, who works to close the sale, via Asure’s web site, phone, or a face-to-face meeting by discussing solutions that meet their needs. We track our marketing and sales activities to provide immediate insights into activities, leads and pipeline opportunities. Our account management teams also work with clients to promote and sell additional solutions that are relevant for each client. We supplement our direct sales efforts with partner programs. By working with partners, we gain access to opportunities in various geographic and industry niches.
Asure has two distinct levels of partners: Reseller Partners and Referral Partners.
Reseller Partners. Reseller Partners pay us recurring license fees to white label our solutions and then they focus on providing value-add services to their clients (our indirect clients). There are generally two types of Reseller Partners: regional payroll providers and SMB trusted advisors (CPA, regional banks, and benefit brokers). Regional payroll providers typically focus on a specific geographic area or industry. They have proven to be attractive alternatives for SMBs’ payroll and HCM needs versus the one-size-fits-all national payroll companies that do not necessarily understand the local needs of many businesses. Since trusted advisors are relied on by entrepreneurs and executives at SMBs to advise on payroll and HR decisions, white labeling our solutions allows them to provide additional solutions directly to their clients. This deepens their client relationships and grows their revenue.
Asure’s Reseller Partners are also the primary source of Asure’s acquisitions. Since they already white label Asure’s solutions, technology integration risk is lessened. By acquiring Reseller Partners, we gain a presence in specific geographic (typically less densely populated U.S. metropolitan cities) and industry niches. These acquisitions help Asure gain scale by assuming all of the Reseller Partner's revenue instead of just a recurring licensing fees (which is typically a small percentage of their total revenue). Reseller Partners can continue to license our solutions with the opportunity to expand their available solutions, or they can come under the Asure umbrella.
Referral Partners. Referral Partners are typically the aforementioned trusted advisors (e.g., regional banks, CPAs, and benefit brokers) that provide us with SMB leads but do not resell our solutions. Since SMBs rely on their trusted advisors to guide them in selecting payroll and HCM solutions, we have found this to be a fruitful source of leads. Referral Partners provide qualified leads that convert to clients at a higher rate than non-referral leads. We have been successful in nurturing some Referral Partners to become Reseller Partners over time as the referral relationships develop and they become more comfortable in the HCM space.
We generate revenues from (i) fixed amounts charged per billing period plus a fee per employee or transaction processed and (ii) fixed amounts charged per billing period. We do not require clients to enter into long-term contractual commitments with us. Our billing period varies by client based on when each client pays its employees, which may be weekly, bi-weekly, semi-monthly or monthly. We serve a diverse client base in terms of industry and geography. None of our clients constituted more than one-half of one percent of our revenues and no industry represented over 10% of our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our revenues are generated through our salesforce that solicits new clients and our client relations representatives who sell new applications to existing clients as well as Reseller Partner recurring license fees.
Our continued growth depends on attracting new clients through further penetration of our existing markets and geographic expansion into new markets by strategically acquiring Reseller Partners, targeting a high degree of client employee usage across our solution, and introducing new applications to our existing client base. We believe our ability to continue to develop new applications and to improve existing applications will enable us to increase revenues in the future. Furthermore, we believe the challenges of managing the ever-changing complexity of payroll and human resources will continue to drive companies to turn to outsourced providers for help with their HCM needs. The HCM industry historically has been driven, in part, by legislation and regulatory action, including COBRA, changes to the minimum wage laws or overtime rules, and legislation from federal, state or municipal taxation authorities. The implementation of the Affordable Care Act (the “ACA”) is an example of legislation that has created demand in the HCM industry. We generate ACA-related revenues (i) on an annual basis in connection with processing and filing Forms 1094 and 1095 on behalf of clients and (ii) from clients who have purchased our Enhanced ACA application as part of the fixed, bundled price charged per billing period.
While we were incorporated in 1985 and became publicly traded in 1992, we view ourselves as a young pure-play SaaS HCM provider with the appropriate people, processes, and technology to execute on our strategy. Our primary source of revenue is derived from Payroll & Tax solutions, which came with the acquisitions of Mangrove Software in 2016 and iSystems in 2017. Beginning in 2016, we rolled-up approximately 15 of our Reseller Partners that white labeled Mangrove and iSystems’ solutions. With our sale of our Workspace Management business in December 2019 and the subsequent transition services agreement that ended in June 2020, we became a pure-play SaaS HCM provider.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak to be a global pandemic. In response, federal, state and local governments imposed various restrictions on social and commercial activity to promote social distancing in an effort to slow the spread of the disease, and many such restrictions remain in place. Beginning in February 2020, we took various actions in order to minimize the risk of COVID-19 to our employees, our clients, and the communities in which we operate, and in March 2020, we prohibited all business-related travel until further notice and began transitioning our employees to work-from-home arrangements. As of December 31, 2020, more than 90% of our employees were working remotely. We will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state or local authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees and clients.
In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted the operations of our clients and client prospects and may continue to do so for an indefinite period of time. Across many industries, temporary and permanent business closures as well as business occupancy limitations have resulted in significant layoffs and employee furloughs since late March 2020. Because we charge our clients on a per-employee basis for certain services we provide, decreases in headcount at our clients as of the onset of the pandemic negatively impacted our recurring revenue during 2020, and we expect that our recurring revenue in future periods will continue to be negatively impacted by such headcount reductions until employment levels among such client base return to pre-pandemic levels. Further, at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, a limited number of new clients temporarily delayed service implementation. As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to create uncertainty and the potential for ongoing business disruptions, we may experience similar client-driven delays in service implementation in the future.
During 2019, interest earned on funds held for clients contributed to growth in recurring revenue, due to both higher average interest rates and an increased average funds held for clients balance. Between August 2019 and March 2020, the Federal Open Market Committee reduced the target range for short-term interest rates several times, with the most significant rate cut occurring in March 2020 to support the economy and potentially reduce the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Further, a provision in the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) allowed employers to delay the payment of the employer’s share of Social Security taxes to a future date. To the extent our clients made such an election, we collected less money from them to hold and then remit to the appropriate taxing authorities, which adversely affected our average funds held for clients balance and, consequently, interest earned on funds held for clients. During 2020, despite the growth in the number of clients in our base, employee headcount reductions at our clients as well as clients electing to defer payment of their share of Social Security taxes under the CARES Act resulted in nominal growth in our average funds held for clients balance, relative to 2019. Due to significantly lower average interest rates in 2020 and, to a lesser extent, the lack of growth of our average funds held for clients balance, interest earned on funds held for clients for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased from the year ended December 31, 2019, which had a negative effect on recurring revenue growth. The balance of funds held for clients was approximately $321,069 at December 31, 2020, compared with approximately $126,625 at December 31, 2019. Much of this increase was due to acquisitions in 2020.
In 2020, we continued to aggressively invest in sales and marketing and in research and development to drive future growth and expand our market share. Lower headcount at our clients and the other pandemic-related factors described above, which had and may continue to have, a negative impact on recurring revenue, combined with increased sales and marketing and research and development expenses, resulted in a decrease in net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. We expect net income to be negatively affected by the impact of the pandemic on our recurring revenue and our deliberate, increased level of investment in sales and marketing and research and development to drive the growth of our business.
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, our sales force historically traveled frequently to sell our solution. The current remote work environment presents a unique opportunity for our sales force, in that each sales employee is able to meet virtually with a greater number of client prospects in a given day than he or she would if conducting in-person meetings. Although we have not experienced such challenges to date, if clients and client prospects are not as willing or available to engage by video conference and teleconference, the shift from in-person to virtual sales meetings could negatively affect our sales efforts, impede client acquisition and lengthen our sales cycles, which would negatively impact our business and results of operations and could impact our financial condition in the future.
We are unable to estimate the full impact that the COVID-19 pandemic could have on our business and results of operations in the future due to numerous uncertainties, including the severity of the disease, the duration of the outbreak, actions that may be taken by governmental authorities, the impact it may have on the business of our clients and other factors identified in Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” in this Form 10-K. Given this, the effect of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic may not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial performance until future periods.
Operating Segment
We operate as one operating segment. Operating segments are defined as components of an enterprise for which the chief operating decision maker, who in our case is the chief executive officer, in deciding how to allocate resources and assess performance, evaluates separate financial information regularly. During 2020, and over the last few years, we have completed a number of acquisitions. These acquisitions have allowed us to expand our offerings, presence and reach in various market segments of the human capital management market. Our business operates in one operating segment because our chief operating decision maker evaluates our financial information and resources and assesses the performance of these resources on a consolidated basis. Since we operate as one operating segment, all required financial segment information can be found in the consolidated financial statements.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussions of our results of continuing operations exclude the results related to the Workspace Management business which was sold in 2019. This business has been segregated from continuing operations and is reflected as a discontinued operation.
The following table sets forth, for the fiscal periods indicated, the percentage of total revenues represented by certain items in Asure’s Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss):
Comparison of Fiscal 2020 to 2019
Basis of Presentation
Revenue
Revenues are comprised of recurring revenues, and implementation and other revenues. We expect our revenues to increase as we introduce new applications, expand our client base and renew and expand relationships with existing clients. As a percentage of total revenues, we expect our mix of recurring revenues, and implementation and other revenues to remain relatively constant.
Recurring Revenues
Recurring revenues include fees for our payroll, payroll tax, time and labor management, and other Asure HCM solutions as well as fees charged for form filings and delivery of client payroll checks and reports. These revenues are derived from (i) fixed amounts charged per billing period plus a fee per employee or transaction processed or (ii) fixed amounts charged per billing period. We do not require clients to enter into long-term contractual commitments with us. Our billing period varies by client based on when each client pays its employees, which may be weekly, bi-weekly, semi-monthly or monthly. We also generate recurring revenue from our Reseller Partners that license our solutions. Because recurring revenues are based, in part, on fees for use of our applications and the delivery of checks and reports that are levied on a per-employee basis, our recurring revenues increase as our clients hire more employees. Recurring revenues are recognized in the period services are rendered.
Recurring revenues include revenues relating to the annual processing of payroll forms, such as Form W-2 and Form 1099, and revenues from processing unscheduled payroll runs (such as bonuses) for our clients. Because payroll forms are typically processed in the first quarter of the year and many of our clients are subject to ACA form filing requirements in the first quarter, first quarter revenues and margins are generally higher than in subsequent quarters. We anticipate our revenues will continue to exhibit this seasonal pattern related to ACA form filings for so long as the ACA (or replacement legislation) includes employer reporting requirements. In addition, we often experience increased revenues during the fourth quarter due to unscheduled payroll runs for our clients that occur before the end of the year. Therefore, we expect the seasonality of our revenue cycle to decrease to the extent clients utilize more of our non-payroll applications.
Professional Services, Hardware and Other Revenues
Professional Services, Hardware and Other Revenues represents implementation fees, one-time consulting projects, on premise maintenance, and hardware devices to enhance our software products.
This revenue line also includes interest earned on funds held for clients. We collect funds from clients in advance of either the applicable due date for payroll tax submissions or the applicable disbursement date for employee payment services. These collections from clients are typically disbursed from one to 30 days after receipt, with some funds being held for up to 120 days. We typically invest funds held for clients in money market funds, demand deposit accounts, commercial paper, fixed income securities and certificates of deposit until they are paid to the applicable tax or regulatory agencies or to client employees. The amount of interest we earn from the investment of client funds is also impacted by changes in interest rates.
Our revenue was derived from the following sources (Amounts in thousands):
Total revenue represents our consolidated revenues, including sales of our scheduling software, time and attendance and human resource software, as well as complementary hardware devices to enhance our software products. Most product groupings include cloud revenue, hardware revenue, maintenance and support revenue, on premise software license revenue as well as installation and services and other professional services revenue. Revenue mix varies by product.
Excluding revenue from discontinued operations, our total revenue in 2020 was $65,507 as compared to $73,150 in 2019. Total revenue decreased by $(7,643), or (10.4)%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. Recurring revenue comprised the majority of the decrease with a decrease of $(6,751), or (9.6)%. Recurring revenue decreased primarily due to the impact of COVID and lower interest rates. Hardware and professional services revenue trended downward, partially offset by an increase in on premise software license revenue.
Although our total customer base is widely spread across industries, our HCM sales are concentrated in small to mid-size businesses. We continue to target small and medium-sized businesses across industries as prospective customers. Geographically, we sell our HCM products in the United States.
In addition to continuing to develop our workforce solutions and release of new software updates and enhancements, we continue to actively explore other opportunities to acquire additional products or technologies to complement our current software and services.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Consolidated gross profit was $38,093 in 2020 as compared to $43,314 in 2019, a decrease of $5,221, or (12.1)%. Gross margin as a percentage of revenues was 58.2% for 2020 and 59.2% for 2019. Our decline in gross margin is attributable to lower sales volumes primarily due to COVID, a growing investment in HCM service resources and personnel, maintaining COVID related tax codes, increased amortization of capitalized software costs as well as migration to secure cloud hosting services.
Our cost of sales relates primarily to direct product costs, compensation for operations and related consulting expenses, hardware expenses, facilities and related expenses and the amortization of our purchased software development costs. We include intangible amortization related to developed and acquired technology within cost of sales.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses were $36,340 in 2020 as compared to $41,535 in 2019, a decrease of $5,195, or (12.5)%. SG&A expenses as a percentage of revenues were 55.5% and 56.8% for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
SG&A decreased due to selling of our Workspace business in 2019. Our other professional services, legal fees and rent decreased partially offset from the transition services agreement with FM:Systems in relation to the sale of the Workspace business in 2019,
We may incur significant additional legal expenses and/or professional services-related expenses in the future if we pursue further acquisitions of products or businesses, even if we ultimately do not consummate any acquisition.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development (“R&D”) expenses were $5,959 in 2020 as compared to $5,351 in 2019, an increase of $608, or 11.4%. R&D expenses as a percentage of revenues were 9.1% and 7.3% for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Our development efforts for future releases and enhancements are driven by feedback received from our existing and potential customers and by gauging market trends. We believe we have the appropriate development team to design and enhance our solution suite and integrated platform.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization expenses in 2020 were $9,547, a decrease of $(2,218), or (18.9)%, as compared to $11,765 in 2019. Amortization expenses as a percentage of revenues were 14.6% and 16.1% for 2020 and 2019, respectively. In 2019, we accelerated the amortization after a reassessment of the useful lives of certain trade names in relation to our rebranding efforts, resulting in an increase in amortization expense.
Impairment of Goodwill
There was no goodwill impairment recognized in 2020. During fiscal 2019, we determined that the estimated fair value of our HCM reporting unit was less than its carrying value. Therefore, we compared the carrying value of the reporting unit to its fair value in order to determine if an impairment exists. In addition to performing the income based approach discussed above we compared the market value of our common stock to our HCM reporting unit’s carrying value noting its carrying value exceeded market value. A non-cash, before-tax impairment charge of $35,060 was recognized to reduce the carrying amount of the goodwill to its estimated fair value as of December 31, 2019.
Interest Expense and Other, net
Interest expense and other, net was $(2,221) for the year ended 2020 as compared to $(16,005) in the year ended 2019. Interest expense and other, net is primarily comprised of interest expense on notes payable. Interest expense and other for the year ended 2019 is composed primarily of interest expense on notes payable.
Income Taxes
At December 31, 2020, we had federal net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $48,435, and research and development (R&D) credit carryforwards of approximately $3,579. The net operating loss and R&D credit carryforwards will expire in varying amounts from 2021 through 2040, if not utilized.
Income tax expense attributable to continuing operations increased from $(24,111) in 2019 to $337 in 2020, a $(24,448), or (101.4)%, decrease. These figures represent an effective tax rate of (2.1)% and 36.3% in 2020 and 2019, respectively. In 2020, we recorded income tax expense from continuing operations primarily due to deferred taxes on the amortization of goodwill for tax purposes.
As a result of our various acquisitions in prior years, utilization of the net operating losses and credit carryforwards may be subject to a substantial annual limitation due to the “change in ownership” provisions of Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. The annual limitation may result in the expiration of net operating losses before utilization.
Due to the uncertainty surrounding the timing of realizing the benefits of our favorable tax attributes in future tax returns, we have placed a valuation allowance against our net deferred tax asset, exclusive of goodwill and jurisdictions in which we
have net deferred tax liabilities. During 2020, we increased the valuation allowance by approximately $1,688 due primarily to operations.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES (Amounts in thousands)
Working Capital. We had working capital of $8,208 at December 31, 2020, a decrease of $9,646 from $17,854 at December 31, 2019. We attribute the increase in our working capital primarily to an increase in cash and cash equivalents due to the divestiture of our Workspace Management business. Working capital at December 31, 2020 includes $5,838 of short term deferred revenue, an increase in short term deferred revenue of $338 compared to December 31, 2019. Deferred revenue is an obligation to perform future services. We expect that deferred revenue will convert to future revenue as we perform our services, but this does not represent future payments. Deferred revenue can vary based on seasonality, expiration of initial multi-year contracts and deals that are billed after implementation rather than in advance of service delivery.
Operating Activities. Net cash used in operating activities was $1,707 in 2020. The $1,707 of cash provided by operating activities during 2020 was primarily driven by our net loss of $16,311 and increases in deferred revenue of $128, and decreases in accrued expenses and other long-term obligations of $4,596. This was offset by non-cash adjustments of $20,908, decreases in accounts receivable of $1,118 and increases in inventory of $11, and decreases in accounts payable of $448 and $911 of prepaid expenses and other assets.
Net cash used in operating activities was $(4,117) in 2019. The $(4,117) of cash used in operating activities during 2019, including discontinued operations, was primarily driven by our net income of $30,001 and increases in deferred revenue of $5,662, and accrued expenses and other long-term obligations of $5,649. This was offset by non-cash adjustments of $(35,215), increases in accounts receivable of $1,446 and inventory of $1,581, and a decrease in accounts payable of $3,174.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities during 2020 was $(201,134), primarily due to the net change in funds held for clients and our acquisitions of three payroll processing and payroll tax businesses during the year. Cash provided by investing activities during 2019 was $85,632. The cash provided by investing activities in 2019 is primarily driven by the proceeds from the sale of discontinued operations.
Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities of $202,592 in 2020 was primarily due to the net change in client funds of $184,823, net proceeds from issuance of our common stock of $21,392, and proceeds from note payable of $8,856, partial offset by payments of our note payables of $12,234.
Net cash used in financing activities of $(68,018) in 2019 was primarily due to the payments of our notes payable and debt financing costs.
Sources of Liquidity. As of December 31, 2020, Asure’s principal sources of liquidity consisted of approximately $28,577 of cash and cash equivalents, future cash generated from operations of our business over the next twelve months, and $4,500 available for borrowing under our Wells Fargo revolver. Based on current internal projections, we believe that we have and/or will generate sufficient cash for our operational needs for at least the next twelve months from issuance of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We continue to be focused on growing our existing software operations and seeking accretive and complimentary strategic acquisitions as part of our growth strategy. We believe the available sources of liquidity described above will be sufficient to fund such growth activities but may raise additional capital or incur additional indebtedness to supplement those sources as we execute on our growth plan.
Underwriting Agreement
In December 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering 2,990,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $7.25. We realized gross proceeds of approximately $21,700 before deducting underwriting discounts and estimated offering expenses.
Credit Agreement
Due to the effects of COVID-19 on our business, we were not in compliance with our minimum EBITDA financial covenant as of March 31, 2020. This covenant was set in December 31, 2019, before the COVID-19 pandemic and its possible effects on our business were known to our senior lender or us. On July 10, 2020, our senior lender issued a reservation of rights letter related to our failure to comply with the minimum EBITDA financial covenant, along with other technical defaults. Following this default, we negotiated and entered a waiver and amendment to our Credit Agreement and our Amended and Restated Guaranty and Security Agreement (the “Amendment”) on August 10, 2020.
The Amendment reduced our facility from $30,000 to $15,000, consisting of $10,000 in term loans and a $5,000 revolver. As a result, we were required to make a principal payment of $9,750 on our outstanding term loans. The Amendment provides for an accordion feature to our term loan that would allow us to borrow up to an additional $15,000 in term loans subject to certain conditions following the Covenant Conversion Date, which is described below.
The Amendment also reset our financial covenants and added a new financial covenant for minimum recurring revenue.
The Amendment does not require that we meet our fixed charge ratio or leverage ratio covenant until the Covenant Conversion Date. The Coverage Conversion Date is the earlier of August 10, 2022 or the date in which we have satisfied the fixed charge coverage ratio and leverage ratio for two consecutive reporting periods. Until such time, we are only obligated to comply with our minimum EBITDA and minimum recurring revenue covenants.
In addition to the requirement that we pay $9,750 on our outstanding term loans, we were also required to pay our senior lender an amendment fee of $225. Our senior lender waived any prepayment penalty that would have otherwise been due on the $9,750 payment toward our term loan and agreed that we would not owe a prepayment penalty if we were to refinance our facility before December 31, 2020. Finally, as a condition to the amendment, our senior lender required that we agree to obtain lender consent for any acquisitions until the later of August 10, 2021 or the Covenant Conversion Date. Previously certain types of acquisitions were deemed permitted acquisitions, which did not require our lender’s consent. We do not anticipate an issue with obtaining consent from our lender for accretive acquisitions.
We had sufficient cash on hand to make the required payment of $9,750 in connection with the Amendment and expect to have enough cash on hand to meet our future business needs. Further, we expect to comply with our financial covenants in future quarters under the Credit Agreement, as amended by the Amendment.
Also, due to the effects of Covid-19 on our business and the related need to support our operations, we applied for and received a loan from Pinnacle Bank under the Paycheck Protection Program during the second quarter of 2020. Under the terms of our note with Pinnacle Bank, principal payments would have begun in November 2020. However, the Small Business Administration, who administers loans issued under the Paycheck Protection Program, has issued guidance, deferring all payments that would be owed on this loan until the Small Business Administration makes a decision on our loan forgiveness application. While we expect that the entire loan will be forgiven, we cannot be certain that the Small Business Administration will grant forgiveness of our entire loan. If we do not receive forgiveness of our entire loan, we will be obligated to begin repaying the portion of the principal and interest that is not forgiven such that it is fully paid no later than April 15, 2022, unless we are able to negotiate new payment terms with Pinnacle Bank. Further, if the portion of the PPP Loan that is not forgiven (the “Unforgiven Debt”) exceeds $3,250 or requires monthly payments of principal and interest in excess of $185, it is likely we will be in default under our Credit Agreement unless we obtain a waiver from our senior lender or are otherwise able to negotiate acceptable terms with our senior lender and Pinnacle Bank. We applied our initial application for forgiveness of this loan in December 2020 and completed this application in early Febuary 2021. Given this, we expect that payments we may owe, if any, would not start until second quarter of 2021. Under GAAP, we are required to report this entire loan as outstanding debt in our financial statements and further identify the current portion of this debt (e.g. amounts which would be payable in the next 12 months) with reference to the actual terms of our note with Pinnacle Bank. Notwithstanding how this loan is reported in our financial statements, we do not expect to make any payments on this note until at least second quarter of 2021, and then only to the extent that any portion of this note is not forgiven in accordance with the terms of the Paycheck Protection Program.
As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, no amount was outstanding and $4,500 and $10,000, respectively, was available for borrowing under the revolver.
As of December 31, 2020, we are in compliance with our financial covenants under the Amendment and all payments remain current. We expect to be in compliance or be able to obtain compliance through debt repayments with available cash on hand or cash we expect to generate from the ordinary course of operations over the next twelve months.
See Note 6 - Notes Payable in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information about the Credit Agreement.
We cannot assure that we can grow our cash balances or limit our cash consumption and thus maintain sufficient cash balances for our planned operations or future acquisitions. Future business demands may lead to cash utilization at levels greater than recently experienced. We may need to raise additional capital in the future in order to grow our existing software operations and to seek additional strategic acquisitions in the near future. However, we cannot assure that we will be able to raise additional capital on acceptable terms, or at all.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
We have prepared our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles and included the accounts of our wholly owned subsidiaries. We have eliminated all significant intercompany transactions and balances in the consolidation. Preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of the assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. These estimates are subjective in nature and involve judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at fiscal year-end and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the fiscal year. The more significant estimates made by management include the valuation allowance for our gross deferred tax asset, lease impairment, useful lives of fixed assets, the determination of the fair value of our long-lived assets and the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed during acquisitions. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that management believes are reasonable under the given circumstances. These estimates could be materially different under different conditions and assumptions. Additionally, the actual amounts could differ from the estimates made. Management periodically evaluates estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements for continued reasonableness. We prospectively apply appropriate adjustments, if any, to our estimates based upon our periodic evaluation.
We believe the following are our critical accounting policies:
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue consists of software-as-a-service (“SaaS”) offerings and time-based software subscription license agreements that also, typically include hardware, maintenance/support, and professional services elements. We recognize revenue on an output basis when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. Our contracts with customers may include multiple performance obligations. For such arrangements, we allocate revenue to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. We determine standalone selling prices based on the amount that we believe the market is willing to pay determined through historical analysis of sales data as well as through use of the residual approach when we can estimate the standalone selling price for one or more, but not all, of the promised goods or services.
Effective January 1, 2018, we adopted the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), and ASU 2015-14, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Deferral of Effective Date, which deferred the effective date of ASU 2014-09 by one year. ASU 2014-09 (“Topic 606”) “Revenue from Contracts with Customers) supersedes the revenue recognition requirements in Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 605, Revenue Recognition, and is based on the principle that revenue is recognized to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. It also requires additional disclosure about the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of revenue, cash flows arising from customer contracts, including significant judgments and changes in judgments, and assets recognized from costs incurred to obtain or fulfill a contract. The adoption of ASU 2014-09, using the modified retrospective approach, had no significant impact on our results of operations, cash flows, or financial position. The initial application was applied to all contracts at the date of initial application. We recognized the cumulative effect of initially applying the new revenue standard as an adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings.
We recorded a $1,500 cumulative effect adjustment to opening retained earnings as of January 1, 2018 related to an increase in deferred commissions. There was no impact to revenue as a result of applying Topic 606.
The primary impact of adopting Topic 606 is to sales commissions related to onboarding new clients that were previously expensed. Under the new standard, these costs are now capitalized as deferred commissions and amortized over the estimated customer life of five to ten years.
The terms of our contracts with customers range from month to month for some Asure HCM direct clients to longer terms ranging from one to three years, some of which are renewable for successive terms. A typical SaaS/software subscription arrangement will also include hardware, setup and implementation services. Revenue allocated to the SaaS/software subscription performance obligations are recognized on an output basis ratably as the service is provided over the non-cancellable term of the SaaS/subscription service and are reported as Recurring revenue on the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Loss. Revenue allocated to other performance obligations included in the arrangement is recognized as outlined in the paragraphs below.
Hardware devices sold to customers are sold as either a standard product sell arrangement where title to the hardware passes to the customer or under a hardware-as-a-service (“HaaS”) arrangement where the title to the hardware remains with Asure. Revenue allocated to hardware sold as a standard product are recognized on an output basis when title passes to the customer, typically the date we ship the hardware. Revenue allocated to hardware under a hardware-as-a-service (“HaaS”) arrangement are recognized on an output basis, recorded ratably as the service is provided over the non-cancellable term of the HaaS arrangement, typically one year. Revenue recognized from hardware devices sold to customers via either of the two above types of arrangements are reported as Hardware revenue on the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Loss.
Our professional services offerings typically include data migration, set up, training, and implementation services. Set up and implementation services typically occur at the start of the software arrangement while certain other professional services, depending on the nature of the services and customer requirements, may occur several months later. We can reasonably estimate professional services performed for a fixed fee and we recognize allocated revenue on an output basis on a proportional performance basis as the service is provided. We recognize allocated revenue on an output basis for professional services engagements billed on a time and materials basis as the service is provided. We recognize allocated revenue on an output basis on all other professional services engagements upon the earlier of the completion of the service’s deliverable or the expiration of the customer’s right to receive the service. Revenue recognized from professional services offerings are reported as Professional service revenue on the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Loss.
We recognize allocated revenue for maintenance/support on an output basis ratably over the non-cancellable term of the support agreement. Initial maintenance/support terms are typically one to three years and are renewable on an annual basis. Revenue recognized from maintenance/support are reported as Maintenance and support revenue on the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income (Loss).
We do not recognize revenue for agreements with rights of return, refundable fees, cancellation rights or substantive acceptance clauses until these return, refund or cancellation rights have expired or acceptance has occurred. Our arrangements with resellers do not allow for any rights of return.
Our payment terms vary by the type of customer and the customer’s payment history and the products or services offered. The term between invoicing and when payment is due is not significant and as such our contracts do not include a significant financing component. The transaction prices of our contracts do not include consideration amounts that are variable and do not include noncash consideration.
Deferred revenue includes amounts invoiced to customers in excess of revenue we recognize, and is comprised of deferred SaaS/software, HaaS, Maintenance and support, and Professional services revenue. We recognize deferred revenue when we complete the service and over the terms of the arrangements, primarily ranging from one to three years.
Intangible Assets and Goodwill
We record the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combinations at their respective fair values at the date of acquisition, with any excess purchase price recorded as goodwill. Valuation of intangible assets and in-process research and development entails significant estimates and assumptions including, but not limited to, estimating future cash flows from product sales, developing appropriate discount rates, estimating probability rates for the continuation of customer relationships and renewal of customer contracts and approximating the useful lives of the intangible assets acquired. U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) require that we not amortize intangible assets other than goodwill with an indefinite life until we determine their life as finite. We must amortize all other intangible assets over their useful lives. We currently amortize our acquired intangible assets with definite lives over periods ranging from one to nine years. We have assessed the fair value of our customer relationship intangible assets as of December 31, 2020, we do not believe these to be impaired, as the carrying value of the customer relationship intangible assets are recoverable through the associated project cash flows.
Impairment of Intangible Assets and Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with FASB ASC 350, we review and evaluate our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that we may not recover their net book value. When such factors and circumstances exist, including those noted above, we compare the assets’ carrying amounts against the estimated undiscounted cash flows we expect to generate with those assets over their estimated useful lives. If the carrying amounts are greater than the undiscounted cash flows, we estimate the fair values of those assets by discounting the projected cash flows. We record any excess of the carrying amounts over the fair values as impairments in that fiscal period. In 2019, we accelerated the amortization after a reassessment of the useful lives of certain trade names in relation to our rebranding efforts. There has been no other impairment of intangible assets and long-lived assets for the periods presented.
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price in a business combination over the fair value of net tangible and intangible assets acquired in a business combination. We test goodwill for impairment on an annual basis in the fourth fiscal quarter of each year, and between annual tests if indicators of potential impairment exist, using a fair-value-based approach. There has been no impairment of goodwill in 2020. In 2019, we recognized an impairment loss on goodwill. See Notes 4 and 5 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding goodwill.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the liability method under ASC 740, Accounting for Income Taxes, which requires recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events included in the financial statements. Under the liability method, we determine deferred tax assets and liabilities based on the difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect in the years in which we expect the differences to reverse. We reduce deferred tax assets by a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that we will not realize some component or all of the deferred tax assets.
See Note 2 - Significant Account Policies in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information about Recent Accounting Pronouncements.