ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our “Risk Factors” and our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. See cautionary note regarding “Forward-Looking Statements” at the beginning of this Annual Report.
Overview
Asensus Surgical is a medical device company that is digitizing the interface between the surgeon and the patient to pioneer a new era of Performance-Guided Surgery by unlocking the clinical intelligence to enable consistently superior outcomes and a new standard of surgery. This builds upon the foundation of Digital Laparoscopy with the Senhance® Surgical System powered by the Intelligent Surgical Unit to increase surgeon control and reduce surgical variability. With the addition of machine vision, augmented intelligence, and deep learning capabilities throughout the surgical experience, we intend to holistically address the current clinical, cognitive and economic shortcomings that drive surgical outcomes and value-based healthcare. The Company is focused on the market development for and commercialization of the Senhance Surgical System, which digitizes laparoscopic minimally invasive surgery, or MIS. The Senhance System is the first and only digital, multi-port laparoscopic platform designed to maintain laparoscopic MIS standards while providing digital benefits such as haptic feedback, robotic precision, comfortable ergonomics, advanced instrumentation including 3 mm microlaparoscopic instruments, eye-sensing camera control and fully-reusable standard instruments to help maintain per-procedure costs similar to traditional laparoscopy.
The Senhance System is available for sale in Europe, the United States, Japan, Taiwan, Russia and select other countries.
•
The Senhance System has a CE Mark in Europe for adult and pediatric laparoscopic abdominal and pelvic surgery, as well as limited thoracic surgeries excluding cardiac and vascular surgery.
•
In the United States, the Company has received 510(k) clearance from the FDA for use of the Senhance System in general laparoscopic surgical procedures and laparoscopic gynecologic surgery in a total of 31 indicated procedures, including benign and oncologic procedures, laparoscopic inguinal, hiatal and paraesophageal hernia, sleeve gastrectomy and laparoscopic cholecystectomy (gallbladder removal) surgery.
•
In Japan, the Company has received regulatory approval and reimbursement for 98 laparoscopic procedures.
•
The Senhance System received its registration certificate by the Russian medical device regulatory agency, Roszdravnadzor, in December 2020, allowing for its sale and utilization throughout the Russian Federation.
On February 23, 2021, we changed our name from TransEnterix, Inc. to Asensus Surgical, Inc. as part of our strategy to utilize the Senhance System and ISU capabilities, along with our other augmented intelligence related offerings and instrumentation to unlock clinical intelligence to enable consistently superior outcomes and a new standard of surgery we are calling Performance-Guided Surgery. We believe our product offerings, and our digitization of the interface between the surgeon and the patient allows us to assist the surgeon in all aspects of laparoscopic surgery including:
•
Pre-operative - in what we call “intelligent preparation,” our machine learning models will take data from all of the procedures done utilizing our current Senhance System with the ISU, such as tracking surgical motion and team interaction, to create a large and constantly improving database of surgeries and their outcomes to enable surgeons to best inform their approach and surgical setup.
•
Intra-operative - we believe the Senhance System provides perceptive real-time guidance for intra-operative tasks, allowing any surgeon performing a procedure with the Senhance System to perform multiple tasks and benefit from the collective knowledge and rules-based performance of thousands of other successful Senhance-based procedures. Not only will this provide the surgeon with a pathway to better outcomes, we believe it will ultimately help reduce the cognitive load of the surgeons.
•
Future use post-operative - finally, by tapping into the vast amount of data captured during procedures, surgeons and operating room staff will be able to get actionable assessments of their performance giving them the information needed to improve performance over time. We intend on building a new standard of analytics to improve not only the skills of all surgeons but moving towards best-practice-sharing that bridges the global surgeon community.
We received FDA clearance in January 2020 for our Intelligent Surgical Unit, or ISU. We believe it is the only FDA-cleared device for machine vision technology in abdominal robotic surgery. On September 23, 2020, we announced the first surgical procedures successfully completed using the ISU. In January 2021, we received CE Mark for the ISU.
In February 2020, we received CE Mark for the Senhance System and related instruments for pediatric use indications in CE Mark territories.
In 2020, we obtained regulatory clearance for the Senhance ultrasonic system in both Taiwan and Japan. We also received clearance for the ISU in both the U.S. and Japan. Finally, in the EU, we expanded our claims for the Senhance System to include pediatric patients, allowing accessibility to more surgeons and patients, as well as expanding our potential market to include pediatric hospitals in Europe. We anticipate the robotic precision provided by the Senhance System, coupled with the already available 3 mm instruments will prove to be an effective tool in surgery with smaller patients. As of February 15, 2021, two hospitals have installed the Senhance System for pediatric use.
The Company believes that future outcomes of minimally invasive laparoscopic surgery will be enhanced through its combination of more advanced tools and robotic functionality, which are designed to: (i) empower surgeons with improved precision, dexterity and visualization; (ii) improve patient satisfaction and enable a desirable post-operative recovery; and (iii) provide a cost-effective robotic system, compared to existing alternatives today, for a wide range of clinical indications.
From our inception, we devoted a substantial percentage of our resources to research and development and start-up activities, consisting primarily of product design and development, clinical studies, manufacturing, recruiting qualified personnel and raising capital. We expect to continue to invest in research and development and market development as we implement our strategy.
Since inception, we have been unprofitable. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $722.9 million.
Due to a decline in market conditions and changes in our forecast, the Company tested its goodwill and in-process research & development, or IPR&D, for potential impairment as of September 30, 2019. During the third quarter of 2019, the Company determined that the carrying value of both its goodwill and IPR&D were impaired, and recorded impairment charges of $79.0 million and $7.9 million, respectively.
We operate in one business segment.
On December 11, 2019, following receipt of approval from stockholders at a special meeting of stockholders held on the same day, the Company filed an amendment to our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation to effect a reverse stock split of the Company’s common stock at a ratio of one-for-thirteen, or the Reverse Stock Split. The Company’s common stock began trading on a split-adjusted basis on NYSE American on the morning of December 12, 2019. No fractional shares were issued in connection with the Reverse Stock Split. Instead, the Company rounded up each fractional share resulting from the reverse stock split to the nearest whole share. As a result of the Reverse Stock Split, the Company’s outstanding common stock decreased from approximately 261.9 million shares to approximately 20.2 million shares (without giving effect to the rounding up for each fractional share).
Unless otherwise noted, all share and per share data referenced in this Annual Report have been retroactively adjusted to reflect the Reverse Stock Split. Certain amounts in the financial statements, the notes thereto, and elsewhere in this Annual Report, may be slightly different than previously reported due to rounding of fractional shares as a result of the Reverse Stock Split.
Financing Transactions
January 2021 Public Offering
On February 1, 2021, the Company completed an underwritten public offering of 26,725,832 shares of its common stock, including the underwriter’s full exercise of an over-allotment option, at the public offering price of $3.00 per share, generating net proceeds of approximately $73.5 million.
Registered Direct Purchase Agreement
On January 12, 2021, the Company sold in a registered direct offering 25,000,000 shares of common stock at a purchase price per share of $1.25 for aggregate gross proceeds of $31.25 million, and net proceeds of $28.8 million.
At-the-Market Offerings
On August 12, 2019, the Company entered into a Controlled Equity Offering Sales Agreement, or the 2019 Sales Agreement, with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., or Cantor, and commenced an at-the-market offering, or the 2019 ATM Offering pursuant to which the Company could sell from time to time, at its option, up to an aggregate of $25.0 million shares of the Company’s common stock, through Cantor, as sales agent. Pursuant to the 2019 Sales Agreement, sales of the common stock were made under the Company’s previously filed and currently effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3. The aggregate compensation payable to Cantor was 3.0% of the aggregate gross proceeds from each sale of the Company’s common stock. Under the 2019 ATM Offering, the Company raised gross proceeds of $7.2 million and net proceeds of $7.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, and an additional $11.6 million of gross proceeds and $11.2 million of net proceeds during the year ended December 31, 2020. The 2019 ATM Offering was completed in February 2020.
On October 9, 2020, the Company filed a prospectus supplement relating to an “at the market” offering with Cantor pursuant to which the Company could sell from time to time, at its option, up to an aggregate of $40.0 million of shares of the Company’s common stock, through Cantor as sales agent, pursuant to the 2019 Sales Agreement, or the “2020 ATM Offering”. The 2020 ATM Offering was conducted under the Company’s effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3, which was declared effective by the SEC on February 10, 2020. The aggregate compensation paid to Cantor was 3.0% of the aggregate gross proceeds from each sale of the Company’s common stock.
The following table summarizes the total sales under the 2019 ATM Offering and 2020 ATM Offering for the period indicated (in thousands except for share and per share amounts):
From January 1, 2021 through the termination date of January 26, 2021, the Company has raised, under the 2020 ATM Offering, additional gross proceeds of $28.1 million through the sale of 19,120,037 shares of common stock.
Public Offerings of Securities
On July 6, 2020, the Company completed an underwritten public offering, or the July 2020 Public Offering, and sold an aggregate of 42,857,142 shares of its common stock, including the underwriter’s full exercise of an over-allotment option, at the public offering price per of $0.35 per share, generating net proceeds of approximately $13.6 million after deducting underwriter discounts, commissions and expenses.
On March 10, 2020, the Company closed a firm commitment underwritten public offering, or the March 2020 Public Offering, pursuant to which it sold an aggregate of 14,121,766 Class A Units at a public offering price of $0.68 per Class A Unit and 7,937,057 Class B Units at a public offering price of $0.68 per Class B Units. Each Class A Unit consisted of one share of the Company’s common stock, one warrant to purchase one share of common stock that expires on the first anniversary of the date of issuance, or collectively, the Series C Warrants, and one warrant to purchase one share of common stock that expires on the fifth anniversary of the date of issuance, or collectively, the Series D Warrants. Each Class B Unit consisted of one share of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share, or the Series A Preferred Stock, convertible into one share of common stock, a Series C Warrant to purchase one share of Common Stock and a Series D Warrant to purchase one share of Common Stock. The Class A Units and Class B Units had no stand-alone rights and were not certificated or issued as stand-alone securities. The shares of common stock, Series A Preferred Stock, Series C Warrants and Series D Warrants were immediately separable. In addition, the underwriter for the March 2020 Public Offering exercised its overallotment option to purchase 3,308,823 Series C Warrants and 3,308,823 Series D Warrants for an aggregate purchase price of $60 thousand. All shares of Series A Preferred Stock were converted into 7.9 million shares of common stock prior to June 30, 2020. The net proceeds to the Company were $13.4 million.
On September 4, 2019, the Company entered into an underwriting agreement with an underwriter. Subject to the terms and conditions of the underwriting agreement, the Company sold, in a firm commitment underwritten offering, 2,153,846 shares of the Company’s common stock. The Company raised $18.8 million in gross proceeds under this offering.
Paycheck Protection Program
The CARES Act was passed in the United States and signed into law on March 7, 2020 and was amended on June 5, 2020 through the enactment of the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act. On April 27, 2020, Asensus Surgical US, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, received funding under a promissory note dated April 18, 2020 (the “Promissory Note”), evidencing an unsecured non-recourse loan in the principal amount of $2,815,200 under the PPP provisions of the CARES Act. The PPP is administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (the “SBA”). The Promissory Note was made through City National Bank of Florida, a national banking association (the “Lender”). The Company elected to account for the PPP loan as debt and included the principal amount within notes payable on the consolidated balance sheet.
The Promissory Note has a two-year term, maturing on April 27, 2022, and bears interest at 1.00% per annum. If the Promissory Note is not forgiven, payments can be deferred until 10 months after the end of the Company’s covered period, which is the 24-week period beginning on the date the Company received the PPP loan proceeds from the Lenders (the “Covered Period”). The Promissory Note contains customary events of default relating to, among other things, payment defaults, and breach of representations and warranties, or other provisions of the Promissory Note. The Promissory Note may be forgiven partially or fully if the proceeds are used for covered payroll, rent and utility costs incurred during the Covered Period and if at least 60% of the proceeds are used for covered payroll costs. All or a portion of the Promissory Note may be forgiven by the SBA upon application by the Company and documentation of expenditures in accordance with the SBA requirements.
Any forgiveness of the Promissory Note will be subject to approval by the SBA and the Lender. The Company recognizes that its restructuring activities unrelated to COVID-19 led to a decrease in the number of employees and, the Company may not be able to comply with the available safe harbor and savings provisions of the CARES Act, therefore, not all of the Promissory Note may be eligible for forgiveness. The Company submitted its application for forgiveness of the Promissory Note in full to the Lender on February 10, 2021.
Lincoln Park Purchase Agreement
On February 10, 2020, we entered into a purchase agreement, or the LPC 2020 Purchase Agreement, with Lincoln Park, pursuant to which we have the right to sell to Lincoln Park up to an aggregate of $25,000,000 in shares of our common stock, subject to certain limitations and conditions set forth in the LPC 2020 Purchase Agreement, including a limitation on the number of shares of common stock we can put to LPC and the pricing parameters for the sales. In consideration for entering into the LPC 2020 Purchase Agreement, we issued to Lincoln Park 343,171 shares of Common Stock as commitment shares. We also committed to issue up to an additional 171,585 shares of Common Stock to Lincoln Park on a pro rata basis based on the number of shares Common Stock purchased by Lincoln Park pursuant to the LPC 2020 Purchase Agreement. No other shares were issued to Lincoln Park under the purchase agreement, and it was terminated in June 2020.
Hercules Loan Agreement
On May 23, 2018, the Company and its domestic subsidiaries, as co-borrowers, entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (the “Hercules Loan Agreement”) with several banks and other financial institutions or entities from time-to-time party to the Loan Agreement (collectively, the “Lender”) and Hercules Capital, Inc., as administrative agent and collateral agent (the “Agent”). The Hercules Loan Agreement was modified on two separate occasions in 2019.
The term loans bore interest at a rate equal to the greater of (i) 9.55% per annum (the “Fixed Rate”) and (ii) the Fixed Rate plus the prime rate (as reported in The Wall Street Journal) minus 5.00%. On the Initial Funding Date, the Company was obligated to pay a facility fee of $0.4 million, recorded as a debt discount. The Company also incurred other debt issuance costs totaling $1.1 million in conjunction with its entry into the Hercules Loan Agreement. In addition, the Company was permitted to prepay the term loans in full at any time, with a prepayment fee of 3.0% of the outstanding principal amount of the loan in the first year after the Initial Funding Date, 2.0% if the prepayment occurred in the second year after the Initial Funding Date and 1.0% thereafter. Upon prepayment of the term loans in full or repayment of the terms loans at the maturity date or upon acceleration, the Company was required to pay a final fee of 6.95% of the aggregate principal amount of term loans funded. The final payment fee was accreted to interest expense over the life of the term loan and included within notes payable on the consolidated balance sheet.
The Company’s obligations under the Hercules Loan Agreement were guaranteed by all current and future material foreign subsidiaries of the Company and were secured by a security interest in all of the assets of the Company and their current and future domestic subsidiaries and all of the assets of their current and future material foreign subsidiaries, including a security interest in the intellectual property. The Hercules Loan Agreement contained customary representations and covenants that, subject to exceptions, restricted the Company’s and its subsidiaries’ ability to do the following, among other things: declare dividends or redeem or repurchase equity interests; incur additional indebtedness and liens; make loans and investments; engage in mergers, acquisitions, and asset sales; transact with affiliates; undergo a change in control; add or change business locations; and engage in businesses that were not related to its existing business. Under the terms of the Hercules Loan Agreement, the Company was required to maintain cash and/or investment property in accounts which perfected the Agent’s first priority security interest in such accounts in an amount equal to the lesser of (i) (x) 120% of the then-outstanding principal balance of the term loans, including accrued interest and any other fees payable under the agreement to the extent accrued and payable plus (y) an amount equal to the then-outstanding accounts payable of the Company on a consolidated basis that were more than 90 days past due and (ii) 80% of the aggregate cash of the Company and its consolidated subsidiaries. The Agent was granted the option to invest up to $2.0 million in any future equity offering broadly marketed by the Company to investors on the same terms as the offering to other investors.
On November 4, 2019, the Company entered into a payoff letter with the Agent pursuant to which the Company terminated the Hercules Loan Agreement, as amended. The Company determined it was in the best interests of the Company to pay down the debt and terminate the Hercules Agreement to simplify the Company's balance sheet and provide additional flexibility as the Board of Directors continues to explore strategic and financial alternatives for the Company. Under the payoff letter, the Company repaid all amounts owed under the Hercules Loan Agreement totaling approximately $16.4 million, which included end of term fees of $1.4 million, and Hercules released all security interests held on the assets of the Company and its subsidiaries, including, without limitation, on the intellectual property assets of the Company. The Company recognized a loss of $1.0 million on the extinguishment of notes payable, which is included in interest expense on the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss for the year ended December 31, 2019.
MST Acquisition and Related Transactions
Purchase Agreement
On September 23, 2018, the Company entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement, or the MST Purchase Agreement, with MST Medical Surgery Technologies Ltd., an Israeli private company, or MST, and two of the Company’s wholly owned subsidiaries, as purchasers of the assets of the Seller, including the intellectual property assets, or collectively, the Buyers. The closing of the transactions contemplated by the MST Purchase Agreement occurred on October 31, 2018, pursuant to which the Company acquired MST's assets consisting of intellectual property and tangible assets related to surgical analytics with its core image analytics technology designed to empower and automate the surgical environment, with a focus on medical robotics and computer-assisted surgery. The core technology acquired under the MST Purchase Agreement is a software-based image analytics information platform powered by advanced visualization, scene recognition, artificial intelligence, machine learning and data analytics.
Under the terms of the MST Purchase Agreement, at the closing the Buyers purchased substantially all of the assets of MST. The acquisition price consisted of two tranches. At or prior to the closing of the transaction the Buyers paid $5.8 million in cash and approximately 242,310 shares of the Company’s common stock, or the Initial Shares. A second tranche of $6.6 million in additional consideration was payable in cash, stock or cash and stock, at the discretion of the Company, within one year after the closing date.
On August 7, 2019, the Company notified MST that the Company would satisfy the payment of additional consideration of $6.6 million due to MST under the MST Purchase Agreement by issuing shares of the Company's common stock, as permitted by the MST Purchase Agreement. The number of shares issued to MST as the additional consideration was 370,423 shares of common stock, or the Additional Consideration Shares. In accordance with the provisions of the MST Purchase Agreement, the number of Additional Consideration Shares was calculated based on the volume-weighted average of the closing prices of the Company's common stock as quoted on the NYSE American for the ninety day period ended August 6, 2019.
Sale of AutoLap Assets
On July 3, 2019, the Company entered into a System Sale Agreement with GBIL to sell certain assets related to the AutoLap technology. On October 15, 2019, the Company amended the prior AutoLap Sale Agreement with GBIL. Pursuant to the amended agreement the Company sold the AutoLap laparoscopic vision system, or AutoLap, and related assets to GBIL. The assets include inventory, spare parts, production equipment, testing equipment and certain intellectual property specifically related to the AutoLap. The purchase price was $17.0 million, all of which was received in 2019 in the form of $16 million in cash and a payment by GBIL of $1.0 million to settle certain Company obligations in China. Under the amended AutoLap Agreement, the Company entered into a cross-license agreement with GBIL to retain rights to use any AutoLap-related intellectual property sold to GBIL, and to non-exclusively license additional intellectual property to GBIL. The Company recorded a $16 million gain on the sale of the AutoLap assets during the year ended December 31, 2019, which represented the proceeds received in excess of the carrying value of the assets, less contract costs.
Senhance Acquisition and Related Transactions
Membership Interest Purchase Agreement and Amendment
On September 21, 2015, the Company announced that it had entered into a Membership Interest Purchase Agreement, dated September 18, 2015, or the Purchase Agreement, with Sofar S.p.A., or Sofar, as the seller, Vulcanos S.r.l., as the acquired company, and Asensus International, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company as the Buyer. The closing of the transactions contemplated by the Purchase Agreement occurred on September 21, 2015. The Buyer acquired all of the membership interests of the acquired company from Sofar, and changed the name of the acquired company to Asensus Surgical Italia S.r.l. On the closing date, pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, the Company completed the strategic acquisition from Sofar of all of the assets, employees and contracts related to the advanced robotic system for minimally invasive laparoscopic surgery now known as the Senhance System, or the Senhance Acquisition.
Under the terms of the Purchase Agreement, the consideration consisted of the issuance of 1,195,647 shares of the Company’s common stock, or the Sofar Consideration, and approximately $25.0 million U.S. Dollars and €27.5 million Euro in cash consideration, or the Cash Consideration. The Sofar Consideration was issued in full at closing of the acquisition; the Cash Consideration was or will be paid in four tranches, with U.S. $25.0 million paid at closing and the remaining Cash Consideration of €27.5 million to be paid in three additional tranches based on achievement of negotiated milestones. On December 30, 2016, the Company and Sofar entered into an Amendment to the Purchase Agreement to restructure the terms of the second tranche of the Cash Consideration. Under the Amendment, the second tranche was restructured to reduce the contingent cash consideration by €5.0 million in exchange for the issuance of 286,360 shares of the Company’s common stock with an aggregate fair market value of €5.0 million, which were issued on January 4, 2017. The price per share was $18.252 and was calculated based on the average of the closing prices of the Company’s common stock on ten consecutive trading days ending one day before the execution of the Amendment.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company has paid all Cash Consideration due under the second and fourth tranches. The third tranche, consisting of €15.0 million, has not yet been paid and is subject to certain sales revenue milestones.
The Purchase Agreement contains customary representations and warranties of the parties and the parties have customary indemnification obligations, which are subject to certain limitations described further in the Purchase Agreement.
Results of Operations
Revenue
In 2020, our revenue consisted of Senhance System leasing, instruments, accessories, and services for Senhance Systems sold in Europe, Asia and the U.S. in prior periods. In 2019, our revenue consisted of product and service revenue primarily resulting from the sale of a total of four Senhance Systems in Europe (one) and Asia (three), and related instruments, accessories and services for current and prior year system sales. The Company also recognized $1.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 related to a 2017 system sale for which revenue was deferred until the first clinical use of the system, which occurred in the second quarter of 2019.
Product, instrument, and accessory revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $1.6 million compared to $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $5.5 million decrease is due to the 2020 revenue being derived primarily from system leasing arrangements, versus 2019 revenue driven by the sale of four Senhance Systems, as well as instruments and accessories. Services revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to $1.6 million from $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the increase in the number of Senhance Systems under service contracts.
We expect to experience variability in the number and trend, and average selling price or leasing price of our products given the early stage of commercialization of our products.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of costs related to contract manufacturing, materials, and manufacturing overhead. We expense all inventory obsolescence provisions related to normal manufacturing changes as cost of revenue. The manufacturing overhead costs include the cost of quality assurance, material procurement, inventory control, facilities, equipment depreciation and operations supervision and management. We expect overhead costs as a percentage of revenues to become less significant as our production volume increases. We expect cost of revenue to increase in absolute dollars to the extent our revenues grow and as we continue to invest in our operational infrastructure to support anticipated growth.
Product cost for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $2.3 million as compared to $16.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This $14.1 million decrease over the prior year period was primarily the result of decreased materials cost of $11.6 million, which includes an inventory write-down in the amount of $7.4 million under our restructuring plan during the year ended December 31, 2019. Also contributing to the decrease were lower personnel costs totaling $1.6 million, decreased facility costs totaling $0.3 million, decreased freight costs of $0.3 million, decreased travel costs of $0.2 million, and decreased supplies cost of $0.2 million.
Service cost for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $2.9 million as compared to $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This $1.4 million decrease over the prior year period was primarily related to $1 million in reduced supplies costs, $0.3 million in reduced travel expenses for field service engineers driven by the COVID-19 pandemic, and $0.1 million in reduced other costs. Cost of revenue exceeds revenue primarily due to part replacements under maintenance plans, which are expensed when incurred, along with salaries for the field service teams.
Research and Development
Research and development, or R&D, expenses primarily consist of engineering, product development and regulatory expenses incurred in the design, development, testing and enhancement of our products and legal services associated with our efforts to obtain and maintain broad protection for the intellectual property related to our products. In future periods, we expect R&D expenses to increase moderately as we continue to invest in additional regulatory approvals as well as new products, instruments, and accessories to be offered with the Senhance System. R&D expenses are expensed as incurred.
R&D expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 26% to $16.6 million as compared to $22.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $5.9 million decrease primarily relates to decreased personnel costs of $3.7 million driven by a reduced headcount under our restructuring plan, decreased technology fees of $0.6 million, decreased supplies costs of $0.6 million, decreased travel costs of $0.5 million, decreased consulting costs of $0.4 million, decreased facility costs of $0.1 million, and decreased other costs of $0.2 million offset by $0.2 million in increased testing and validation costs. R&D expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 also include an impairment of IPR&D in the amount of $7.9 million that is presented separately in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses include costs for sales and marketing personnel, travel, demonstration product, market development, physician training, tradeshows, marketing clinical studies and consulting expenses. We expect sales and marketing expenses to remain level as we refocus our resources and efforts on market development activities pursuant to our restructuring plan.
Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 53% to $13.1 million compared to $28.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $14.9 million decrease was primarily related to decreased personnel related costs of $7.5 million, decreased travel of $3.7 million, decreased consulting costs of $2.1 million, decreased supplies expense of $0.9 million, decreased facilities costs of $0.3 million, decreased depreciation expense of $0.2 million, and decreased other costs of $0.1 million. These decreases were primarily the result of the restructuring plan implemented in the fourth quarter of 2019 together with reductions in travel and cancellation of tradeshows beginning in the first quarter of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel costs related to the executive, finance and human resource functions, as well as professional service fees, legal fees, accounting fees, insurance costs, and general corporate expenses. In future periods, we expect general and administrative expenses to decrease due to the restructuring.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 24% to $14.2 million compared to $18.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $4.6 million decrease was primarily due to decreased personnel costs of $2.4 million, decreased bad debt expense of $1.6 million, decreased consulting and outside services costs of $0.3 million, decreased supplies expense of $0.2 million, decreased travel costs of $0.2 million, and decreased other costs of $0.4 million offset by increased facilities costs of $0.5 million. In 2019, the Company recorded the bad debt charge due to uncertainty regarding collectability on a 2018 system sale in North Africa.
Restructuring
During the fourth quarter of 2019, we announced the implementation of a restructuring plan to reduce operating expenses as we continue the global market development of the Senhance platform. Under the restructuring plan, we reduced headcount primarily in the sales and marketing functions and determined that the carrying value of our inventory exceeded the net realizable value due to a decrease in expected sales. The restructuring charges amounted to $8.8 million, of which $7.4 million was an inventory write down and was included in cost of product revenue and $1.4 million related to employee severance costs and was included as restructuring and other charges in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss, during the fourth quarter of 2019. Payments under the restructuring plan concluded in 2020.
During March 2020, we continued our restructuring with additional headcount reductions which resulted in $0.9 million related to severance costs which were paid in 2020.
Gain from Sale of AutoLap Assets, Net
The gain from the sale of AutoLap assets, net to GBIL was $16.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as further explained in the "Overview" section. The gain represented the difference between the purchase price of $17 million and a $1 million liability incurred as a result of entering into the sale.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to $10.8 million compared to $10.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $0.5 million increase was primarily the result of a higher Euro to Dollar exchange rate.
Impairment of Goodwill and IPR&D Assets
The Company historically tested goodwill for impairment annually as of year-end, however, due to market conditions as well as reduced forecasts, we tested our goodwill and IPR&D carrying values as of September 30, 2019.
Pursuant to ASU 2017-04, a company must record a goodwill impairment charge if a reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value. The Company generally determines the fair value of its reporting unit using two valuation methods: the “Income Approach - Discounted Cash Flow Analysis” method, and the “Market Approach - Guideline Public Company Method.”
Under the “Income Approach - Discounted Cash Flow Analysis” method, the key assumptions consider projected sales, cost of sales, and operating expenses. These assumptions were determined by management utilizing the Company's internal operating plan, growth rates for revenues and operating expenses, and margin assumptions. An additional key assumption under this approach is the discount rate, which is determined by looking at current risk-free rates of capital, current market interest rates, and the evaluation of risk premium relevant to the business segment. If our assumptions relative to growth rates were to change or were incorrect, our fair value calculation may change.
Under the “Market Approach - Guideline Public Company Method,” the Company identified several publicly traded companies, which it believed had sufficiently relevant similarities. Similar to the income approach discussed above, sales, cost of sales, operating expenses, and their respective growth rates are key assumptions utilized. The market prices of the Company’s common stock and other guideline companies are additional key assumptions. If these market prices increase, the estimated market value would increase. If the market prices decrease, the estimated market value would decrease.
The results of these two methods were weighted based upon management’s evaluation of the relevance of the two approaches. In the 2019 evaluation, management determined that the income and market value approach should be weighted 50%-50%. In addition, management considered the decline in both our stock price and market capitalization after the September 30, 2019 measurement date as relevant factors in the analysis.
As of September 30, 2019, the Company determined that the goodwill associated with the business was impaired, and recorded impairment charges of $79.0 million. The impairment charge resulted from decreased sales and estimated cash flows and a significant decline in the Company's stock price. The Company does not have any goodwill on its consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. The Company also recognized a $7.9 million impairment charge to its IPR&D as it concluded that under the market value approach, the fair value of the IPR&D was lower than the carrying value during the year ended December 31, 2019. No such impairment was recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
The change in fair value of contingent consideration in connection with the Senhance Acquisition was a $2.9 million increase for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a decrease of $9.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The net $12.5 million increase was primarily due to changes in the Company's fair value measurement of a discounted cash flow model using significant unobservable inputs including the probability of achieving the potential milestone, future Euro-to-USD exchange rates, and an estimated discount rate associated with the risks of the expected cash flows attributable to the milestone.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities
The change in fair value of Series B Warrants issued in April 2017 was an increase of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a decrease of $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The net $2.5 million increase in change in fair value of warrant liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020 over the year ended December 31, 2019 includes re-measurement associated with the warrants exercised during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the outstanding warrants at December 31, 2020. The decrease in value at December 31, 2019 was primarily the result of the decrease in the stock price at December 31, 2019 versus December 31, 2018.
Interest Income
There was no interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $0.6 million was due to less cash and short-term investments on hand during the year ended December 31, 2020 earning less interest.
Interest Expense
There was insignificant interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company incurred a $1.0 million loss on extinguishment of debt, classified as interest expense, during the year ended December 31, 2019 which did not recur during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax benefit consists primarily of taxes related to the amortization of purchase accounting intangibles in connection with the Italian taxing jurisdiction for Asensus Surgical Italia as a result of the acquisition of the Senhance System. We recognized $1.5 million and $3.1 million of income tax benefit for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company's consolidated financial statements are prepared using U.S. GAAP applicable to a going concern, which contemplate the realization of assets and liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company has not established sufficient sales revenues to cover its operating costs and may require additional capital to proceed with its operating plan. The Company had an accumulated deficit of $722.9 million as of December 31, 2020 and working capital of $23.7 million as of December 31, 2020.
The Company has raised additional capital through equity offerings, including raising net proceeds of $73.5 million in the January 2021 public offering, $28.8 million in the January 2021 registered direct offering, $36.2 million in the 2020 ATM Offering, $13.5 million in the March 2020 public offering and an additional $13.6 million in net proceeds in the July 2020 public offering (see Note 17). Also Series B, C and D warrants have been exercised in 2020 and 2021 for aggregate proceeds to the Company of $33.7 million. Additionally, in April 2020 the Company secured a non-recourse loan in the principal amount of $2.8 million under the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) provisions of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), as amended that may be forgiven under certain circumstances, although forgiveness is not assured. Management's plan to obtain additional resources for the Company may include additional sales of equity, traditional financing, such as loans, entry into a strategic collaboration, entry into an out-licensing arrangement or provision of additional distribution rights in some or all of our markets. However, management cannot provide any assurance that the Company will be successful in accomplishing any or all of its plans. The Company believes the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to negatively impact its operations and ability to implement its market development efforts, which will have a negative effect on its financial condition.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had cash and cash equivalents, excluding restricted cash, of approximately $16.4 million. Based on the Company’s expected cash requirements, the Company believes its cash on hand at December 31, 2020 combined with the net proceeds of the January 2021 public offering, the January 2021 registered direct offering, the 2020 ATM Offering, and the Series B, C and D Warrant exercises will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months.
During 2020, we had two effective shelf registration statements on file with the SEC. The first shelf registration statement was declared effective by the SEC on May 19, 2017 and registered up to $150.0 million of debt securities, common stock, preferred stock, or warrants, or any combination thereof for future financing transactions. The second shelf registration statement was declared effective by the SEC on February 10, 2020, and also registered up to $150.0 million of debt securities, common stock, preferred stock, or warrants, or any combination thereof for future financing transactions. We have raised under such registration statements approximately $294.5 million since 2017. The first effective shelf registration statement expired in May 2020, and the second was completed in February, 2021. As of the date of this Annual Report, the Company has no effective shelf registration statement.
For a discussion of our recent equity financings, see “Financing Transactions” above in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis and Results of Operations.
Consolidated Cash Flow Data
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities of $46.7 million consisted of a net loss of $59.3 million and cash used for working capital of $10.7 million, offset by non-cash items of $23.3 million. The non-cash items primarily consisted of $10.8 million of net amortization of intangible assets, $7.9 million of stock-based compensation expense, $2.9 million change in fair value of contingent consideration, $2.9 million of depreciation, $1.5 million deferred income tax benefit, and $0.3 million change in fair value of warrant liabilities. The decrease in cash from changes in working capital included $7.2 million increase in inventories, $2.6 million decrease in accrued expenses, $2.3 million decrease in other current and long term assets, $1.8 million decrease in accounts payable, $0.9 million decrease in other long term liabilities, $0.4 million increase in accounts receivable, and $0.1 million decrease in deferred revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in operating activities of $73.5 million consisted of a net loss of $154.2 million and cash used for working capital of $12.8 million, offset by non-cash items of $93.5 million. The non-cash items primarily consisted of $86.9 million in goodwill and IPR&D impairment, $11.5 million of stock-based compensation expense, $11.5 million of net amortization of intangible assets, debt discount and debt issuance costs and short-term investments discount, $2.2 million of depreciation, $1.6 million of bad debt expense, $1.0 million loss on debt extinguishment, $8.9 million related to the write-down of obsolete inventory, and $0.8 million in interest expense on deferred consideration related to the MST Acquisition, offset by $16.0 million gain from sale of AutoLap assets, $9.6 million change in fair value of contingent consideration, $3.2 million deferred income tax benefit, and $2.2 million change in fair value of warrant liabilities. The decrease in cash from changes in working capital included $16.4 million increase in inventories, $1.2 million decrease in accrued expenses, $1.0 million decrease in deferred revenue, $0.7 million decrease in accounts payable, and $0.7 million increase in other current and long term assets, offset by $6.1 million decrease in accounts receivable and $1.0 million increase in other long term liabilities. The decrease in cash from changes in working capital was primarily driven by an increase in manufacturing activities combined with decreased Senhance System sales in the current year.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $0 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by investing activities was $67.6 million. This amount primarily consists of $65.0 million proceeds from maturities of short-term investments and $16.0 million in proceeds related to the sale of the AutoLap assets, offset by $12.9 million purchase of short-term investments and $0.4 million purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $53.4 million. The net change primarily related to $13.5 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock, preferred stock, and warrants under the March 2020 Public Offering, $13.6 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock under a July 2020 underwritten public offering, $20.2 million in proceeds from additional issuances of common stock, $3.3 million from the exercise of warrants, and $2.8 million from the receipt of funding under a Promissory Note under the PPP provisions of the CARES Act.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in financing activities was $5.6 million. This amount was primarily related to $31.4 million payment of notes payable under the Hercules Loan Agreement and $0.5 million related to the taxes withheld on restricted stock unit, or RSU, awards, offset by $25.8 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock and warrants and $0.5 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options and warrants.
Operating Capital and Capital Expenditure Requirements
We intend to spend substantial amounts on research and development activities, including product development, regulatory and compliance, clinical studies in support of our future product offerings, commercial activities and the enhancement and protection of our intellectual property. We obtained financing for these activities over the past four months, but cannot assure you that additional financing will not be required in the future to support our operations. We intend to be use financing opportunities strategically to continue to strengthen our financial position.
Cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries totaled $2.3 million at December 31, 2020, including restricted cash. We do not intend or currently foresee a need to repatriate cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries. If these funds are needed in the United States, we believe that the potential U.S. tax impact to repatriate these funds would be immaterial.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 (in millions):
During 2019, the Company fully repaid its outstanding indebtedness to Hercules Capital, and all related liens and encumbrances
have been terminated. As of December 31, 2019, the third tranche contingent consideration that may be paid under the Purchase Agreement with Sofar upon the achievement of milestones is €15.0 million. Due to uncertainty regarding the timing and amount of future payments related to this liability, the amount is excluded from the contractual obligations table above.
Operating lease amounts include future minimum lease payments under all our non-cancelable operating leases with an initial term in excess of one year. We rent office space in North Carolina under an operating lease which expires in 2020. In Italy, we rent space for research and development and demonstration facilities under an operating lease which expires in 2022. In Israel, we rent space for research and development under an operating lease which expires in 2024. In Japan, we rent office space under an operating lease which expires in 2023. In Switzerland, we rent office space under an operating lease which expires in 2023. This table does not include obligations for any lease extensions.
License, supply and third-party vendor agreements include agreements assumed as part of the Senhance Acquisition and other third party vendor agreements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations set forth above under the headings “Results of Operations” and “Liquidity and Capital Resources” have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and notes thereto appearing in