ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes included in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements, which involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors including, but not limited to, those described in “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Please refer to page 5 for further information regarding forward-looking statements and “Item 1A. Risk Factors” for a description of our risk factors.
Overview
We are a leading, global manufacturer of capital equipment, including thermal processing and wafer polishing and related consumables used in fabricating semiconductor devices, such as silicon carbide ("SiC") and silicon power devices, analog and discrete devices, electronic assemblies, and light-emitting diodes ("LEDs"). We sell these products to semiconductor device and module manufacturers worldwide, particularly in Asia, North America and Europe.
We operate in two reportable business segments, based primarily on the industries they serve: (i) Semiconductor and (ii) Material and Substrate. In our Semiconductor segment, we supply thermal processing equipment, including solder reflow ovens, horizontal diffusion furnaces, and custom high-temp belt furnaces for use by semiconductor, electronics and electro/mechanical assembly manufacturers. Our semiconductor customers are primarily manufacturers of integrated circuits and optoelectronic sensors and discrete ("O-S-D") components used in analog, power and radio frequency ("RF"). In our Material and Substrate segment, we produce substrate consumables, chemicals and machinery for lapping (fine abrading) and polishing of materials, such as silicon wafers for semiconductor products, sapphire wafers for LED applications, and compound substrates, like silicon carbide wafers, for power device applications.
The semiconductor industry is cyclical, but not seasonal, and historically has experienced fluctuations. Our revenue is impacted by these broad industry trends.
We continue to focus on our plans to profitably grow our business and have developed a strategic growth plan and a capital allocation plan that we believe will support our growth objectives. Our Power Semiconductor strategic growth plan leverages our experience, products and capabilities in pursuit of growth, profitability and sustainability. Our core focus areas are:
Emerging opportunities in the SiC industry - We believe we are well-positioned to take part in this significant growth area, specifically as it relates to silicon carbide wafer capacity expansion. We are working closely with our customers to understand their SiC growth plans, needs and opportunities. We are investing in our capacity, next generation product development, and in our people. During 2021, we completed the acquisition of Intersurface Dynamics, which added numerous coolants and chemical products to our existing consumable and machine product lines. We believe these investments will help fuel our growth in the emerging growth SiC industry.
300mm Horizontal Thermal Reactor - We have a highly successful and proven 300mm horizontal diffusion solution used for power semiconductor device manufacturing applications. We have a strong foundation with the leading 300mm power chip manufacturer, and, in the last three years, we have received 14 orders from top-tier customers. We believe we have a strong opportunity to continue expanding our customer base and grow revenue with our 300mm solution.
As the largest revenue contributor to our organization, we expect our subsidiary, BTU, will continue to track semi industry growth cycles for our advanced semi-packaging and SMT products, in addition to specialized custom belt furnaces used in automotive and other specialized industrial applications. We believe that our investments in product innovation will provide BTU with opportunities to grow further, especially in high growth applications of consumer and industrial electronics, IoT, electric vehicles and 5G communications.
We anticipate that the required investments to achieve our revenue growth targets will be in the range of $6.0 - $8.0 million in research and development and capital expenditures, which also includes investments in management information systems and capacity expansions at existing manufacturing facilities. Additionally, we may decide to divest some or all of our real estate holdings to streamline our balance sheet and provide additional working capital for our investments and research and development needs. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we completed the move of our Shanghai facility to a new location. This new location increases our capacity and allows us to streamline our manufacturing processes, thus reducing our lead times. In addition, we are evaluating our management information systems and needs in order to allow for greater efficiencies and to ensure our infrastructure can support our future growth plans. We are and will continue to closely scrutinize these planned investments, in light of the COVID-19 challenges, and we may defer some of our projects. However, as a capital equipment manufacturer, we will continue to invest in our business to fuel our future growth.
In addition to investments in our organic growth, another key aspect of our capital allocation policy is our plan to grow through acquisitions. We have the expertise and track record to identify strong acquisition targets in the semi and SiC growth environments and to execute transactions and integrations to provide for value creating, profitable growth in both the short-term and long-term. On March 3, 2021, we acquired Intersurface Dynamics, a Connecticut-based manufacturer of substrate process chemicals used in various manufacturing processes, including semiconductors, silicon and compound semiconductor wafers, and optics. As of the date of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we do not have an agreement to acquire any acquisition target.
Cybersecurity Incident
On April 12, 2021, we detected a data incident in which attackers acquired data and disabled some of the technology systems used by one of our subsidiaries. Upon learning of the incident, we immediately engaged external counsel and retained a team of third-party forensic, incident response, and security professionals to investigate and determine the full scope of this incident. We also notified law enforcement officials and confirmed that the incident is covered by our insurance. We have completed the investigation of the data incident with assistance from our outside professionals, and indications were that the unauthorized third-party gained access to certain personal information relating to employees and their beneficiaries for some of our operations. There was no indication of any misuse of this information.
Despite this disruption, production continued in our facilities. Our previously disabled subsidiary network is now back up and running securely. Working alongside our security professionals, we were able to bring our subsidiary’s systems online with enhanced security controls. We have deployed an advanced next generation anti-virus and endpoint detection and response tool, as well as Managed Detection & Response services. We remain committed to protecting the security of the personal information entrusted to us and providing high-quality products and service to our customers.
We recorded approximately $1.1 million of expense related to this incident, which is included in selling, general and administrative expenses, during the third quarter of fiscal 2021. The expense is primarily related to third-party service providers, including security professionals as well as legal and response teams. We may make additional investments in the future to further strengthen our cybersecurity. We filed an insurance claim during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 related to the incident. Disputes over the extent of insurance coverage for claims are not uncommon, and there will be a time lag between the initial incurrence of costs and the receipt of any insurance proceeds. There is no guarantee that we will be fully reimbursed for all expenses incurred. As of September 30, 2021, we have been approved for a reimbursement of approximately $0.4 million and received a request for additional information related to certain items in our claim.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the outbreak of COVID-19 was recognized as a pandemic by the World Health Organization, and the outbreak became increasingly widespread, including in all of the markets in which we operate. We continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 on all aspects of our business. We are a company operating in a critical infrastructure industry, as defined by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Consistent with federal guidelines and with state and local orders to date, we have continued to operate across our footprint throughout the COVID-19
pandemic. Following the onset of COVID-19 and its negative effects on our business, most prominently reflected in our second, third and fourth quarter fiscal 2020 results, global economic conditions improved during fiscal 2021, resulting in increased demand for our products and services, which led to our earnings for fiscal 2021 substantially exceeding our fiscal 2020 results. There remain many unknowns and we continue to monitor the expected trends and related demand for our products and services and have and will continue to adjust our operations accordingly. Please see additional information in “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
Solar and Automation Divestitures
In April 2019, we announced that the Board determined that it was in the long-term best interest of Amtech to exit the Solar business segment and to focus our strategic efforts on our non-Solar business segments in order to more fully realize the opportunities presented in those segments. The divestiture included our Tempress and SoLayTec subsidiaries, which comprised substantially all of our Solar segment.
Effective January 22, 2020 (“Tempress Sale Date”), we completed the sale of Tempress for nominal consideration to a third party located in the Netherlands. We recorded a pre-tax loss on sale of approximately $10.9 million, of which approximately $7.2 million was the recognition of previously recorded accumulated foreign currency translation losses. The total pre-tax loss did not have a material effect on our cash balances at our continuing operations. We also recognized a significant tax benefit relating to this loss, which can be carried over to future years. Effective on the Tempress Sale Date, Tempress is no longer included in our consolidated financial statements.
The portion of our Solar segment not included in discontinued operations is our previously reported Automation division, R2D. R2D had historically sold automation products to both solar and semiconductor customers. On December 13, 2019 (“R2D Sale Date”), we finalized the sale of R2D to certain members of R2D’s management team. Upon the sale, we recognized a loss of approximately $2.8 million. Effective on the R2D Sale Date, R2D is no longer included in our consolidated financial statements.
Segment Reporting Changes
Upon the acquisition of Intersurface Dynamics in the second quarter of 2021, we evaluated our organizational structure and concluded that we have two reportable business segments following the acquisition. Our Material and Substrate segment includes our former SiC/LED segment in addition to Intersurface Dynamics beginning at the date of acquisition.
In the second quarter of 2019, we began the process to divest our solar business, which we completed on January 22, 2020 with the sale of our Tempress subsidiary. As such, we have reported the results of the Solar segment as discontinued operations in our Consolidated Statements of Operations for 2019 and 2020.
Industry Fluctuations
Our quarterly and annual operating results have been and will continue to be impacted by the timing of large system orders. Further, the semiconductor equipment industry is highly cyclical, and the conditions of this industry remain volatile. Therefore, our order flow fluctuates quarter to quarter. For additional information regarding the risks related to our business and industry, please refer to "Item 1A. Risk Factors" within this Form 10-K.
Fiscal Year
Our fiscal year is from October 1 to September 30. Unless otherwise stated, references to the years 2021, 2020 and 2019 relate to the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain financial data as a percentage of net revenue for the periods indicated:
Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020
Net Revenue
Net revenue consists of revenue recognized upon shipment and/or installation of equipment, with the exception of products using new technology, for which revenue is recognized upon customer acceptance. Spare parts sales are recognized upon shipment and service revenue is recognized upon completion of the service activity, which is generally ratable over the term of the service contract. Since the majority of our revenue is generated from large system sales, revenue and operating income can be significantly impacted by the timing of system shipments and system acceptances. See “Critical Accounting Policies - Revenue Recognition” included in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations."
Our net revenue by operating segment for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Net revenue for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 were $85.2 million and $65.5 million, respectively, an increase of $19.7 million or 30%. Revenue from the Semiconductor segment increased $17.6 million, or 32%. Our semiconductor segment revenues are dependent on our customers’ expansions, and our 2020 results were negatively impacted by the uncertainty in the global economy due primarily to the impact of the COVID-19 virus, as well as lingering trade tensions between the U.S. and China. The 2021 increase is primarily attributable to higher shipments across our reflow and diffusion furnace product lines in the 2021 period. Revenue from our Material and Substrate segment increased $2.8 million, or 27%, due primarily to the addition of Intersurface Dynamics in March 2021. Excluding Intersurface Dynamics' revenue, Material and Substrate revenue increased approximately 15% due to higher sales of both machines and consumables in the 2021 period. Non-segment related revenues relate to R2D, the Automation segment that we divested in December 2019.
Backlog and Orders
Our backlog, including deferred revenue, if any, as of September 30, 2021 and 2020 was as follows (dollars in thousands):
For comparison purposes, we have removed the Automation segment, which we divested in December 2019, from the table below. New orders booked in the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 were as follows (dollars in thousands):
At the end of 2021, two customers individually accounted for 25% and 17% of our total backlog. The orders included in our backlog are generally credit approved customer purchase orders believed to be firm and are expected to ship within the next twelve months. Because our orders are typically subject to cancellation or delay by the customer, our backlog at any particular point in time is not necessarily representative of actual sales for succeeding periods, nor is backlog any assurance that we will realize profit from completing these orders.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit is the difference between net revenue and cost of goods sold. Cost of goods sold consists of purchased material, labor and overhead to manufacture equipment or spare parts and the cost of service and support to customers for installation, warranty and paid service calls. Gross margin is gross profit as a percent of net revenue. Our gross profit and gross margin by operating segment for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Gross profit for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 was $34.5 million and $24.4 million, respectively, representing an increase of $10.1 million, or 41%. Gross margin for 2021 and 2020 was 41% and 37%, respectively. Gross margin for the Semiconductor segment increased to 42% in 2021, compared to 39% in 2020, due primarily to a favorable product mix, lower labor costs as a portion of our engineers finished customer-specific design projects and began work on strategic-development projects, and a benefit from the usage of previously reserved inventory. In the Material and Substrate segment, gross margin increased slightly to 32% in 2021, compared to 31% in 2020 due primarily to the addition of Intersurface Dynamics as well as higher machine sales leading to improved utilization, partially offset by higher depreciation and inventory reserve charges.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses consist of the cost of employees, consultants and contractors, facility costs, sales commissions, shipping costs, promotional marketing expenses, legal and accounting expenses and bad debt expense.
Total SG&A expenses for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 were $24.7 million and $21.4 million, respectively. In 2021, SG&A increased by $3.3 million compared to the prior year. This increase was primarily due to increased commission expense of $1.5 million as a result of higher sales, costs associated with the data incident in April 2021 of $0.8 million, net of insurance reimbursements, and $0.8 million of costs incurred by Intersurface Dynamics during 2021. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we filed an insurance claim related to the data incident. There is no guarantee that we will be fully reimbursed for all expenses incurred. SG&A expense includes $0.4 million and $0.3 million of non-cash stock-based compensation expense for 2021 and 2020, respectively. Additionally, the fiscal 2020 period included a benefit of $0.3 million from payroll tax credits that were part of the CARES Act.
Research, Development and Engineering
RD&E expenses consist of the cost of employees, consultants and contractors who design, engineer and develop new products and processes as well as materials and supplies used in producing prototypes. RD&E expenses may vary from period to period depending on the engineering projects in process. Expenses related to engineers working on strategic projects or sustaining engineering projects are recorded in RD&E. However, from time to time we add functionality to our products or develop new products during engineering and manufacturing to fulfill specifications in a customer’s order, in which case the cost of development, along with other costs of the order, are charged to cost of goods sold. Occasionally, we receive reimbursements through governmental research and development grants which are netted against these expenses when certain conditions have been met.
RD&E expense, net of grants earned, for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 were $6.0 million and $3.3 million, respectively, an increase of $2.7 million. This increase is due to increased labor expense related to a portion of our engineers as they completed customer-specific design projects and began work on strategic-development projects. We expect most of these strategic projects to be completed during fiscal 2022, resulting in new or updated product offerings in fiscal 2022. Grants earned are immaterial in all periods presented.
Restructuring Charges
We recorded restructuring charges of $0.1 million in 2021. These one-time charges relate to staff reductions in our Semiconductor and Material and Substrate operations. We recorded restructuring charges of $0.2 million in 2020. These one-time charges were the result of staff reductions at our Massachusetts operations as we evaluated staffing across our Semiconductor operations.
Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate at our continuing operations was 56.1% and (25.4)% in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. The effective tax rate is the ratio of total income tax expense to pre-tax income. The effective tax rates for 2021 and 2020 were higher and lower than the U.S. statutory rate, respectively, due primarily to higher taxes on income in foreign jurisdictions as well as state income taxes in 2021 and 2020.
In 2021 and 2020, we recorded income tax expense at our continuing operations of $1.9 million and $0.8 million, respectively. In 2020, we recorded income tax benefit of $47,000 in our discontinued operations. The income tax provisions are based upon estimates of annual income, annual permanent differences and statutory tax rates in the various jurisdictions in which we operate, except that certain loss jurisdictions and discrete items are treated separately.
Generally accepted accounting principles require that a valuation allowance be established when it is “more likely than not” that all or a portion of deferred tax assets will not be realized. A review of all available positive and negative evidence needs to be considered, including a company’s performance, the market environment in which the Company operates and the length of carryback and carryforward periods. According to those principles, it is difficult to conclude that a valuation allowance is not needed when the negative evidence includes cumulative losses in recent years. We have concluded that we will maintain a full valuation allowance for all net deferred tax assets related to the
carryforwards of U.S. net operating losses and foreign tax credits. We will continue to monitor our cumulative income and loss positions in the U.S. and foreign jurisdictions to determine whether full valuation allowances on net deferred tax assets are appropriate. We expect to pay minimal U.S federal cash taxes for the foreseeable future as a result of our U.S. net operating losses.
Our future effective income tax rate depends on various factors, such as the amount of income (loss) in each tax jurisdiction, tax regulations governing each region, non-tax deductible expenses incurred as a percent of pre-tax income and the effectiveness of our tax planning strategies.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity and Capital Allocation
We maintain a strong focus on liquidity and define our liquidity risk tolerance based on sources and uses to maintain a sufficient liquidity position to meet our obligations through our industry cycles, under both normal and stressed conditions. We manage our liquidity to provide access to sufficient funding to meet our business needs and financial obligations throughout business cycles. We operate in the semiconductor capital equipment industry, which is cyclical, and we must ensure we have sufficient liquidity during the down cycles and varying macroeconomic conditions. Our liquidity plans are established within the context of our financial and strategic planning processes and consider the liquidity necessary to fund our operating commitments, which include purchase obligations for inventory and equipment, payroll and general expenses. We also take into consideration our capital allocation and growth objectives, including investing in research and development, capital expenditures (including capacity assessments and IT systems) and debt payments.
See information below regarding payments we expect to make as a result of contractual obligations. We have never paid dividends on our common stock. Our present policy is to apply cash to investments in product development and upgrades, acquisitions or expansion; consequently, we do not expect to pay dividends on common stock in the foreseeable future. However, once the above priorities have been met, we will evaluate the returning of capital to shareholders, as we have done in the past.
The success of our growth strategy is dependent upon the availability of additional capital resources on terms satisfactory to management. Our sources of capital in the past have included the sale of equity securities, which includes common stock sold in private transactions and public offerings, and cash generated from operations. There can be no assurance that we can raise such additional capital resources when needed or on satisfactory terms. We believe that our principal sources of liquidity discussed above are sufficient to support operations for at least the next twelve months.
Cash and Cash Flow
The following table sets forth for the periods presented certain consolidated cash flow information (in thousands):
*	Includes Cash, Cash Equivalents and Restricted Cash that are included in Held-For-Sale Assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets for periods prior to January 22, 2020.
As of September 30, 2021 and 2020, cash and cash equivalents were $32.8 million and $45.1 million, respectively. We had no restricted cash at September 30, 2021 and 2020. Our working capital was $65.8 million as of September 30, 2021 and $69.1 million as of September 30, 2020. Our ratio of current assets to current liabilities was 5.4:1 as of September 30, 2021, and 10.2:1 as of September 30, 2020.
During periods of weakening demand, we typically generate cash from operating activities. Conversely, we are more likely to use operating cash flows for working capital requirements during periods of higher growth. The $12.2 million decrease in consolidated cash during 2021 was primarily due to cash paid for the acquisition of Intersurface Dynamics, net of cash acquired, of $5.1 million and capital expenditures of $3.0 million, partially offset by proceeds received from the exercise of stock options of $1.5 million. We maintain cash accounts denominated in currencies other than our reporting currency, which expose us to foreign exchange rate fluctuations.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities was $6.0 million in 2021 compared to cash used in operating activities of $1.7 million in 2020 and cash provided by operating activities of $0.2 million in 2019. During 2021, we increased our inventory balances in preparation for shipments scheduled for the first half of fiscal 2022. Additionally, our accounts receivable increased during this period as most of our shipments occurred late in the fourth quarter and our customers generally have payment terms of 60-90 days. During 2020, we increased our inventory balances to mitigate risks in our supply chain resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as in preparation for a large shipment that occurred in the first quarter of fiscal 2021.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $8.1 million in 2021, primarily consisting of $5.1 million net cash paid for the acquisition of Intersurface Dynamics and capital expenditures primarily related to the relocation of our Shanghai manufacturing facility. Cash used in investing activities was $12.6 million in 2020, primarily related to the divestiture of our solar businesses and capital expenditures for our new Material and Substrate building in Pennsylvania. Cash used in investing activities was $1.8 million in 2019, primarily related to the sale of SoLayTec. Investing activities in 2021, 2020 and 2019 included capital expenditures of $3.0 million, $2.7 million and $0.7 million, respectively.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
In 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $1.2 million, consisting of approximately $1.5 million of proceeds received from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by payments on long-term debt of $0.4 million. In 2020, cash used in financing activities was $1.5 million, consisting of $0.9 million of proceeds received from the exercise of stock options, which was fully offset by $2.0 million used for stock repurchases and payments on long-term debt of $0.4 million. In 2019, cash used in financing activities was $0.2 million, consisting of $0.2 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options offset by payments on long-term debt of $0.4 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of September 30, 2021, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K promulgated by the SEC that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
We had the following contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of September 30, 2021, in thousands:
Acquisitions
Our business strategy includes the possible acquisition of or investments in other businesses to expand or complement our operations. The magnitude, timing and nature of any future acquisitions or investments will depend on a number of factors, including the availability of suitable candidates, the negotiation of acceptable terms, our financial capabilities and general economic and business conditions. Financing for future transactions would result in the utilization of cash, incurrence of additional debt, issuance of stock or some combination of the foregoing.
Critical Accounting Policies
See “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” for a discussion of our consolidated financial statements that have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period.
On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition, income taxes, inventory valuation and inventory purchase commitments, and indefinite-lived assets. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience, expectations regarding the future and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. The results of these estimates and judgments form the basis for making conclusions about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
A critical accounting policy is one that is both important to the presentation of our financial position and results of operations, and requires management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. These uncertainties are discussed in “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” We believe the following critical accounting policies encompass the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition. We recognize revenue when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services in an amount that reflects the consideration expected to be received in exchange for those goods or services. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a product or service to the customer. The transaction price of a contract is allocated to each distinct performance obligation based upon the relative standalone selling price ("SSP") for each performance obligation and is recognized as revenue upon satisfaction of the performance obligation. To record revenue properly, we apply the following five steps:
1) Identify the contract with the customer
A contract with a customer exists when (i) we enter into an enforceable contract with a customer that defines each party’s rights regarding the goods or services to be transferred and identifies the related payment terms, (ii) the contract has commercial substance, and (iii) we determine that collection of substantially all consideration for goods and services that are transferred is probable based on the customer’s intent and ability to pay the promised consideration.
2) Identify the performance obligations in the contract
Performance obligations are identified based on the goods and services that will be transferred to the customer that are both (i) capable of being distinct, whereby the customer can benefit from the good or service either on its own or together with other available resources, and (ii) are distinct in the context of the contract, whereby the transfer of the good or service is separately identifiable from other promises to the customer in the contract. To the extent a contract includes multiple promised goods and services, we must apply judgment to determine whether promised goods and services are capable of being distinct and distinct in the context of the contract. If these criteria are not met, the promised goods and services are accounted for as a combined performance obligation.
Our equipment sales consist of multiple performance obligations, including the delivery of the system itself and obligations that are not delivered simultaneously with the system, such as installation services and training. In most cases, these services require minimal effort and are perfunctory in nature. Therefore, equipment and related services are treated as one performance obligation. Customers who purchase new systems are provided an assurance-type warranty, generally for periods of 12 to 24 months. Assurance-type warranties are not considered a performance obligation.
3) Determine the transaction price
The transaction price is determined based on the consideration to which we will be entitled in exchange for transferring goods and services to the customer. The transaction price for equipment sales is adjusted for estimated product returns that we expect to occur under our return policy based upon past return rates, which have historically been immaterial. In rare cases when the transaction price includes variable consideration, we estimate the amount of variable consideration that should be included in the transaction price utilizing either the expected value method or the most likely amount method, depending on the nature of the variable consideration. Any estimates, including the effect of the constraint on variable consideration, are evaluated at each reporting period for any changes.
The transaction price is based on the price reflected in the individual customer’s purchase order. Variable consideration has not been identified as a significant component of the transaction price for any of our existing contracts.
4) Allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract
If the contract contains a single performance obligation, the entire transaction price is allocated to the single performance obligation. Contracts that contain multiple distinct performance obligations require an allocation of the transaction price to each distinct performance obligation. In rare cases, the transaction price is variable and meets criteria to be allocated entirely to each distinct performance obligation or to a distinct service that forms part of a single performance obligation.
When required, we determine the SSP for each performance obligation based on consideration of both market and company-specific factors, including the selling price and profit margin for similar products. For those contracts
that contain multiple performance obligations (primarily system sales requiring extensive installation services), we must determine the SSP for each performance obligation. To determine the SSP for labor related performance obligations (such as the labor component of installation), we use directly observable inputs based on the standalone sale prices for these services. We use a cost-plus margin approach in determining the SSP for any materials-related performance obligations (e.g., system add-ons, spare parts, and systems).
5) Recognize revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation
We satisfy performance obligations either over time or at a point in time. Revenue is recognized over time if either (i) the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits provided by our performance, (ii) our performance creates or enhances an asset that the customer controls as the asset is created or enhanced, or (iii) our performance does not create an asset with an alternative use to the entity and we have an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date. If we do not satisfy a performance obligation over time, the related performance obligation is satisfied at a point in time by transferring the control of a promised good or service to a customer. Examples of control are using the asset to produce goods or services, enhance the value of other assets, settle liabilities, and holding or selling the asset. For over time recognition, we are required to select a single revenue recognition method for the performance obligation that faithfully depicts our performance in transferring control of the goods and services. We can choose between two methods to measure progress toward complete satisfaction of a performance obligation:
Output methods - recognize revenue on the basis of direct measurements of the value to the customer of the goods or services transferred to date relative to the remaining goods or services promised under the contract (e.g., surveys of performance completed to date, appraisals of results achieved, milestones reached, time elapsed, and units of produced or units delivered); or
Input methods - recognize revenue on the basis of our efforts or inputs to the satisfaction of a performance obligation (e.g., resources consumed, labor hours expended, costs incurred, or time elapsed) relative to the total expected inputs to the satisfaction of that performance obligation.
Equipment and related product revenues (e.g., furnace systems, system add-ons, machinery, consumables and spare parts) are recognized at a point in time, when they are shipped or delivered, depending on contractual terms. For products where the customer’s defined specifications have not been met with respect to at least two similarly configured systems and processes (i.e., new technology), the revenue and directly-related costs are deferred at the time of shipment and later recognized at the time of customer acceptance or when this criterion has been met.
For installation services related to our current products, revenue is recognized at a point in time, when the equipment is shipped or delivered, depending on contractual terms. The nature of the installation services requires minimal effort and is perfunctory in nature. Therefore, delivery of equipment and any related installation are treated as one performance obligation. Our installation obligations related to future products may differ, thus requiring treatment as a separate performance obligation.
Revenue for maintenance and service contracts are recognized over time. Progress in the satisfaction of these performance obligations will be measured using an input method of either time elapsed, in the case of fixed-period contracts, or labor hours expended, in the case of project-based contracts.
We exclude from the transaction price all sales taxes that are assessed by a governmental authority and that are imposed on and concurrent with a specific revenue-producing transaction and collected from a customer (for example, sales, use, value added, and some excise taxes). Sales taxes are presented on a net basis (excluded from revenues) in our Consolidated Statements of Operations. Our remaining performance obligations as of September 30, 2021, have an original duration of one year or less. We do not have any payment terms that exceed one year from the point we have satisfied the related performance obligations.
Income Taxes. The calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in identifying uncertain tax positions and estimating the amount of deferred tax assets that will be realized in the future and the impact of uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with our expectations could have a material impact on our operations and financial condition.
We are required to apply a more-likely-than-not threshold to the recognition and derecognition of uncertain tax positions and in determining whether certain tax benefits will be realized in the future. We are required to recognize the amount of tax benefit that has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being ultimately realized upon settlement. It further requires that a change in judgment related to the expected ultimate resolution of uncertain tax positions be recognized in earnings in the period of such change.
We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. We consider past operating results, future market growth, historical and projected taxable income, the mix of earnings in the jurisdictions in which we operate, prudent and feasible tax planning strategies and statutory tax law changes in determining the need for a valuation allowance. If we were to determine that it is more likely than not that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax assets in the future, an adjustment to the deferred tax assets would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. Likewise, if we later determine that it is more likely than not that all or part of the net deferred tax assets would be realized, then all or part of the previously provided valuation allowance would be reversed. As of September 30, 2021, we have significant U.S. deferred tax assets that have a full valuation allowance. Any changes to the judgements related to our valuation allowance could have a material impact on our results of operations.
Inventory Valuation and Inventory Purchase Commitments. We value our inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Inventory cost includes the purchase price of parts or finished good and any freight cost incurred to receive the inventory into our manufacturing facilities. We regularly review inventory quantities and record a write-down to net realizable value for excess and obsolete inventory. The write-down is primarily based on historical inventory usage adjusted for expected changes in product demand and production requirements. Our industry is characterized by customers in highly-cyclical industries, rapid technological changes, frequent new product developments and rapid product obsolescence. Changes in demand for our products could result in further write-downs.
We must order components for our products and build inventory in advance of product shipments through issuance of purchase orders based on projected demand. These commitments typically cover our requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 180 days or longer when there is a significant increase in demand or lead-times from suppliers. These purchase commitments may result in accepting delivery of components not needed to meet current demand. We accrue for estimated cancellation fees related to component orders that have been cancelled or are expected to be cancelled, and for excess inventories that will likely result in our taking delivery of ordered inventory items in excess of our projected needs. If there is an abrupt and substantial decline in demand for one or more of our products, an unanticipated change in technological requirements for any of our products, or a change in our suppliers’ practice of not enforcing purchase commitments, we may be required to record additional charges for these items. This would negatively impact gross margin in the period when the charges are recorded.
Indefinite-Lived Assets and Goodwill. We perform an annual impairment test in the fourth quarter of each year, or more frequently if indicators of potential impairment exist, to determine whether the fair value of a reporting unit in which goodwill resides is less than its carrying value. We perform the first step of the goodwill impairment test, which compares the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying value. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of the net assets assigned to that unit, goodwill is not considered impaired and we are not required to perform additional analysis. If the carrying value of the net assets assigned to the reporting unit exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit, we would recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value (although the loss would not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit).
Determining the fair value of a reporting unit involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. Our goodwill impairment test uses a weighting of the income approach and the market approach to estimate a reporting unit’s fair value. The income approach is based on a discounted future cash flow analysis that uses certain assumptions including: projections of revenues and expenses and related cash flows based on assumed long-term growth rates and demand trends; expected future investments and working capital requirements to sustain and grow the business; and estimated discount rates based on the reporting unit’s weighted average cost of capital as derived by the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) and other methods, which includes observable market inputs and other data from identified comparable companies. The same estimates are also used internally for our capital budgeting process, and for
long-term and short-term business planning and forecasting. We test the reasonableness of the inputs and outcomes of our discounted cash flow analysis against available comparable market data.
The market approach is based on the application of appropriate market-derived multiples selected from (i) comparable publicly-traded companies and/or (ii) the implied transaction multiples derived from identified merger and acquisition activity in the market. Multiples are then selected based on a comparison of the reviewed data to that of the reporting unit and applied to relevant historical and forecasted financial parameters such as levels of revenues, EBITDA, EBIT or other metrics.
If actual results differ significantly from our projections, we may be required to record a material impairment charge.
Impact of Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements, see “Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements” within "Note 1. Summary of Operations and Significant Accounting Policies” in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”