ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and accompanying notes included herein. This discussion contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. All statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K other than statements of historical fact, including statements regarding our future operating results or financial position, our business strategy and plans, and our objectives for future operations, are forward-looking statements. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, economic and competitive conditions, regulatory changes and other uncertainties, as well as those factors included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, all of which are difficult to predict. In light of these risks, uncertainties and assumptions, the forward-looking events discussed may not occur. We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements.
For purposes of this section, “we,” “us,” “our,” the “Company” and “Atlas” refers to Atlas Technical Consultants, Inc. (formerly named Boxwood Merger Corp.) and its subsidiaries. The Atlas Business Combination (as defined below) was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization where the Company was the legal acquirer but treated as the accounting acquiree. All references to operations prior to the Atlas Business Combination reflect the results of Atlas Intermediate Holdings LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Atlas Intermediate”) and its subsidiaries. Since Atlas Intermediate was determined to be the accounting acquirer, the information included below will include the results of Atlas Intermediate and its subsidiaries through the Atlas Business Combination and will include the Company, including Atlas Intermediate, for transactions occurring after the Atlas Business Combination.
OVERVIEW
Since becoming a public company in February 2020, we continued to execute on our growth strategy by completing three strategic acquisitions, and we improved our capital structure through (i) a warrant exchange in the fourth quarter of 2020 and (ii) a recapitalization of our debt and redemption in full of our preferred equity in the first quarter of 2021. We incurred significant expenses related to the Atlas Business Combination and our initial formation as a public company. COVID-19 also had negative impacts on our operations during 2020 but we took steps to mitigate the impacts through cost control measures. Our utilization rates improved over the course of the year from the lows initially experienced at the onset of the pandemic, as we continued to work towards pre-COVID operating levels.
Our growth during 2020 was fueled in large part by contracts with various Departments of Transportation that continued throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as our acquisitions of LONG, Alta Vista and WesTest. Our backlog has grown to $628 million at the end of the year and in February 2021, we announced our entry into a definitive agreement (subject to customary closing conditions) to acquire Atlantic Engineering Laboratories, Inc. and Atlantic Engineering Laboratories of NY, Inc. The combination of organic growth and acquisitions remains integral to our expansion plans, particularly as it relates to potential increases in federal and state transportation, infrastructure and environmental spending.
Atlas Technical Consultants, Inc. (the “Company”, “We”, or “Atlas” and formerly named Boxwood Merger Corp. (“Boxwood”)) was a blank check company, incorporated in Delaware on June 28, 2017. The Company was formed for the purpose of acquiring, through a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization, recapitalization, or other similar business transaction, one or more operating businesses or assets.
On February 14, 2020 (the “Closing Date”), the Company consummated its acquisition of Atlas Intermediate pursuant to the Unit Purchase Agreement, dated as of August 12, 2019, as amended on January 22, 2020 (the “Purchase Agreement”), by and among the Company, Atlas TC Holdings LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company and a Delaware limited liability company (“Holdings”), Atlas TC Buyer LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Holdings and a Delaware limited liability company, Atlas Intermediate and Atlas Technical Consultants Holdings LP, a Delaware limited partnership (the “Seller”). The acquisition of Atlas Intermediate pursuant to the Purchase Agreement together with the other transactions contemplated by the Purchase Agreement is referred to herein as the “Atlas Business Combination.”
Following the consummation of the Atlas Business Combination, we are organized in an “Up-C” structure in which the business of Atlas Intermediate and its subsidiaries is held by Holdings and continues to operate through the subsidiaries of Atlas Intermediate, and in which our only direct assets consist of common units of Holdings (the “Holdings Units”). We are the sole manager of Holdings in accordance with the terms of the Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement of Holdings entered into in connection with the consummation of the Atlas Business Combination.
Headquartered in Austin, Texas, we are a leading provider of professional testing, inspection, engineering, environmental, program management and consulting services, offering solutions to public and private sector clients in the transportation, commercial, water, government, education, industrial, healthcare and power markets. With approximately 140 offices located throughout the United States, we provide a broad range of mission-critical technical services, helping our clients test, inspect, certify, plan, design and manage a wide variety of projects across diverse end markets.
We act as a trusted advisor to our clients, helping our clients design, engineer, inspect, manage and maintain civil and commercial infrastructure, servicing the existing structures as well as helping to build new structures. However, we do not perform any construction, and do not take any direct construction risk.
We provide a broad range of mission-critical technical services, ranging from providing inspection services in small projects to managing significant aspects of large, multi-year projects. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we:
● performed approximately 40,000 projects, with average revenue per project of less than $10,000; and
● delivered approximately 90% of our projects under “time & materials” and “cost-plus” contracts.
We have long-term relationships with a diverse set of clients, providing a base of repeating clients, projects and revenues. Approximately 90% of our revenues are derived from projects that have used our services at least twice in the past three years and more than 95% of our revenues are generated from client relationships longer than 10 years, with greater than 25% of revenues generated from relationships longer than 30 years. Examples of such long-term customers include the Texas and Georgia Departments of Transportation, U.S. Postal Service, Gwinnett County Georgia, New York City Housing Authority, Stanford University, Port of Oakland, United Rentals, Inc., Speedway, Walmart, Inc., and Apple Inc.
Our broad base of customers spans a diverse set of end markets including the transportation, commercial, water, government, education, industrial, healthcare and power sectors. Our customers include government agencies, quasi-public entities, schools, hospitals, utilities and airports, as well as private sector clients across many industries.
Our services require a high degree of technical expertise, as our clients rely on us to provide testing, inspection and quality assurance services to ensure that structures are designed, engineered, built and maintained in accordance with building codes, regulations and the highest safety standards. As such, our services are delivered by a highly-skilled, technical employee base that includes scientists, engineers, inspectors and other field experts. As of December 31, 2020, our technical staff represented approximately 80% of our approximately 3,200 employees. Our services are typically provided under contracts, some of which are long-term with long lead times between when contracts are signed and when our services are performed. As such, we have a significant amount of contracted backlog, providing for a high degree of visibility with respect to revenues expected to be generated from such backlog. As of December 31, 2020, our contracted backlog was estimated to be approximately $628 million. See “-Backlog” below for additional information relating to our backlog.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The domestic and global crisis resulting from the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the measures being taken to address and limit the spread of the virus, have adversely affected the U.S. economy and financial markets, resulting in an economic downturn that has negatively impacted the demand for our services. This crisis has affected our operations and liquidity in a number of ways. Project delays have negatively impacted our revenue, and if continued or exacerbated, could result in a material adverse effect to our business. Additionally, a prolonged downturn could ultimately result in an overall decrease in demand for our services. Although the pandemic has begun to show signs of subsiding during the first quarter of 2021 with the approval and dissemination of multiple COVID-19 vaccines and the lifting of pandemic-related restrictions in many states, we cannot currently predict with certainty the full extent to which our business, results of operations, financial condition or liquidity will ultimately be impacted. We will continue to monitor the safety of our employees during the COVID-19 pandemic, and we are evaluating, and will continue to evaluate, the impact of COVID-19 on our current projects. Our top priority is to protect our employees and their families, as well as our clients.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2016, FASB issued ASU 2016-02, Leases. ASU 2016-02 requires lessees to recognize, in the balance sheet, a liability to make lease payments and a right-of-use asset representing the right to use the underlying asset over the lease term. The amendments in this accounting standard update are to be applied using a modified retrospective approach and are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021. The Company is currently evaluating the requirements of ASU 2016-02 and its impact on the consolidated and combined financial statements.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments (Topic 326) - Credit Losses: Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which provides guidance regarding the measurement of credit losses on financial instruments. The new guidance replaces the incurred loss impairment methodology in the current guidance with a methodology that reflects expected credit losses and requires consideration of a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to determine credit loss estimates. This ASU will be effective for the Company commencing after December 15, 2022. The Company is in the process of assessing the impact of this ASU on our consolidated financial statements and disclosures.
See Note 2. “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of the recent accounting pronouncements.
HOW WE EVALUATE OUR OPERATIONS
We use a variety of financial and other information in monitoring the financial condition and operating performance of our business. Some of this information is financial information that is prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), while other information may be financial in nature and may not be prepared in accordance with GAAP. Historical information is periodically compared to budgets, as well as against industry-wide information. We use this information for planning and monitoring our business, as well as in determining management and employee compensation.
We evaluate our overall business performance based primarily on a combination of four financial metrics: revenue, backlog, adjusted EBITDA and liquidity measures. These are key measures used by our management team and Board to understand and evaluate our operational performance, to establish budgets and to develop short and long-term operational goals.
Revenue
Revenues for services are derived from billings under contracts (which are typically of short duration) that provide for specific time, material and equipment charges, or lump sum payments and are reported net of any taxes collected from customers. We recognize revenue as it is earned at estimated collectible amounts.
Revenue is recognized as services are performed and amounts are earned in accordance with the terms of a contract. We generally contract for services to customers based on either hourly rates or a fixed fee. In such contracts, our efforts, measured by time incurred, typically are provided in less than a year and represent the contractual milestones or output measure, which is the contractual earnings pattern. For contracts with fixed fees, we recognize revenues as amounts become billable in accordance with contract terms, provided the billable amounts are consistent with the services delivered and are earned. Expenses associated with performance of work may be reimbursed with a markup depending on contractual terms. Revenues include the markup, if any, earned on reimbursable expenses. Reimbursements include billings for travel and other out-of-pocket expenses and third-party costs, such as equipment rentals, materials, subcontractor costs and outside laboratories, which is included in cost of revenues in the accompanying combined statement of income.
Backlog
We analyze our backlog, which we define as fully awarded and contracted work or revenue we expect to realize for work completed, to evaluate operations and future revenue potential. Our contracted backlog includes revenue we expect to record in the future from signed contracts. In order to calculate backlog, we determine the amounts for contracted projects that are fully funded, and then determine the respective revenues expected to be realized upon completion of work. We use backlog to evaluate Company revenue growth as it typically follows growth in backlog. As backlog is not a defined accounting term, our computation of backlog may not be comparable with that of our peers.
Adjusted EBITDA
We view adjusted EBITDA, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, as an important indicator of performance. We define adjusted EBITDA as net income before interest expense, provision for income taxes, depreciation and amortization, further adjusted to reflect non-cash equity compensation as well as certain one-time or non-recurring items.
We believe adjusted EBITDA is a useful performance measure because it allows for an effective evaluation of our operating performance when compared to our peers, without regard to our financing methods or capital structure. We exclude the items listed above from net income in arriving at adjusted EBITDA because these amounts are either non-recurring or can vary substantially within the industry depending upon accounting methods and book values of assets, capital structures and the method by which the assets were acquired. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to, or more meaningful than, net income determined in accordance with GAAP. Certain items excluded from adjusted EBITDA are significant components in understanding and assessing a company’s financial performance, such as a company’s cost of capital and tax structure, as well as the historic costs of depreciable assets, none of which are reflected in adjusted EBITDA. Our presentation of adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an indication that results will be unaffected by the items excluded from adjusted EBITDA. Our computations of adjusted EBITDA may not be identical to other similarly titled measures of other companies.
The following table presents reconciliations of adjusted EBITDA to net income, our most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
(1) Includes the EBITDA of LONG (which we acquired in February 2020) for the period January 1, 2020 through the date of the acquisition.
(2) Includes professional service-related service fees such as legal, accounting, tax, valuation and other consulting relating as well as change in control payments relating to the Atlas Business Combination. Additionally, it includes other acquisition related professional fees, previous owner expenses and costs to shut down the telecom division.
(3) Includes the amortization of the unvested portion of our 2017 and 2019 Management Incentive Plan grants that vested immediately upon the consummation of the Atlas Business Combination pursuant to change in control provisions contained within the applicable agreements, compensation that was earned and accrued for in the three months ended March 31, 2020 that were share settled in December 2020, and the amortization of unvested restricted stock units granted in May 2020 to key management personnel.
COMPONENTS AND FACTORS AFFECTING OUR OPERATING RESULTS
Revenue
We generate revenue primarily by providing infrastructure-based testing, inspection, certification, engineering, and compliance services to a wide range of public- and private-sector clients. Our revenue consists of both services provided by our employees and pass-through fees from subcontractors and other direct costs.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue reflects the cost of personnel and specifically identifiable costs associated with revenue.
Operating Expense
Operating expense includes corporate expenses, including personnel, occupancy, and administrative expenses, including depreciation and amortization.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of contractual interest expense on outstanding debt obligations including amortization of deferred financing costs and other related financing expenses.
Income Tax Expense
Following the consummation of the Atlas Business Combination, we are organized in an “Up-C” structure in which the business of Atlas Intermediate and its subsidiaries is held by Holdings and will continue to operate through the subsidiaries of Atlas Intermediate, and in which our only direct assets consist of common units of Holdings. We are the sole manager of Holdings in accordance with the terms of the Holdings LLC Agreement entered into in connection with the consummation of the Atlas Business Combination.
Previously, Atlas Intermediate was treated as a partnership for federal and state income tax purposes with all income tax liabilities and/or benefits of the Company being passed through to the partners and members. As such, no recognition of federal or state income taxes have been provided for in the accompanying consolidated financial statements with the exception of income taxes relating to the C-Corp subsidiaries directly owned by Atlas Intermediate and the State of Texas Margin tax.
Subsequent to the Atlas Business Combination, income taxes relating to the C-Corps owned directly by Atlas Intermediate and the State of Texas Margin tax are considered within the provision of non-controlling interest as it is generated through the results of Atlas Intermediate and its subsidiaries.
Net Income (loss) From Continuing Operations
Net income from continuing operations reflects our operating income after taking into account costs and expenses for a given period, while excluding any gain or loss from discontinued operations.
Loss From Discontinued Operations
Loss from discontinued operations includes our non-recurring gains or losses realized in connection with the disposition of an asset or component of the business that results in discontinued operations.
Provision for Non-controlling Interest
Our ownership and voting structure is comprised of holders of our Class A common stock that participate 100% in the results of Atlas Technical Consultants, Inc. and 36.4% in Atlas Intermediate and its subsidiaries and holders of our Class B common stock that participate in the results of Atlas Intermediate and its subsidiaries until their Class B common stock is converted to Class A common stock. The holders of our Class B common stock participate in 63.6% of Atlas Intermediate and its subsidiaries. In connection with the Atlas Business Combination, it was determined that the results of Atlas Intermediate and its subsidiaries would be fully consolidated within the results of the Company.
Due to the participation of the holders of our Class B common stock in the results of Atlas Intermediate and subsidiaries, a non-controlling interest was deemed to exist. Consolidated net income includes earnings attributable to both the shareholders and the non-controlling interests.
The provision for non-controlling interest relates to pre-tax income subsequent to the Atlas Business Combination and includes a pro-rata share of taxes as federal and state income taxes relating to the C-Corps directly owned by Atlas Intermediate and the State of Texas Margin tax as it is generated through the results of Atlas Intermediate and its subsidiaries.
Upon the close of the Atlas Business Combination, the holders of our Class B common stock participated in 80.6% of the results of Atlas Intermediate and its subsidiaries. This percentage has declined over the course of the year due to the exchange of Atlas Intermediate units, together with Class B common shares, for Class A common shares and the exchange of our public and private placement warrants for Class A common shares during November and December 2020 as a result of our tender offer and warrant exchange.
Redeemable Preferred Stock Dividends
On February 14, 2020, in connection with the consummation of the Atlas Business Combination, Holdings and GSO COF III AIV-2 LP (“GSO AIV-2”) entered into a subscription agreement (the “Subscription Agreement”) pursuant to which GSO AIV-2 purchased 145,000 units of a new class of Series A Senior Preferred Units of Holdings (the “Preferred Units”) at a price per Preferred Unit of $978.21, for an aggregate cash purchase price of $141,840,450, which represented a 2.179% original issue discount on the Preferred Units (such purchase, the “GSO Placement”).
The GSO Placement was made pursuant to the exemption from registration contained in Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and/or Regulation D promulgated thereunder.
On February 25, 2021, the Company, in its capacity as the managing member of Holdings, entered into Amendment No. 1 to the Holdings LLC Agreement to allow Holdings, at the direction of the Board, to redeem all of the Preferred Units at any time using the proceeds from the refinancing of the Atlas Credit Agreement and entry into the Atlas 2021 Credit Agreements described in Note 17 - Subsequent Events.
On February 25, 2021, following the execution of Amendment No. 1 to the Holdings LLC Agreement, Holdings elected to redeem all of the 145,000 Preferred Units then outstanding and held by GSO AIV-2 for $1,084.96 per Preferred Unit for a total redemption price of $157,371,024.84 (the “Redemption”). Following the Redemption, (i) the Preferred Units are no longer deemed outstanding, (ii) all dividends on the Preferred Units ceased to accrue, and (iii) all rights of the holders thereof as holders of Preferred Units ceased and terminated, except for the right to receive payment under the Redemption.
Net Income (loss) Attributable to Class A Common Stock (Previously Members)
Net income (loss) attribution to holders of our Class A common stock represents our results after the provision for non-controlling interest, the effect of all taxes under the Up-C structure for the period subsequent to the Atlas Business Combination, and dividends due on redeemable preferred stock.
Net income (loss) for the historical results of Atlas Intermediate prior to the Atlas Business Combination are also reported within this line item.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following table represents our selected results of operations for the periods indicated (in thousands, except per share data).
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 to 2019:
Revenue
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $2.8 million, or 1%, to $468.2 million as compared to $471.0 million for the corresponding prior year period. The decrease in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations, offset, in part, by current year acquisitions and organic growth in certain regions.
COVID-19 affected our operations through: (i) shelter-in-place orders and similar restrictions along the West Coast and Eastern seaboard, (ii) accessibility to client facilities throughout the country, whether related to the client’s closure of facilities due to safety protocols or their efforts to reduce visitor interaction as a means of protecting their employees and (iii) project start delays. The total impact of COVID-19 was a revenue reduction of $34.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company was able to temper the full effect of COVID-19 through acquisitions and organic growth within its existing platform. Acquisitions provided $21.7 million of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our existing platform contributed $10.3 million of additional revenues primarily through two significant infrastructure projects that supported the nation’s security interests in the amount of $4.6 million of increased revenues in comparison to prior year, and our strategic expansion into the Texas market, which added an additional $2.9 million in comparison to prior year.
The Company also entered into a new service offering during 2019 benefitting our national clients that leveraged our nationwide platform. We continued to see robust demand during 2020 from additional clients. This resulted in $1.0 million of increased revenues during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year prior.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $14.0 million, or 5%, to $245.7 million, as compared to $259.7 million for the corresponding prior year period. The decrease in cost of revenues was partially due to the decrease in revenues, but the percentage decrease was higher than the revenue decrease of 1% due to the fact that we are cross selling our services which reduces our use of outside contractors and that COVID-19 served to significantly reduce pass through travel and consumables costs in comparison to prior year. The reduction in travel was a result of our efforts to protect our employees from unnecessary exposure to the virus and client actions to limit our access to facilities as previously discussed. The reduction in consumables related to our environmental testing activities, as those services were affected by reduced access to client facilities as previously discussed.
Cost of revenue, as a percentage of revenue, decreased to 52.5% from 55.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, as we earn higher revenues from self-performed work.
Operating Expense
Operating expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $32.9 million, or 17%, to $224.8 million as compared to $191.9 million for the corresponding prior year period. For the year ended December 31, 2020, operating expense, as a percentage of revenue, increased to 48.0% from 40.7% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The increase in operating expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to the consummation of the Atlas Business Combination, as the Company expensed $7.5 million of acquisition related costs and $12.0 million of costs incurred with change of control provisions contained within employment agreements and our former Management Incentive Plan. The Company also incurred $5.4 million of additional intangible amortization expense in comparison to the prior year due to new intangibles resulting from current year acquisitions as well as the acceleration of amortization associated with its Trade Name intangible assets, as the Company has sought to use the Atlas name in lieu of the acquired company’s legacy name in marketing and legal documents. The remainder of the increase was attributable to legal, accounting and insurance costs related to our status as a newly public company.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $14.8 million, or 150%, to $24.7 million, as compared to $9.9 million for the corresponding prior year period. The increase in interest expense is due to higher borrowings and interest rates in comparison to the prior year and higher amortization of deferred financing fees for the Atlas Credit Agreement in comparison to the Atlas Credit Facility.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.7 million, compared to income tax expense of $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in income tax expense was primarily due to the impacts of COVID-19 on our operations that are organized as C-Corps based in Northern California.
Loss From Discontinued Operations
Loss from discontinued operations was $0.0 million and $0.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We closed the Power & Industrial (P&I) business unit in late 2018 with some closing transactions recorded in early 2019.
Provision for Non-controlling Interest
The provision for non-controlling interest for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $16.6 million. The provision is new for fiscal year 2020 as there was a reverse recapitalization created by the Atlas Business Combination whereby the holders of our Class B common stock only share in the results of Atlas Intermediate and its subsidiaries based upon their ownership percentage in relation to total common stockholders. This treatment is effective from the Atlas Business Combination throughout the conversion of Class B common stock to Class A common stock.
Redeemable Preferred Stock Dividends
Redeemable preferred stock dividends for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $16.2 million, or 100%, to $16.2 million from $0.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase is due to $141.8 million of redeemable preferred stock that we issued in connection with the Atlas Business Combination.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our primary sources of liquidity and capital resources are our cash and cash equivalents balances, cash flow from operations, borrowings under the Atlas 2021 Credit Agreements (as defined below), and access to financial markets. Our principal uses of cash are operating expenses, working capital requirements, capital expenditures, repayment of debt and acquisition expenditures. We believe our sources of liquidity, including cash flow from operations, existing cash and cash equivalents and borrowing capacity under the Atlas 2021 Credit Agreements will be sufficient to meet projected cash requirements for at least the next twelve months. We continue to assess our business operations and the impact that COVID-19 may have on our financial results and liquidity. Due to the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic and related project delays, during fiscal year 2020 we experienced a reduction in revenues and our cash flows in comparison to the previous comparable period. We will continue to monitor our capital requirements to ensure our needs are in line with available capital resources and we will continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 on our liquidity. We believe that we have adequate liquidity resources for the next twelve months.
Other than the impact on cash flows from operations relating to the decrease in revenues relating to COVID-19, we have not experienced other liquidity decreases.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth our cash flows for the periods indicated.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019
Cash and Cash Equivalents.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $14.1 million and $20.2 million of cash and cash equivalents, respectively. Due to the fact that our operating companies closed their books on December 25, 2020, the Friday closest to December 31, 2020, as disclosed in Note 1- Organization and Basis of Presentation to our audited financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020, we collected $8.9 million of net cash from December 26, 2020 through December 31, 2020 that was applied to outstanding receivable balances. This did not affect our working capital as of December 31, 2020 or our cash flows generated from operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. However, this would increase our liquidity to $39.0 million as of December 31, 2020.
Operating Activities
Cash flow from operating activities is primarily generated from operating income from our professional and technical testing, inspection, engineering, environmental, program management and consulting services.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $15.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $31.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $16.0 million was due to payments of accounts payable and accrued expenses mainly relating to costs associated with the Atlas Business Combination and other public company costs.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was ($23.6) million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to ($9.6) million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $14.0 million increase in cash used was related to our current year acquisitions of LONG, Alta Vista and WesTest in the amount of $20.4 million, offset, in part, by lower capital expenditures in 2020 versus 2019 and a purchase in 2019 of a New York state engineering license in the amount of $2.0 million that did not recur in 2020. Capital expenditures were lower for 2020 in comparison to prior year due to the development of a general ledger software platform at one of our operating companies.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to ($8.2) million used during the year ended December 31, 2019. The $10.2 million increase in net cash provided by financing activities was primarily due to the issuance of common stock in the amount of $10.2 million as a result of the Atlas Business Combination. Also during the current year we paid preferred dividends associated with our redeemable preferred stock in the amount of ($6.6) million, offset, in part, by a payment of contingent consideration in the amount of ($5.1) million during the year ended December 31, 2019 that did not recur in 2020. The payment of redeemable preferred stock dividends also is a result of the Atlas Business Combination and was expected to be a recurring use of cash until the extinguishment of the redeemable preferred stock in February 2021.
The Company raised additional money during 2020 through the Atlas Credit Agreement, described herein, and the issuance of redeemable preferred stock which was used to pay a distribution to the former owners of Atlas Intermediate, acquire LONG and pay off the Atlas Credit Facility.
Working Capital
Working capital, or current assets less current liabilities, increased by $0.7 million, or 1.0%, to $92.8 million at December 31, 2020 from $92.1 million at December 31, 2019. This increase in working capital is primarily due to the contributions from our LONG, Alta Vista and WesTest acquisitions collectively in the amount of $9.9 million during the current year, offset, in part, by deferrals of employer payroll taxes allowed for by the CARES Act in the amount of $4.1 million and an increase in short term debt of $3.2 million, which resulted from the change in debt agreements upon the consummation of the Atlas Business Combination.
Debt Arrangements
In March 2019, subsequent to the merger with ATC Group Partners (“ATC”), we repaid all outstanding balances on the combined entity’s loan agreements in full and terminated our prior loan agreements. These loan agreements were replaced with a term loan of $145.0 million and a revolving credit facility of $50.0 million, of which $31.8 million was funded at closing (the “Atlas Credit Facility”). Proceeds of the Atlas Credit Facility were used to repay existing debt of $123.9 million and fund a shareholder distribution of $52.8 million made in April 2019.
The Atlas Credit Facility was secured by assets of Atlas Intermediate. The Atlas Credit Facility required quarterly principal payments of $2.719 million through March 31, 2023, and then $3.625 million until the final maturity in March 2024, and bore interest at an annual rate of LIBOR plus a margin ranging from 275 to 425 basis points determined by the Company’s Consolidated Leverage Ratio, as defined in the Atlas Credit Facility. For the interest payment made in the quarter ended December 31, 2019, the applicable margin was 375 basis points and the total interest rate was 5.500%.
The Atlas Credit Facility was scheduled to mature in March 2024. However, in connection with the consummation of the Atlas Business Combination, the Atlas Credit Facility was repaid and we entered into a new credit arrangement (the “Atlas Credit Agreement”) with Macquarie Capital Funding LLC (the “Lender” or “Lead Arranger”). The Atlas Credit Agreement provided for a term loan (the “Term Loan”) in the amount of $281.0 million and revolving letter of credit (the “Revolver”) in the amount of $40.0 million, of which $24.0 million was drawn upon through December 31, 2020. The term loan proceeds were used to repay the existing Atlas Credit Facility in the amount of $171.0 million and partially fund the Atlas Business Combination and the acquisition of LONG.
Under the terms of the Atlas Credit Agreement, the Term Loan and Revolver were set to expire on February 14, 2027 and February 14, 2025, respectively. However, the Atlas Credit Agreement was repaid on February 25, 2021 in connection with the entry into the Atlas 2021 Credit Agreements described below. Interest was payable monthly or at the end of the applicable interest period in arrears on any outstanding borrowings. The interest rates under the Atlas Credit Agreement equaled either (i) Adjusted LIBOR (as defined in the Atlas Credit Agreement), plus 4.75%, or (ii) an Alternate Base Rate (as defined in the Atlas Credit Agreement), plus 3.75%.
The Atlas Credit Agreement was guaranteed by Holdings and secured by (i) a first priority pledge of the equity interests of subsidiaries of Holdings and Atlas Intermediate and (ii) a first priority lien on substantially all other assets of Holdings, Atlas Intermediate and all of their direct and indirect subsidiaries.
On March 31, 2020, the terms of the Atlas Credit Agreement were modified to reduce the maturity of the Term Loan by one year to February 14, 2026 from February 14, 2027. The interest rate for the Term Loan was increased to (i) Adjusted LIBOR Rate as defined in the Atlas Credit Agreement, plus 6.25%, or (ii) an Alternate Base Rate as defined in the Atlas Credit Agreement, plus 5.25%. The interest rate for the Revolver was increased to (i) Adjusted LIBOR Rate as defined in the Atlas Credit Agreement, plus 5.0%, or (ii) an Alternate Base Rate as defined in the Atlas Credit Agreement, plus 4.0%. The modification also increased the rate of amortization applicable to the Term Loan to 5.0% per annum (commencing on June 30, 2020).
The modifications to the Atlas Credit Agreement resulted from the exercise of the market-flex rights by the Lead Arranger in connection with the syndication process, which, in addition, required the payment of an upfront fee in an amount equal to 2% of the currently outstanding Term Loans, which was subsequently paid in April 2020. The market-flex rights were included in the Atlas Credit Agreement and were exercised by the Lead Arranger upon completion of the time period allowed to complete a syndication process.
The Company has been in compliance with the terms of the Atlas Credit Facility and Atlas Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Our debt balances are summarized as follows:
The following table presents, in millions, scheduled maturities of the Company’s debt as of December 31, 2020:
Our average effective interest rate on our total debt, exclusive of amortization of deferred debt issuance costs, during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was 7.0% and 6.0%, respectively.
Interest expense, inclusive of amortization of deferred debt issuance costs, in the consolidated statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $24.7 million and $9.9 million, respectively.
On February 25, 2021, Atlas Intermediate, as the borrower, entered into two new credit facilities consisting of (i) a $432.0 million senior secured term loan at closing and, subject to the satisfaction of certain terms and conditions, a committed delayed draw term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to $75.0 million and an uncommitted incremental term loan facility that may be incurred after closing (the “2021 Term Loan”) pursuant to a Credit Agreement dated February 25, 2021, by and among Holdings, Atlas Intermediate, Wilmington Trust, National Association, as administrative agent and collateral agent, and certain lenders thereto, including certain Blackstone entities, which may include, Blackstone Alternative Credit Advisors LP, and its managed funds and accounts, and its affiliates, Blackstone Holdings Finance Co. L.L.C. and its affiliates, and/or certain other of their respective funds, accounts, clients managed, advised or sub-advised, or any of their respective affiliates (the “2021 Term Loan Agreement”) and (ii) a $40.0 million senior secured revolver which aggregate principal amount may be increased, subject to the satisfaction of certain terms and conditions, including obtaining commitments therefor, by up to $20,000,000 (the “2021 Revolver”) pursuant to that certain Credit Agreement dated February 25, 2021, by and among Holdings, Intermediate, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent, swingline lender, issuing bank, lender, sole bookrunner and sole lead arranger (the “2021 ABL Revolver Agreement,” and together with the 2021 Term Loan Agreement, collectively the “Atlas 2021 Credit Agreements”).
The initial 2021 Term Loan will mature on February 25, 2028 and the 2021 Revolver will mature on February 25, 2026.
Interest on any outstanding borrowings is payable monthly under the 2021 ABL Revolver Agreement, quarterly under the 2021 Term Loan Agreement or, in each case, at the end of the applicable interest period in arrears. The cash interest rates under the 2021 Term Loan Agreement will be equal to either (i) the Adjusted LIBO Rate (as defined in the 2021 Term Loan Agreement), plus 5.50%, or (ii) an Alternate Base Rate (as defined in the 2021 Term Loan Agreement), plus 4.50%. The interest rates under the 2021 ABL Revolver Agreement will be equal to either (i) the Adjusted LIBO Rate (as defined in the 2021 ABL Revolver Agreement), plus 2.50%, or (ii) the ABR (as defined in the 2021 ABL Revolver Agreement), plus 1.50%.
The Atlas 2021 Credit Agreements are guaranteed by Holdings and secured by (i) in the case of the 2021 ABL Revolver Agreement, a first priority security interest in the current assets, including accounts receivable, of Holdings, Intermediate and its subsidiaries and (ii) in the case of the 2021 Term Loan Agreement, a pledge of the equity interests of the subsidiaries of Holdings and Intermediate, and subject to the first lien security interest on current assets under the 2021 Revolver, a first priority lien on substantially all other assets of Holdings, Intermediate and all of their direct and indirect subsidiaries.
The 2021 Term Loan Agreement contains a financial covenant which requires Holdings, Atlas Intermediate and all of their direct and indirect subsidiaries on a consolidated basis to maintain a Total Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in each of the Atlas 2021 Credit Agreements) tested on a quarterly basis that does not exceed (i) 8.25 to 1.00 with respect to the fiscal quarters ending on April 2, 2021 and July 2, 2021, (ii) 8.00 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarters ending October 1, 2021 and December 31, 2021, (iii) 7.50 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarters ending April 1, 2022 and July 1, 2022, (iv) 7.25 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarters ending September 30, 2022 and December 30, 2022, (v) 7.00 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarters ending March 31, 2023 and June 30, 2023, (vi) 6.75 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarters ending September 29, 2023 and December 29, 2023, and (vii) 6.50 to 1.00 for March 29, 2024 and each fiscal quarter ending thereafter.
The 2021 ABL Revolver Agreement contains a “springing” financial covenant which requires Holdings, Intermediate and all of their direct and indirect subsidiaries on a consolidated basis to maintain a Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio (as defined in the 2021 ABL Revolver Agreement) of no less than 1.10 to 1.00 when the outstanding principal amount of loans under the 2021 Revolver exceeds $0 or the aggregate exposure for letters of credit under the 2021 Revolver exceeds $5 million.
Other Commitments and Contingencies
In connection with our acquisitions during the year ended December 31, 2020, we may be required to pay earnout bonuses upon the achievement of certain performance targets. This amount may be paid in installments over the first, second and third anniversaries of the acquisition. We have currently accrued $3.1 million and $15.1 million as the fair value of that liability within other current and other long-term liabilities, respectively, within our Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2020, which is temporary and subject to finalization.
In November 2020, we entered into a financing arrangement of our business-related insurance policies and the amount remaining is $4.5 million as of December 31, 2020.
The Company enters into operating leases relating to office space and equipment leases in the ordinary course of business. Remaining amounts due, in millions, as of December 31, 2020 are as follows:
During 2020, the Company entered into an agreement with its fleet management company pursuant to which it would receive rebates of $1.3 million to be repaid over three years at an interest rate of 2.85% per annum. The rebates were secured by title to selected vehicles within the Company’s owned fleet of vehicles in Georgia and California.
Remaining payments are as follows:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no material off-balance sheet arrangements.
Effects of Inflation
Based on the analysis of the periods presented, we believe that inflation has not had a material effect on our operating results. There can be no assurance that future inflation will not have an adverse impact on our operating results and financial condition.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Revenue Recognition
Our accounting policies establish principles for recognizing revenue upon the transfer of control of promised goods or services to customers. We generally recognize revenues over time as performance obligations are satisfied. In the course of providing these services, we may subcontract for services and incur other direct costs on behalf of our clients. These costs are passed through to clients, and in accordance with accounting rules, are included in our revenue and cost of revenue. Please refer to Note 2. “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Recent accounting pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.