Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations contains forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Actual events or results may differ materially from our expectations. Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those stated or implied by our forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, those set forth in Part I, “Item 1A. Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. All forward-looking statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are based on information available to us as of the time we file this Annual Report on Form 10-K and, except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update publicly or revise any forward-looking statements.
Overview
Mohawk is a rapidly growing technology-enabled consumer products company that uses machine learning, natural language processing, and data analytics to design, develop, market and sell products. Mohawk was founded on the premise that if a company selling consumer packaged goods was founded today, it would apply AI and machine learning, the synthesis of massive quantities of data and the use of social proof to validate high caliber product offerings as opposed to over-reliance on brand value and other traditional marketing tactics. Today, we predominantly operates through online retail channels such as Amazon and Walmart.
We have launched and sold hundreds of SKUs on e-commerce platforms. Through the success of a number of those products we have incubated our own brands. We also have recently started to purchase brands and products when we believe it is more advantageous. Today, we own and operate eleven brands which sell products in multiple categories, including home and kitchen appliances, kitchenware, heating, cooling and air quality appliances (dehumidifiers, humidifiers and air conditioners), and health and beauty products. Our eleven brands include, hOmeLabs; Vremi, Xtava; RIF6; Aussie Health; Holonix; Truweo; Mueller; Pursteam; Pohl and Schmitt; and Spiralizer. On February 2, 2021, we acquired the assets of Healing Solutions, LLC, an online seller of essential oils.
Seasonality of Business and Product Mix
Our individual product categories are typically affected by seasonal sales trends primarily resulting from the timing of the summer season for certain of our environmental appliance products and the fall and holiday season for our small kitchen appliances and accessories. With our current mix of environmental appliances, the sales of those products tend to be significantly higher in the summer season. Further, our small kitchen appliances and accessories tend to have higher sales during the fourth quarter, which includes Thanksgiving and the December holiday season. As a result, our operational results and cash flows may fluctuate materially in any quarterly period depending on, among other things, adverse weather conditions, and changes in our product mix.
Each of our products typically goes through the Launch phase and depending on its level of success is moved to one of the other phases as further described below:
i.
Launch phase: During this phase, we leverage our technology to target opportunities identified using AIMEE. During this period of time and due to the combination of discounts and investment in marketing, our net margin for a product could be as low as approximately negative 35%. Net margin is calculated by taking net revenue less cost of goods sold, less fulfillment, online advertising and selling expenses. These costs primarily reflect the estimated variable costs related to the sale of a product.
ii.
Sustain phase: Our goal is for every product we launch to enter the sustain phase and become profitable, with a target average of positive 15% net margin, within approximately three months of launch on average. Net margin primarily reflects a combination of manual and automated adjustments in price and marketing spend. Over time, our products benefit from economies of scale stemming from purchasing power both with manufacturers and with fulfillment providers.
iii.
Milk phase or Liquidate phase: If a product does not enter the sustain phase or if the customer satisfaction of the product (i.e., ratings) is not satisfactory, then it will go to the liquidate phase and we will sell the remaining inventory. In order to enter the milk phase, we believe that a product must be well received and become a strong leader in its category in both customer satisfaction and volume sold as compared to its competition. Products in the milk phase that have achieved profitability should benefit from pricing power and we expect their profitability to increase accordingly. As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, none of our products have achieved the milk phase and we can provide no assurance that any of our products will do so in the future.
To date, our operating results have included a mix of products in the launch and sustain phases, and we expect such results to include a mix of products in all phases at any given period. Product mix can affect our gross profit and the variable portion of our sales and distribution expenses. Ultimately, we believe that the future cash flow generated by our products in the sustain phase will outpace the amount that we will reinvest into launching new products, driving profitability at the company level while we continue to invest in growth and technology. During the second quarter of 2020, we changed how we procure and order products, including our products in
the launch phase, by reducing the targeted inventory on hand. For products in the launch phase in particular, we have reduced our initial order quantities to reduce exposure related to product launches which do not meet expectations. This reduced order quantity may impact the time needed for a product to reach the sustain phase and may increase the cost of online advertising and other promotional programs related to product launches, but we believe this reduces the working capital impact from product launches, including product launches which may not meet expectations. In addition, we may shift our focus towards launching a fewer number of products that we believe have larger addressable market opportunities.
The following table shows the number of launches of new products included in our net revenue which have achieved, or are expected to achieve, more than $0.5 million in net revenue per year. The growth in our direct net revenue (i.e., direct-to-consumer sales) versus the comparable prior year period is the period over period growth of direct sales channel.
Our growth in direct revenue can be impacted by the timing and the season in which products are launched.
Financial Operations Overview
Net Revenue
We derive our revenue from the sale of consumer products, primarily in the United States. We sell products directly to consumers through online retail channels and through wholesale channels. Direct-to-consumer sales (i.e. direct net revenue), which is currently the majority of our revenue, is done through various online retail channels. We sell on Amazon.com, Walmart.com, and our own websites, with substantially all of our sales made through Amazon.com. For all of our sales and distribution channels, revenue is recognized when control of the product is transferred to the customer (i.e., when our performance obligation is satisfied), which typically occurs at the shipment date. During the year-ended December 31, 2020, we began to sell PPE to certain states and local governments. PPE net revenue is typically recognized when the goods are delivered to the customer’s warehouse as the control of the products has transferred at that point.
Cost of Goods Sold- Cost of goods sold is comprised of the book value of inventory sold to customers during the reporting period. When circumstances dictate that we use net realizable value as the basis for recording inventory, we base our estimates on expected future selling prices, less expected disposal costs. The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (“USTR”) has imposed additional tariffs on products imported from China. We contract manufacturers, predominantly in China, through purchase orders, for our consumer products. As such, this exposes us to risks associated with doing business globally, including changes in tariffs, which impact a significant number of our products. These increases may affect the way and the amount of product we order. For example, in late 2019 we increased our days of inventory on hand to delay the expected impact on increased cost of goods from tariffs and delay increasing pricing to our end customers until late summer 2020. Ultimately, these tariff increases were not implemented by USTR. If tariff increases are enacted in the future, our pricing actions are intended to offset the full gross margin impact from such tariffs. However, there are no assurances that these pricing actions will not reduce customer orders tariffs are implemented in the future. Further, we can provide no assurances that future tariff increases will not be enacted.
Expenses
Research and Development Expenses-Research and development expenses include compensation and employee benefits for technology development employees, travel-related costs and fees paid to outside consultants related to the development of our intellectual property.
Sales and Distribution Expenses-Shipping and handling expenses are included in our consolidated statements of operations in sales and distribution expenses. This includes pick and pack costs and outbound transportation costs to ship goods to customers performed by e-commerce platforms or incurred directly by us, through our own direct fulfillment platform, which leverages AIMEE and our third-party logistics partners. Our sales and distribution expenses, specifically our logistics expenses and online advertising, will vary quarter to quarter as they are dependent on our sales volume, our product mix (i.e., products in the launch phase or sustain phase) and whether we fulfill products ourselves, i.e., FBM, or through e-commerce platform service providers, i.e., fulfillment by Amazon
(“FBA”). After a product launches and reaches the sustain phase, we seek to maintain the product within its targeted level of profitability. This profitability can be impacted as each product has a unique fulfillment cost due to its size and weight. As such, products with less expensive fulfilment costs as a percentage of net revenue may allow for a lower gross margin, while still maintaining their targeted profitability level. Conversely, products with higher fulfillment costs will need to achieve a higher gross margin to maintain their targeted level of profitability. In the first quarter of 2020 we added five FBM warehouses to our direct fulfillment platform, enabling FBM One Day Prime delivery for sales through Amazon, for approximately 76% of the U.S., based on our sales history. Expanding our third-party warehouse locations to have greater geographic reach, reduces the average last mile shipping zones to the end customer and as such our speed of delivery improves while our shipping costs to customers decreases, prior to the impacts in shipping providers rates.
General and Administrative Expenses-General and administrative expenses include compensation and employee benefits for executive management, finance administration, legal, and human resources, facility costs, insurance, travel, professional service fees and other general overhead costs, including the costs of being a public company.
Interest Expense, Net-Interest expense, net includes the interest cost from our credit facility and term loan, and includes amortization of deferred finance costs and debt discounts from our credit facility with MidCap (the “Credit Facility”), our term loan with Horizon, which was refinanced on December 1, 2020 through a new term loan with High Trail. Also included in interest expense is the net interest and amortization of deferred finance costs, warrant and debt discounts from our term loan with High Trail.
Inflation and Changing Prices
We believe that inflation and changing prices have had an immaterial effect on our net revenue or our business, financial condition or results of operations during the years-ended December 31, 2019 and 2020.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We believe that our financial statements and the other financial data included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been prepared in a manner that complies, in all material respects, with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”). However, for the reasons discussed below, we have presented certain non-GAAP measures herein.
We have presented the following non-GAAP measures to assist investors in understanding our core net operating results on an on-going basis: (i) Contribution Margin; (ii) Contribution margin as a percentage of net revenue; (iii) Adjusted EBITDA; and (iv) Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net revenue. These non-GAAP financial measures may also assist investors in making comparisons of our core operating results with those of other companies.
As used herein, Contribution margin represents operating loss plus general and administrative expenses, research and development expenses, fixed sales and distribution expenses, changes in fair-market value of earn-outs and amortization of inventory step-up from acquisitions (included in cost of goods sold). As used herein, Contribution margin as a percentage of net revenue represents Contribution margin divided by net revenue. As used herein, EBITDA represents net loss plus depreciation and amortization, interest expense, net and income tax expense. As used herein, Adjusted EBITDA represents EBITDA plus stock-based compensation expense, changes in fair-market value of earn-outs, amortization of inventory step-up from acquisitions (included in cost of goods sold), changes in fair-market value of warrant liability, professional fees related to acquisitions, loss from extinguishment of debt and other expenses, net. As used herein, Adjusted EBTIDA as a percentage of net revenue represents Adjusted EBITDA divided by net revenue. Contribution margin, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not represent and should not be considered as alternatives to loss from operations or net loss, as determined under GAAP.
We present Contribution margin, Contribution margin as a percentage of net revenue, EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net revenue because we believe each of these measures provides an additional metric to evaluate our operations and, when considered with both our GAAP results and the reconciliation to net loss, provides useful supplemental information for investors. We use Contribution margin, Contribution margin as a percentage of net revenue, EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net revenue, together with financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP, such as sales and gross margins, to assess our historical and prospective operating performance, to provide meaningful comparisons of operating performance across periods, to enhance our understanding of our operating performance and to compare our performance to that of our peers and competitors.
We believe EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net revenue are useful to investors in assessing the operating performance of our business without the effect of non-cash items, while Contribution margin and Contribution margin as a percentage of net revenue are useful to investors in assessing the operating performance of our products as they represent our operating results without the effects of fixed costs and non-cash items. Contribution margin, Contribution margin as a percentage of
net revenue, EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net revenue should not be considered in isolation or as alternatives to net loss, loss from operations or any other measure of financial performance calculated and prescribed in accordance with GAAP. Neither EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA nor Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net revenue should be considered a measure of discretionary cash available to us to invest in the growth of our business. Our Contribution margin, Contribution margin as a percentage of net revenue, EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net revenue may not be comparable to similar titled measures in other organizations because other organizations may not calculate Contribution margin, EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA or Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net revenue in the same manner as we do. Our presentation of Contribution margin and Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by the expenses that are excluded from such terms or by unusual or non-recurring items.
We recognize that EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net revenue, have limitations as analytical financial measures. For example, neither EBITDA nor Adjusted EBITDA reflects:
•
our capital expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or mergers and acquisitions;
•
the interest expense or the cash requirements necessary to service interest expense or principal payments, associated with indebtedness;
•
depreciation and amortization, which are non-cash charges, although the assets being depreciated and amortized will likely have to be replaced in the future, or any cash requirements for the replacement of assets;
•
changes in cash requirements for our working capital needs; or
•
changes in fair value of contingent earn-out liabilities, warrant liabilities, and amortization of inventory step-up from acquisitions (included in cost of goods sold).
Additionally, Adjusted EBITDA excludes non-cash expense for stock-based compensation, which is and is expected to remain a key element of our overall long-term incentive compensation package.
We also recognize that Contribution margin and Contribution margin as a percentage of net revenue have limitations as analytical financial measures. For example, Contribution margin does not reflect:
•
general and administrative expense necessary to operate our business;
•
research and development expenses necessary for the development, operation and support of our software platform;
•
the fixed costs portion of our sales and distribution expenses including stock-based compensation expense; or
•
changes in fair value of contingent earn-out liabilities, warrant liabilities, and amortization of inventory step-up from acquisitions (included in cost of goods sold).
Contribution Margin
Contribution margin represents operating loss plus general and administrative expenses, research and development expenses, fixed sales and distribution expenses, changes in fair-market value of earn-outs and amortization of inventory step-up from acquisitions (included in cost of goods sold). Contribution margin as a percentage of net revenue represents Contribution margin divided by net
revenue. The following table provides a reconciliation of Contribution margin to operating loss, which is the most directly comparable financial measure presented in accordance with GAAP (in thousands, except percentages):
Adjusted EBITDA
EBITDA represents net loss plus depreciation and amortization, interest expense, net and income tax expense. Adjusted EBITDA represents EBITDA plus stock-based compensation expense, changes in fair-market value of earn-outs, amortization of inventory step-up from acquisitions (included in cost of goods sold), change in fair-market value of warrant liability, professional fees related to acquisitions, loss from extinguishment of debt and other expenses, net. As used herein, Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net revenue represents Adjusted EBITDA divided by net revenue. The following table provides a reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, which is the most directly comparable financial measure presented in accordance with GAAP (in thousands, except percentages):
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years-Ended December 31, 2019 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years-ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, together with the changes in those items in dollars and percentages (in thousands, except percentages):
(1)Amounts include stock-based compensation expense as follows (in thousands, except percentages):
The following table sets forth the components of our results of operations as a percentage of net revenue:
Net Revenue
Revenue by Product Categories:
The following table sets forth our net revenue disaggregated by product categories (in thousands, except percentages):
Net revenue increased $71.3 million, or 62.3%, to $185.7 million during the year-ended December 31, 2020 compared to $114.5 million for the year-ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net revenue was primarily attributable to increased direct sales volume of $52.8 million, or a 47.5% increase, which increased due to increased pricing, growth in our existing sustain product portfolio, including the impact of products released in the second half of 2019, new product launches in 2020 and new products obtained through acquisitions. We also saw an increase in wholesale revenue of $18.7 million versus the prior year primarily from the sale of PPE in 2020. Finally, we saw a decrease in PaaS revenue of $0.3 million in 2020.
Heating, cooling and air quality products accounted for $58.0 million in net revenue in 2019 and accounted for $78.4 million in net revenue for 2020, an increase of $20.4 million versus 2019 from new products launched and growth in our existing products. We continued to expand our kitchen appliances products, which increased $2.7 million in net revenue compared to 2019.
We started selling health and beauty products in 2019 which generated $14.9 million in net revenue for 2019 and accounted for $26.0 million in net revenue in 2020. This increase of $11.1 million came from new products launched, growth in our existing products and new products obtained through acquisitions. We started selling PPE in 2020 which generated $15.5 million in net revenue for 2020. Net revenue from cookware, kitchen tools and gadgets increased approximately $8.0 million year-over-year from new products launched, growth in our existing products and new products obtained through acquisitions.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Margin
The increase in cost of goods sold was primarily attributable to increased sales volume due to growth in our existing product portfolio and impact of products launched during the year in 2020, and new products obtained through acquisitions and was partially offset by volume discounts received from manufacturers. Included in the year-ended December 31, 2020 cost of goods sold includes approximately $0.6 million of amortization of inventory step-up from acquisition valuations.
Gross margin increased to 45.6% for the year-ended December 31, 2020 compared to 39.4% for the year-ended December 31, 2019. The improvement in gross margin was due to a decrease in overall cost of product per unit as a result of increased sales prices and improved pricing from our manufacturers including favorable volume discounts.
Sales and Distribution Expenses
Sales and distribution expenses increased by $12.8 million from $55.2 million for the year-ended December 31, 2019 to $68.0 million for the year-ended December 31, 2020. The increase in sales and distribution expenses for the year-ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year period was primarily attributable to the increase in the volume of products sold for the year-ended December 31, 2020. Our sales and distribution fixed costs (i.e., salary and office expenses) decreased slightly to $5.2 million for the year-ended December 31, 2020 from $5.3 million for the year-ended December 31, 2019, as we relocated certain operation and marketplace functions to lower cost regions. Sales and distribution expenses for the year-ended December 31, 2020 also included a decrease in stock-based compensation expense of $4.9 million as compared to $2.5 million from $7.4 million as compared to the prior year period due to expense reversals from the termination of certain employees whose equity award grants did not vest and the completion of vesting of certain equity award grants during the period which are no longer expensed.
As a percentage of net revenue, sales and distribution expenses decreased to 36.6% in the year-ended December 31, 2020 from 48.2% in the year-ended December 31, 2019. Online advertising, selling and logistics expenses included within sales and distribution expenses, as a percentage of net revenue, were 32.4% in the year-ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 37.1% in the year-ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was due to our warehouse expansion, which has reduced last mile shipping costs due to shorter distances and improved pricing with our delivery partners, which took effect in April 2020. We believe that e-commerce customers prefer to have delivery of their purchases as soon as possible (i.e., in one day). In an effort to deliver products as soon as possible, while managing our logistics spend, we fulfill product sales ourselves by leveraging our direct fulfillment platform (i.e., FBM) through third-party warehouses, instead of fulfilling through e-commerce platform service providers (i.e., FBA), which enables us to reduce our logistics spend and improve our product unit economics, especially on oversized goods. During the year-ended December 31, 2020, we added five third-party FBM warehouses to our direct fulfillment platform, enabling One Day Prime delivery for approximately 76% of the United States, based on our sales history. Expanding our third-party warehouse locations to have greater geographic reach, reduces the average last mile shipping zones to the end customer and as such our speed of delivery improves while our shipping costs to customers decreases, subject to changes with respect to shipping providers’ rates.
Research and Development Expenses
The decrease in research and development expenses was attributable to a decrease of stock-based compensation expense of $1.7 million due to the expensing of certain new equity awards granted after June 2019 which vested during the year-ended December 31, 2020 and a decrease in fixed costs of $0.8 million as we continue to centralize our research and development facilities primarily into Poland.
General and Administrative Expenses
The decrease in general and administrative expenses was primarily attributable to a decrease in stock-based compensation expense of $5.4 million due to the completion of vesting of certain equity award grants during the period which are no longer expensed. This decrease was offset by an increase in insurance costs, primarily directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, professional fees and headcount expenses of $2.2 million, which increased because we were a public company for the full twelve months of 2020 versus six months in 2019.
Change in fair value of contingent earn-out liabilities
The increase in change in fair value of contingent earn-out liabilities was related to our acquisitions, which include re-assessment of the estimated fair value of contingent consideration as part of the purchase price, primarily driven by the increase of our share price since the date of each acquisition.
Interest expense, net
The decrease in interest expense was primarily related to lower average borrowings under the Credit Facility.
Loss on extinguishment of debt
The increase is attributable to the payment and termination of the Horizon term loan, which resulted in $2.0 million in loss on extinguishment of debt consisting of unamortized deferred finance costs.
Change in fair market value of warrant liability
The increase is attributable to the issuance of the warrant in connection with the Note and the change in the fair value of warrant liability for the year-ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily driven by the increase of our share price since the issuance of the Warrant.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows for Years-Ended December 31, 2019 and 2020
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years-ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively (in thousands):
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $25.2 million for the year-ended December 31, 2019, resulting from our net cash losses from operations of $22.5 million, compounded by cash used in working capital of $2.7 million from changes in accounts receivable, purchase of inventory and insurance and payments of accounts payable.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $6.1 million for the year-ended December 31, 2020, resulting from our net cash losses from operations of $2.4 million, offset by cash from working capital of $8.5 million from changes in accounts receivable, purchase of inventory and insurance and payments of accounts payable.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year-ended December 31, 2019 was primarily from the acquisition of the Aussie Health Assets for $1.2 million.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year-ended December 31, 2020 was primarily from the acquisition of Truweo Assets for $14.0 million and Smash Assets for $25.0 million.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
For the year-ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by financing activities of $36.6 million was primarily from the net proceeds of our initial public offering of $30.6 million, net proceeds from insurance financing of $1.0 million and $5.0 million in credit facility borrowings net of payments related to debt issuance costs.
For the year-ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities of $32.3 million was primarily from the net proceeds of our August 2020 underwritten public offering of $23.4 million and borrowings from the High Trail term loan, net of $35.8 million, which was offset by net repayments on the Credit Facility of $10.1 million and repayments of the Horizon Term Loan of $16.0 million.
Sources of Liquidity
We are an early-stage growth company. Accordingly, we endeavor to continuously invest in the launch of new products, the development of our software, and the expansion of our sales and distribution infrastructure in order to accelerate revenue growth and
scale operations to support such growth. We also intend to pursue growth through strategic acquisitions of digital native brands that have the potential to be quickly on-boarded onto our e-commerce platform. Our liquidity is materially influenced by the level of investment in our inventory and other working capital items; the size and number of acquisitions we close in any given period; and the availability of financing as described below.
Our principal sources of liquidity since inception have been through equity issuances, debt and cash flows from operations. Further, our recent acquisitions have been financed through a combination of cash on-hand or issuances of equity and/or debt. We believe we will continue to use such methods to finance future acquisitions.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $26.7 million of cash and cash equivalents. Our forecasts, which include cash flows from our recent acquisitions, anticipate we will continue to produce positive operating cash flows and we expect to maintain compliance with our financial covenants.
MidCap Credit Facility and Term Loan
On November 23, 2018, we exited a credit facility with MidCap and entered into the Credit Facility, which was a three-year $25.0 million revolving credit facility. The Credit Facility could be increased, subject to certain conditions, to $50.0 million. Loans under the Credit Facility are determined based on percentages of our eligible accounts receivable and eligible inventory. The Credit Facility bears interest at a rate of the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) plus 5.75% for outstanding borrowings. We are required to pay a facility availability fee of 0.5% on the average unused portion of the facility. On December 1, 2020, we entered into an amendment with MidCap (the “Amendment”) to the MidCap Credit Agreement, (i) providing for a $30.0 million revolving credit facility which can be increased, subject to certain conditions, to $50.0 million, (ii) permitting the incurrence of certain debt under certain conditions and restrictions, including the Note, (iii) permitting certain payments to High Trail as required under the Note, (iv) permitting the acquisition of the Smash Assets, and (v) extending the MidCap Credit Agreement to November 23, 2022. As of December 31, 2020, there was $12.9 million outstanding under the Credit Facility and an available balance of approximately $1.4 million. We were in compliance with the financial covenants contained within the Credit Facility as of December 31, 2020.
Horizon Term Loan
On December 1, 2020, we paid off all obligations under the $15.0 million Horizon Term Loan and all obligations owed under the Horizon Term Loan Agreement were terminated. During the year ended December 31, 2020, total repayments were $16.0 million including the payoff of $14.1 million, which included a prepayment fee in an amount equal to 3% of the outstanding principal balance of the Horizon Term Loan, or $0.3 million.
High Trail Term Loan
On December 1, 2020, we refinanced our existing term loan with Horizon through the issuance of the Note to High Trail SA. We received gross proceeds of $38.0 million in exchange for the issuance to High Trail SA of the Note with an aggregate principal amount of $43.0 million (the “High Trail Loan”). The High Trail Loan will be repaid over 24 equal monthly cash payments of $1.8 million.
In connection with the Note, we issued to High Trail the Warrant to purchase an aggregate of 2,864,133 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $9.01 per share (the “Warrant”). The Warrant initially provided that it would be exercisable on June 1, 2021, expire five years from the date of issuance and would be exercisable on a cash basis, unless there is not an effective registration statement covering the resale of the shares issuable upon exercise of the Warrant, in which case the Warrant would also be exercisable on a cashless exercise basis at High Trail’s election. The Warrant included a provision that provided us with the right to require High Trail to exercise the Warrant if the price of our common stock exceeds 200% of the exercise price of the Warrant for 20 consecutive trading days and certain other conditions are satisfied. We utilized the Monte-Carlo Simulation model to determine the fair value of the Warrant. The fair value of the Warrant on issuance was $10.5 million, which has been recorded as a debt discount against the High Trail Loan. We were in compliance with the financial covenants contained within the High Trail Loan as of December 31, 2020.
We intend to refinance all of our currently outstanding debt, including the High Trail Loan, the MidCap Credit Facility and subsequent debt issued to High Trail related to the Healing Solution acquisition (the “Refinancing”). The new senior secured note is expected to have an 8% annual interest rate payable in cash on a quarterly basis with a three-year maturity and will provide for the issuance to the institutional lender of a warrant to purchase additional shares of our common stock in an amount to be determined at the closing of the Refinancing. The Refinancing is expected to close in April 2021, and is subject to entry into definitive documentation and other customary closing conditions.
Contingent earn-out liability considerations
As part of the acquisition of the Smash Assets, the sellers are entitled to earn-out payments based on the achievement of certain contribution margin thresholds on certain products of the acquired business. Earn-out payments will be due to the sellers for year one, or calendar year 2021, and year two, or calendar year 2022. During the year-ending December 31, 2021 (year one of the earn-out), the earn-out payment will be calculated based on the contribution margin generated on certain products for an amount equal to $1.67 for every $1.00 of such contribution margin that is greater than $15.5 million and less than or equal to $18.5 million. Such earn-out payment cannot exceed $5.0 million. During the year-ending December 31, 2022 (year two of the earn-out), the earn-out payment will be calculated based on the contribution margin generated on certain products for an amount in excess of $15.5 million for each $0.5 million of such contribution that is subject to a cap of $27.5 million. Such earn-out payment will be an amount in cash equal to the value of 100,000 shares of Common Stock multiplied by the average of the volume-weighted average closing price per share of Common Stock, as reported on Nasdaq for the 30 consecutive trading days ending on December 31, 2022.
As of December 1, 2020, the acquisition date, the initial fair value amount of the earn-out payment was appropriately $9.8 million. During the year-ended December 31, 2020, the fair value amount of this earn-out payment was approximately $22.5 million which includes a change of fair value impact of approximately $12.7 million.
Warrant Liability
As of December 1, 2020, the initial fair value of the Warrant on issuance was $10.5 million, which has been recorded as a debt discount against the High Trail Term Loan. During the year-ended December 31, 2020, the fair value amount of this warrant liability was approximately $31.8 million which includes a change of fair value impact of approximately $21.3 million.
COVID-19 Pandemic
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (the “WHO”) announced a global health emergency because of a new strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) originating in Wuhan, China and the risks to the international community as the virus spreads globally beyond its point of origin. In March 2020, the WHO classified COVID-19 as a pandemic, based on the rapid increase in exposure globally. The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the impact associated with preventive and precautionary measures that we, other businesses and governments are taking, continues to evolve as of the date of this report. As such, the future impact on our personnel, business and global operations, and our suppliers, logistics providers, marketplaces and other business partners is uncertain and cannot be reasonably estimated at this time. Given the nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is possible that any and every aspect of our value chain could be disrupted, and such impact could have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition, operating results and prospects. For example, we may be unable to launch new products, replenish inventory for existing products, ship into or receive inventory into our third-party warehouses or ship or sell products to customers, in each case on a timely basis or at all. We may also be unable to forecast demand for our products during the pendency of this pandemic and may experience a substantial decrease in the demand for our products, most of which are considered not essential. In addition, the majority of our personnel are currently working remotely, which creates challenges in the way we operate our business, including, but not limited to, how we test products and our ability to meet reporting obligations. Our ability to execute our operations could be impacted if any of our key personnel contracts COVID-19. While the potential economic impact brought by, and the duration of, COVID-19 may be difficult to assess or predict, the continued widespread pandemic could result in significant disruption of global financial markets, reducing our ability to access capital, which could in the future negatively affect our liquidity. Due to the uncertainty as to the severity and duration of the pandemic, the impact on our future revenues, profitability, liquidity, financial condition, business and results of operations is uncertain at this time.
During the second quarter of 2020, we preserved our liquidity and capital resources through various actions, which included delaying and negotiating the delay of payments to certain vendors, and the effect of such actions did not have an adverse impact on our business, including our relationships with these vendors. Our operations rely on third-parties to manufacture our products, to provide logistics and warehousing services and to facilitate sales of our products, and accordingly we rely on the business continuity plans of these third parties to operate during the pandemic and have limited ability to influence their plans.
The COVID-19 pandemic began to have an unfavorable impact on us, including our key manufacturing partners, in January 2020. Substantially all of our products are sourced and manufactured in China, including new products that we expect to launch during 2021. In addition, we rely on our team in Shenzhen for a number of functions relating to product sourcing and development, among other things. Our key manufacturing partner in China re-opened its facilities as of February 10, 2020 and reached and maintained over 90% capacity since early March 2020.
To date we have had few material overall negative impacts to our business and operations from the COVID-19 pandemic. As reported, we have seen 47.5% growth in our net revenue from direct sales for the year-ended December 31, 2020 versus the prior year. The shift of consumer spending from traditional retail to online spending has increased dramatically due to the COVID-19 pandemic. This has benefited us as historically over 90% of our revenues come from the sale of products online in the U.S. and we believe this shift to increased online consumer spending will continue even after the COVID-19 pandemic ends. Our investments in our infrastructure and software and our expansion of our third-party warehousing network have also allowed us to continue to deliver our products, even when Amazon itself limited its delivery services. We have had no material impacts to our vendor or other business relationships to date as we, in certain circumstances, have negotiated improved credit and other terms. Further, to our knowledge, to date, none of our key operations vendors has had any material negative impacts related to COVID-19 or changes that have negatively affected our business, our borrowing capabilities or financial covenants. During the first half 2021, we are expecting some impacts to our margins as it relates to increased international freight demands, lack of ship containers and general international freight congestion due to the continued increase demand of goods being sold on ecommerce marketplaces. Further, we expect to see increases in last mile shipping costs as shipping providers continue to see increased demand due to the increase of goods sold on ecommerce marketplaces which stresses their delivery networks. We believe these short-term increases in cost to be directly related to COVID-19 pandemic.
Though the COVID-19 pandemic is fluid and we are expecting certain short-term impacts in early 2021, we believe at this time that our business will continue to minimize the impact from this current pandemic given our ability to work remotely, continued consumer demand for products on e-commerce channels and the business continuity plans of our key manufacturing partners and other vendors. We believe this combination of factors may help to mitigate risk from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Variable Interest Entities
We do not currently have any off-balance sheet arrangements and did not have any such arrangements during the years-ended December 31, 2019 and 2020. We have not entered any off-balance sheet arrangements during the year-ended December 31, 2020 and do not have any holdings in variable interest entities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies used in the preparation of our financial statements require the most significant judgments and estimates.
Revenue Recognition-We account for revenue in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
We derive our revenue from the sale of consumer products. We sell our products directly to consumers through online retail channels and through wholesale channels. For direct-to-consumer sales, we consider customer order confirmations to be a contract with the customer. Customer confirmations are executed at the time an order is placed through third-party online channels. For wholesale sales, we consider the customer purchase order to be the contract. For all of our sales and distribution channels, revenue is recognized when control of the product is transferred to the customer (i.e., when our performance obligation is satisfied), which typically occurs at shipment date. As a result, we have a present and unconditional right to payment and record the amount due from the customer in accounts receivable.
Revenue from consumer product sales is recorded at the net sales price (transaction price), which includes an estimate of future returns based on historical return rates. There is judgment in utilizing historical trends for estimating future returns. Our refund liability for sales returns was $0.5 million and $0.5 million at December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively, which is included in accrued liabilities and represents the expected value of the refund that will be due to our customers.
Warrant Liability-The fair values of the outstanding warrants were measured using the Monte Carlo Simulation model. Due to the complexity of the warrants issued, we use an outside expert to assist in providing the mark to market fair valuation of the liabilities
over the reporting periods in which the original agreement was in effect. Inputs used to determine estimated fair value of the warrant liabilities include the fair value of the underlying stock at the valuation date, the term of the warrants, and the expected volatility of the underlying stock. The significant unobservable input used in the fair value measurement of the warrant liabilities is the estimated term of the warrants. Generally, increases (decreases) in the fair value of the underlying stock and estimated term result in a directionally similar impact to the periodic fair value measurement of the outstanding warrant liability, and are recorded within the Change in fair market value of warranty line item on the statement of operations.
Accounting for contingent consideration-Our acquisitions may include contingent consideration as part of the purchase price. The fair value of the contingent consideration is estimated as of the acquisition date based on the present value of the contingent payments to be made using a weighted probability of possible payments. The unobservable inputs used in the determination of the fair value of the contingent consideration include management’s assumptions about the likelihood of payment based on the established benchmarks and discount rates based on internal rate of return analysis. The fair value measurement includes inputs that are Level 3 measurement as discussed in Note 16 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Should actual results increase or decrease as compared to the assumption used in our analysis, the fair value of the contingent consideration obligations will increase or decrease, up to the contracted limit, as applicable. Changes in the fair value of the contingent earn-out consideration could cause a material impact and volatility in our operating results.
Accounting for Business Combinations-We allocate the purchase price of acquired companies to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, based upon their estimated fair values at the acquisition date. These fair values are typically estimated with assistance from independent valuation specialists. The purchase price allocation process requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date with respect to intangible assets, contractual support obligations assumed, contingent consideration arrangements, and pre-acquisition contingencies.
Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain.
Examples of critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired or may acquire in the future include but are not limited to:
•
future expected cash flows from product sales or other customer contracts;
•
expected costs of fulfillment including marketing, warehousing and product sales;
•
the acquired company’s brand and competitive position, as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired brand will continue to be used in the combined company’s product portfolio;
•
cost of capital and discount rates; and
•
estimating the useful lives of acquired assets as well as the pattern or manner in which the assets will amortize.
Inventory and cost of goods sold-Our inventory consists almost entirely of finished goods. We currently record inventory on our balance sheet on a first-in first-out basis, or net realizable value, if it is below our recorded cost. Our costs include the amounts we pay manufacturers for product, tariffs and duties associated with transporting product across national borders, and freight costs associated with transporting the product from our manufacturers to our warehouses, as applicable.
The “Cost of goods sold” line item in the consolidated statements of operations is comprised of the book value of inventory sold to customers during the reporting period. When circumstances dictate that we use net realizable value as the basis for recording inventory, it bases its estimates on expected future selling prices less expected disposal costs.
JOBS Act
In April 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) was enacted. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” (“EGC”) can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, for complying with new or revised accounting standards. We have elected to avail ourselves of this exemption and, as a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to the financial statements of issuers who are required to comply with the effective dates for new or revised accounting standards that are applicable to public companies. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that we can elect to opt out of the extended transition period at any time, which election is irrevocable.
In addition, as an EGC, we have taken advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not “emerging growth companies” including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements and exemptions from the requirements of holding a non-binding advisory vote on executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
We will remain an EGC until the earlier of (i) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more; (ii) the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the completion of our initial public offering, or December 31, 2024; (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt during the previous three years; or (iv) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) (i.e., the first day of the fiscal year after we have (1) more than $700.0 million in outstanding common equity held by our non-affiliates, measured each year on the last day of our second fiscal quarter, (2) been public for at least 12 months, and (3) are not eligible to be deemed a “smaller reporting company” because we do not meet the revenue test of the definition of “smaller reporting company”, which includes an initial determination that our annual revenues are more than $100.0 million for the most recently completed fiscal year).
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The JOBS Act permits an emerging growth company to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period until we are no longer an emerging growth company or until we affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Adopted Accounting Standards
In June 2018, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2018-07, Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-based Payment Accounting, which expands the scope of ASC Topic 718, Compensation- Stock Compensation, which currently only includes share-based payments issued to employees, to also include share-based payments issued to nonemployees for goods and services. This ASU is effective for all annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods therein. The new guidance was adopted on January 1, 2020 with no material impact on the consolidated financial statements.
In February 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-02, Income Statement-Reporting Comprehensive Income (Topic 220) (“ASU 2018-02”). ASU 2018-02 addresses the effect of the change in the U.S. federal corporate tax rate due to the enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 on items within accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). The new guidance was adopted on January 1, 2020 with no material impact on the consolidated financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework-Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement, which changes the fair value measurement disclosure requirements of ASC Topic 820. The amendments in this ASU are the result of a broader disclosure project called FASB Concepts Statement, Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting-Chapter 8: Notes to Financial Statements. This ASU is effective for all annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods therein. The new guidance was adopted on January 1, 2020 with no material impact on the consolidated financial statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) (“ASU 2016-02”). This ASU requires lessees to record most leases on their balance sheets but recognize the expenses on their income statements in a manner similar to current practice. ASU 2016-02 states that a lessee would recognize a lease liability for the obligation to make lease payments and a right-to-use asset for the right to use the underlying asset for the lease term. In July 2019, the FASB delayed the effective date for this ASU for private companies (including emerging growth companies) and it will be effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2021, with early adoption permitted. While we have not completed its evaluation of the impact of adoption of this standard, we do not expect it to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13: Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326). This ASU requires the use of an expected loss model for certain types of financial instruments and requires consideration of a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to calculate credit loss estimates. For trade receivables, loans and held-to-maturity debt securities, an estimate
of lifetime expected credit losses is required. For available-for-sale debt securities, an allowance for credit losses will be required rather than a reduction to the carrying value of the asset. In July 2019, the FASB delayed the effective date for this ASU for private companies (including emerging growth companies) and will be effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2022, with early adoption permitted. While we have not completed our evaluation of the impact of adoption of this standard, we do not expect it to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes. This ASU provides for certain updates to reduce complexity in accounting for income taxes, including the utilization of the incremental approach for intra-period tax allocation, among others. This standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, and for interim periods beginning after December 15, 2022 with early adoption permitted. While we have not completed our evaluation of the impact of adoption of this standard, we do not expect it to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.