ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our historical consolidated financial statements and the related notes. This management’s discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Any statements that are not statements of historical fact are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results or events to differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Except as required by applicable law we do not undertake any obligation to update forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this Annual Report.
This management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate such estimates and judgments, including those described in greater detail below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Overview
Anterix Inc. (“Anterix,” “we,” “us,” “our” or the “Company”), is a wireless communications company focused on commercializing our spectrum assets to enable our targeted utility and critical infrastructure customers to deploy private broadband networks, technologies and solutions. We are the largest holder of licensed spectrum in the 900 MHz band (896-901/935-940 MHz) with nationwide coverage throughout the contiguous United States, Hawaii, Alaska and Puerto Rico. On May 13, 2020, the FCC approved the Report and Order to modernize and realign the 900 MHz band to increase its usability and capacity by allowing it to be utilized for the deployment of broadband networks, technologies and solutions. The Report and Order was published in the Federal Register on July 16, 2020 and became effective on August 17, 2020. We are now engaged in qualifying for and securing broadband licenses from the FCC, with a focus on pursuing licenses in those counties in which we believe we have near-term commercial opportunities. At the same time, our sales and marketing organization is pursuing opportunities to lease the broadband licenses we secure to our targeted utility and critical infrastructure customers.
In December 2020, we entered into the Lease Agreements, our first long-term 900 MHz broadband spectrum lease agreements covering Ameren’s service territories. The Lease Agreements will enable Ameren to deploy a PLTE network in its service territories in Missouri and Illinois covering approximately 7.5 million people. Each Lease Agreement is for a term of up to 40 years, consisting of an initial term of 30 years, with an option to extend for an additional 10-year term for an additional payment. The scheduled prepayments for the 30-year initial terms of the Lease Agreements total approximately $48 million dollars. Full prepayment for the 30-year initial terms is due by 2026, with approximately 50% of the total prepayments due and payable subject to our ability to clear spectrum and secure the broadband licenses for the relevant counties. Our Board approved the Lease Agreements on April 23, 2021 and Ameren’s board of directors approved the Lease Agreements on May 6, 2021. We are clearing incumbents from the 900 MHz broadband segments in Ameren’s service territories and we submitted our first applications for broadband licenses on May 27, 2021. With the board approvals by both companies, we expect to recognize revenue from the Lease Agreements commencing in fiscal year 2022. Revenue will be recognized as spectrum is delivered based on straight-line amortization over the initial 30-year terms of the Lease Agreements.
In February 2021, we entered into the SDG&E Agreement with SDG&E to provide 900 MHz broadband spectrum throughout SDG&E’s California service territory, including San Diego and Imperial Counties and portions of Orange County. The SDG&E Agreement will support SDG&E’s deployment of a PLTE network for its California service territory, with a population of approximately 3.6 million people. As part of the SDG&E Agreement, we and SDG&E intend to collaborate on accelerating utility industry momentum for private networks. The SDG&E Agreement includes the assignment of 6 MHz of broadband spectrum, 936.5 - 939.5 MHz paired with 897.5 - 900.5 MHz, within SDG&E’s service territory following FCC’s issuance of broadband licenses to us. Delivery of the broadband spectrum by county is expected to commence in fiscal year 2023 and completed before the end of fiscal year 2024. We are proactively working with incumbents to clear the 900 MHz broadband allocation in the SDG&E service territory. Total payment of $50.0 million is comprised of an initial payment of $20.0 million received in February 2021 reflected in the Consolidated Balance Sheets under Contingent Liability. The remaining $30.0 million is due through fiscal year 2024 as we deliver broadband spectrum to SDG&E upon our clearing of the 900 MHz incumbents and the granting of broadband licenses by the FCC.
Securing Broadband Licenses
In the Report and Order, the FCC reconfigured the 900 MHz band to create a 6 MHz broadband segment (240 channels) and two narrowband segments, consisting of a 3 MHz narrowband segment (120 channels) and a 1 MHz narrowband segment (39 channels).
The Role of the County. Under the Report and Order, the FCC established the “county” as the base unit of measure in determining whether a broadband applicant is eligible to secure a broadband license. There are 3,233 counties in the United States, including Puerto Rico.
Broadband License Eligibility Requirements. The Report and Order establishes three eligibility requirements to obtain broadband licenses in a county, which we refer to herein as (i) the “50% Licensed Spectrum Test,” (ii) the “90% Broadband Segment Test” and (iii) the “240 Channel Requirement.”
1.50% Licensed Spectrum Test. To be eligible for a broadband license in a particular county, we must demonstrate that we hold more than 50% of the outstanding licensed channels in the county. Because the 50% Licensed Spectrum Test is based on licensed channels, any channels that are not licensed by the FCC are not included in the denominator when determining whether we have satisfied this test. The denominator is determined by the number of channels licensed by all licensees with sites in the county and within 20 miles of the county boundary. In some situations, a single channel is licensed by more than one entity, and therefore could be counted more than once. The FCC has licensed less than 399 channels in all but the most populous counties. As of the date of this filing, we satisfy the 50% Licensed Spectrum Test in more than 3,100 counties of the 3,233 counties in the United States and its territories.
2.90% Broadband Segment Test. The second test, the 90% Broadband Segment Test, addresses the balance between a voluntary market process to clear any Covered Incumbent (i.e., holders of licenses in the broadband segment) and the mandatory relocation process established by the FCC in the Report and Order (which applies to all Covered Incumbents, except for those Covered Incumbents operating Complex Systems. This test requires we hold or have agreements with Covered Incumbents for 90% of the licensed channels in the broadband segment in a particular county and within 70 miles of the county’s boundaries. The broadband segment in the 900 MHz band has a total of 240 channels. The 90% Broadband Segment Test is calculated using outstanding licensed channels, which means that if the FCC has licensed 240 channels, we will be required to have control of or agreements covering 216 channels within the broadband segment. In many counties in the United States, the FCC has licensed fewer than 240 channels in the broadband segment and these unlicensed channels are not included in the denominator when determining whether we have satisfied this 90% Broadband Segment Test.
Before filing for a broadband license, we must satisfy the 90% Broadband Segment Test by utilizing our channel holdings and negotiating with Covered Incumbents on a purely voluntary basis for any additional channels we require to satisfy this test. Only after we satisfy the 90% Broadband Segment Test will the FCC issue a broadband license to us and commence the “Mandatory Retuning” period. During this Mandatory Retuning period, any Covered Incumbents that remain in the broadband segment (other than Complex Systems) are required to negotiate with us in good faith to clear the broadband segment, subject to intervention by the FCC if the parties cannot reach an agreement.
3.240 Channel Requirement. The Report and Order requires the broadband applicant to surrender 6 MHz of spectrum (or 240 channels) in a county to receive the broadband license. If we do not have sufficient channels in the county to return 240 channels to the FCC, we will make an “Anti-Windfall Payment” to the U.S. Treasury to secure the broadband license. The Anti-Windfall Payment for these channels will be based on prices paid in the applicable county in the 600 MHz auction conducted by the FCC.
Treatment of Complex Systems. The Report and Order exempts Complex Systems from the mandatory retuning process-even if the Broadband applicant meets the 90% Broadband Segment Test. The FCC exempted Complex Systems from the mandatory retuning requirements because retuning these systems would potentially be more disruptive to the operators than retuning the smaller systems operated by other incumbents. Of the small number of systems that qualify for this 45-site exemption, based on our calculation, all but one system belongs to utilities that we have identified as our target customers.
The Association of American Railroads. The nation’s railroads, particularly the major freight lines, operate on six narrowband 900 MHz channels licensed to the AAR. Three of these narrowband channels are located in the 900 MHz broadband segment created by the FCC in the Report and Order. As a result, in order to qualify for broadband licenses under the Report and Order, we are required to provide spectrum for the relocation of the AAR channels to narrowband channels outside the 900 MHz broadband segment.
In January 2020, we entered into the AAR agreement with the AAR, pursuant to which we agreed to cancel licenses in the 900 MHz band to enable the AAR to relocate its operations outside the 900 MHz segment. The Report and Order provides that the FCC will make the channels associated with these cancelled licenses available to the AAR. The Report and Order also provides that the FCC will credit us for our cancelled licenses for purposes of determining our eligibility and the calculation of our requirement to pay any Anti-Windfall Payments to secure broadband licenses.
In accordance with the Report and Order and the AAR Agreement, we cancelled our licenses and recorded a loss on the disposal of intangible assets, in the year ended March 31, 2021.
Costs of Securing Broadband Licenses
As a broadband applicant, we can satisfy the three eligibility requirements discussed above by including our existing licensed channels and by acquiring or retuning additional channels when necessary through (i) spectrum purchases, (ii) spectrum relocations and/or (iii) Anti-Windfall Payments, or any combination thereof.
1.Channel Acquisition. In 2015, we began acquiring targeted additional channels in various markets in anticipation of the Report and Order. We will continue to employ spectrum acquisition as a tool for those situations where an incumbent desires to exit the 900 MHz band. We may selectively acquire channels outside the 900 MHz broadband segment and use them to swap for channels within the broadband segment. For purposes of broadband license eligibility, any potential acquisitions of 900MHz channels we negotiate will be included as part of our broadband application, but the acquisition does not need to be consummated at the time we submit our license application.
2.Retuning Costs. Retuning is the exercise of exchanging, also referred to as swapping, broadband segment channels held by Covered Incumbents and moving them to channels outside of the 900 MHz broadband segment. A retune or swap adds to the number of channels we hold for computational purposes in the 90% Broadband Segment Test. We began retuning or swapping channels with Covered Incumbents in 2015 in anticipation of the Report and Order. We have continued retuning channels with Covered Incumbents since that time.
3.Anti-Windfall Payments. To obtain a 6 MHz broadband license, the broadband applicant must surrender up to 240 licensed channels in the county. As this band has been underutilized historically, most counties in the United States do not have 240 channels licensed. When the broadband applicant does not surrender 240 channels, they will pay for the difference between the spectrum held and the 6 MHz it will be receiving as the broadband licensee by making an Anti-Windfall Payment. As noted above, the FCC will use as a reference the spectrum price based on the average price paid in the FCC’s 600 MHz auction in each given county.
Importantly, the markets where the FCC has channels in inventory and where we may need to make Anti-Windfall Payments to effectively return 240 channels to the FCC are generally in smaller urban, suburban and rural markets. Our spectrum position is greatest in the largest, most populated and therefore most expensive markets, with a few exceptions. Although we will need to make Anti-Windfall Payments to secure broadband licenses in some counties, the cost for the channels, on average, will be lower than the nationwide average amount paid in the FCC’s 600 MHz auction.
When combining our estimated clearing and spectrum acquisition costs with our anticipated Anti-Windfall Payments to the U.S. Treasury, we anticipate the combined total costs of securing broadband licenses from the FCC will range from $130 to $160 million, the significant majority of which we intend to spend by the end of fiscal year 2024. We will deploy this capital at our determined pace based on several key ongoing factors, including customer demand, market opportunity and offsetting income from spectrum leases.
Historical Spectrum Initiatives
We acquired our 900 MHz spectrum and certain related equipment from Sprint in September 2014 for $100 million. While the spectrum we initially purchased can support narrowband and wideband wireless services, the most significant business opportunities we identified requires contiguous spectrum that allows for greater bandwidth than allowed by the current configuration of our spectrum. As a result, since purchasing our 900 MHz spectrum in 2014, we pursued initiatives at the FCC seeking to modernize and realign a portion of the 900 MHz band to increase its usability and capacity by allowing it to accommodate the deployment of broadband networks, technologies and solutions. Specifically, in November 2014, we and the EWA submitted a Joint Petition for Rulemaking to the FCC to propose a realignment of a portion of the 900 MHz band to create a 6 MHz broadband authorization, while retaining 4 MHz for continued narrowband operations. Comments on the proposed rules were filed in June 2015 and reply comments in July 2015.
In August 2017, the FCC issued a NOI announcing that it had commenced a proceeding to examine whether it would be in the public interest to change the existing rules governing the 900 MHz band to increase access to spectrum, improve spectrum efficiency and expand flexibility for a variety of potential uses and applications, including broadband and other advanced technologies and services. We and EWA filed a joint response to the FCC’s NOI in October 2017 and reply comments in November 2017.
On March 14, 2019, the FCC unanimously adopted a NPRM that endorsed the Company’s objective of creating a broadband opportunity in the 900 MHz band for critical infrastructure and other enterprise users. In the NPRM, the FCC requested comments from interested parties, including us, on a number of important topics that would impact the timing and costs of obtaining a broadband license. The Company filed comments to the NPRM in June 2019 and reply comments in July 2019.
On May 13, 2020, the FCC approved a Report and Order to modernize and realign the 900 MHz band to increase its usability and capacity by allowing it to be utilized for the deployment of broadband networks, technologies and solutions.
The Report and Order was published in the Federal Register on July 16, 2020 and became effective on August 17, 2020.
Historical Business Operations
Historically, we generated revenue principally from our pdvConnect and TeamConnect businesses. We historically marketed pdvConnect, a mobile communication and workforce management solution, primarily through two Tier 1 carriers in the United States. In Fiscal 2016, we began offering a commercial PTT service, which we marketed as TeamConnect, in seven major metropolitan areas throughout the United States, including Atlanta, Baltimore/Washington, Chicago, Dallas, Houston, New York, and Philadelphia. We primarily offered the TeamConnect service to customers indirectly through third-party sales representatives who were primarily selected from Motorola’s nationwide dealer network.
In June 2018, we announced our plan to restructure our operations to align and focus our business priorities on our spectrum initiatives. Consistent with this restructuring plan, we transferred our TeamConnect business and support obligations for our pdvConnect business in December 2018. Specifically, we entered into: (i) a Customer Acquisition and Resale Agreement with A BEEP on January 2, 2019, (ii) a Customer Acquisition, Resale and Licensing Agreement with Goosetown on January 2, 2019 and (iii) a MOU with the principals of Goosetown on December 31, 2018. Under the A BEEP and Goosetown agreements, we agreed to: (i) transfer our TeamConnect customers located in the Atlanta, Chicago, Dallas, Houston, and Phoenix metropolitan markets to A BEEP; (ii) transfer our TeamConnect customers located in the Baltimore/Washington DC, Philadelphia, and New York metropolitan markets to Goosetown; (iii) provide A BEEP and Goosetown with access to our MotoTRBO Systems; and (iv) grant A BEEP and Goosetown the right to resell access to our MotoTRBO Systems pursuant to separate Mobile Virtual Network Operation arrangements for a two-year period. We also granted Goosetown a license to sell the business applications we developed for our TeamConnect service.
We retained a number of significant obligations under our A BEEP and Goosetown agreements related to the TeamConnect and pdvConnect businesses. To help ensure the transitioning of the TeamConnect customers, we continued to provide customer care, billing and collection services through April 1, 2019. We are required to pay all site lease, backhaul and utility costs required to operate the MotoTRBO Systems for a two (2)-year period which ended on January 2, 2021. By the end of this two-year period, A BEEP and Goosetown are required to migrate their respective customers off of the MotoTRBO Systems. We are required to continue to pay the cell tower leases for the TeamConnect networks we deployed for the balance of the lease terms. We also retained customer billing and collection responsibility for the pdvConnect business.
Under the terms of the MOU, we assigned the intellectual property rights to our TeamConnect and pdvConnect related applications to the LLC, a new entity formed by the principals of Goosetown, in exchange for a 19.5% ownership interest in the LLC, effective April 30, 2019. The Goosetown Principals have agreed to fund the future operations of the LLC, subject to certain limitations. The LLC assumed our software support and maintenance obligations under the A BEEP and Goosetown agreements. The LLC also assumed customer care services related to the pdvConnect service. We provided transition services to the LLC through April 1, 2019. We were also obligated to pay the LLC a monthly service fee for a 24-month period that ended on January 7, 2021 for its assumption of our support obligations under the A BEEP and Goosetown agreements. We are obligated to pay the LLC a certain portion of the billed revenue we received from pdvConnect customers for a 48-month period. On April 1, 2020, we transferred the pdvConnect customers to the LLC, and the LLC agreed to provide us a portion of the billed revenue they receive from these customers.
For the year ended March 31, 2020, we transferred network, computer, other equipment and intellectual property with a net book value of $246,000 and recorded an investment in the LLC amounting to $48,000 and loss on disposal of assets and capitalized patent costs amounting to $198,000.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, which require management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Accordingly, our actual results could differ from those based on such estimates and assumptions. Further, to the extent that there are differences between our estimates and our actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving our judgments and estimates.
We believe that the areas described below are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, as they require management’s significant judgments in the application of accounting policy or in making estimates and assumptions that are inherently uncertain and that may change in subsequent periods. Our significant accounting policies are set forth in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements. Of those policies, we believe that the policies discussed below may involve a higher degree of judgment and may be more critical to an accurate reflection of our financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition. We recognize revenue when a contract with a customer exists and control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration it expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services and the identified performance obligation has been satisfied.
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is the unit of account in Accounting Standards Update 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and is recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied, which typically occurs when the services are rendered. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may require significant judgment. Our contracts with customers may include multiple performance obligations. For such arrangements, we allocate revenue to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. We generally determine standalone selling prices based on the prices charged to customers under contracts involving only the relevant performance obligation. Judgment may be used to determine the standalone selling prices for items that are not sold separately, including services provided at no additional charge. Most of our performance obligations will be satisfied over time as we provided services such as clearing of our spectrum(s), and obtaining broadband license(s).
We recognize an asset for the incremental costs of obtaining a contract with a customer if we expect the benefit of those costs to be longer than one year. We determined that certain sales commissions meet the requirements to be capitalized and were recorded as an asset.
Evaluation of Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets for Impairment. Intangible assets are wireless licenses that will be used to provide us with the exclusive right to utilize designated radio frequency spectrum to provide wireless communication services. While licenses are issued for only a fixed time, generally ten to fifteen years, such licenses are subject to renewal by the FCC. License renewals have occurred routinely and at nominal cost in the past. There are currently no legal, regulatory, contractual, competitive, economic or other factors that limit the useful life of our wireless licenses. As a result, we have determined that the wireless licenses should be treated as an indefinite-lived intangible asset. We will evaluate the useful life determination for our wireless licenses each year to determine whether events and circumstances continue to support our treatment as an indefinite useful life asset.
Historically, wireless licenses are tested for impairment on an aggregate basis, consistent with our dispatch business at a national level. Effective Fiscal 2021, we determined our unit of accounting should be based on geographic markets and test our wireless licenses for impairment based on the individual markets, as we will be utilizing the wireless licenses as part of facilitating broadband spectrum networks at an individual market level. We may elect to first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of an intangible asset is less than its carrying value. If we do not perform the qualitative assessment, or if the qualitative assessment indicates it is more likely than not that the fair value of the intangible asset is less than its carrying amount, we calculate the estimated fair value of the intangible asset. If the estimated fair value of the spectrum licenses is lower than their carrying amount, an impairment loss is recognized. We use a market-based approach to estimate fair value.
The valuation approach used to estimate fair value for the purpose of impairment testing requires management to use of complex assumptions and estimates such as population, discount rates, industry and market considerations, long-term market equity risk, EBITDA, as well as other factors. These assumptions and estimates are forward-looking and depend on our ability to successfully apply for broadband licenses and commercialize our spectrum licenses.
For the year ended March 31, 2021, we performed a step one quantitative impairment test to determine if the fair value of the licenses exceed the carrying values for each geographical market. Estimated fair value is determined using a market-based approach primarily using the 600 MHz auction price as the Report and Order noted that the FCC will use as a reference the spectrum price based on the average price paid in the FCC’s 600 MHz auction to calculate the Anti-Windfall Payments. For the year ended March 31, 2020, we performed a step zero qualitative approach on an aggregate basis to test indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment by first assessing qualitative factors to determine whether it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset is impaired as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform quantitative impairment testing.
﻿
﻿
Results of Operations
Comparison of the years ended March 31, 2021 and March 31, 2020
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 (“Fiscal 2021”) and March 31, 2020 (“Fiscal 2020”). The period to period comparison of financial results is not necessarily indicative of financial results to be achieved in future periods.
Operating revenues
﻿
Overall operating revenues decreased by $0.6 million, or 41% to $0.9 million in Fiscal 2021 from $1.6 million in Fiscal 2020. The decrease in our operating revenues were attributable to the transfer of our TeamConnect customers to A BEEP and Goosetown as part of our December 2018 restructuring efforts as discussed in Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report, as well as the loss of customers in our pdvConnect business.
Operating expenses
﻿
﻿
Direct cost of revenue. Direct cost of revenue decreased by $1.2 million to $1.6 million for Fiscal 2021, or 43%, from $2.8 million for Fiscal 2020. The decrease primarily resulted from lower support costs related to the transfer of pdvConnect customers to the LLC as part of our December 2018 restructuring efforts as discussed in Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses increased by $14.0 million to $39.2 million for Fiscal 2021, or 55%, from $25.2 million for Fiscal 2020. The $14.0 million increase for Fiscal 2021 was attributable to $5.1 million in stock compensation expense recognized upon the achievement of a performance metric under the performance-based restricted stock units and performance-based stock options, upon the Report and Order becoming effective in August 2020 (see Note 12), $0.8 million relating to the Type III modification to the restricted stock units held by the former Chairman of the Board upon his transition to a consultant to the Company and approximately $3.8 million due to higher valuation of grants awarded in Fiscal 2021, $3.6 million higher employee related costs due to increased headcount as well as the realignment of the business development team and $1.1 million higher consulting services related to our strategic spectrum initiatives. These increases were partially offset by a $0.4 million decrease in employee related travel and meeting costs due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Product development expenses. Product development expense increased by $1.4 million, or 47% to $4.3 million for Fiscal 2021 from $3.0 million for Fiscal 2020. The increase is primarily attributable to $0.4 million higher valuation of grants awarded in Fiscal 2021, $0.4 million higher consulting charges, $0.6 million higher technology and equipment related charges to assist with the development of future product offerings, offset by $0.2 million lower employee related travel and meeting costs due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Sales and support expenses. Sales and support expenses decreased by $1.1 million, or 27%, to $2.9 million for Fiscal 2021 from $4.1 million for Fiscal 2020. The decrease primarily resulted from $1.1 million related to the realignment of the business development team from Sales and support to General and administrative, $0.3 million lower employee related travel and meeting costs due to the pandemic a $0.2 million decrease for rebranding efforts in Fiscal 2020 that did not occur in Fiscal 2021 and a $0.3 million impairment of contract costs incurred in Fiscal 2020 related to the TeamConnect customers transferred to A BEEP and Goosetown, partially offset by $0.3 million increase in headcount and employee related costs resulting from building the sales team.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization in Fiscal 2021 remained relatively flat as compared to Fiscal 2020.
Restructuring costs. Restructuring costs decreased by $171,000, or 72%, to $65,000 for Fiscal 2021 from $236,000 in Fiscal 2020. The decrease was mainly due to the completion of the December 2018 cost reduction and restructuring actions associated with the transfer of the TeamConnect business to A BEEP and Goosetown and the transfer of the pdvConnect business to the LLC in Fiscal 2020.
Impairment of long-lived assets. Impairment for long-lived assets for Fiscal 2021 remained relatively flat as compared to Fiscal 2020.
Loss from disposal of intangible assets, net
﻿
In June 2020, we cancelled licenses in the 900 MHz band in accordance with the Report and Order and our agreement with the AAR. Because we did not receive any licenses nor monetary reimbursement in exchange for the cancellation, but only credit for purposes of determining our future eligibility and payment requirements for broadband licenses under the Report and Order, we recorded a $5.0 million loss from disposal of the intangible assets in the Consolidated Statements of Operations for Fiscal 2021.
In September 2020, we closed an agreement with a third party for the exchange of 900 MHz licenses. Under the agreement, we received spectrum licenses at their estimated fair value of approximately $0.2 million and a payment of $1.2 million in cash. Under the agreement, we transferred spectrum licenses with a book value of approximately $0.3 million to the third party. We recognized a $1.1 million gain from disposal of intangible assets in the Consolidated Statement of Operations when the deal closed in September 2020.
In Fiscal 2020, we recorded a loss on disposal of capitalized patent costs amounting to $140,000 relating to the transfer of the intellectual property to the LLC. In addition, we also entered into a barter transaction with a third party whereby we acquired wireless licenses valued at approximately $88,000 in exchange of equipment with a net book value of $21,000 and approximately $15,000 in cash. We recorded a corresponding gain of $52,000.
Loss from disposal of long-lived assets, net
﻿
Loss on disposal of long-lived assets, net in Fiscal 2021 remained relatively flat as compared to Fiscal 2020.
Interest income
﻿
Interest income decreased by $1.7 million, or 93%, to $0.1 million for Fiscal 2021 as compared to $1.8 million from Fiscal 2020 due to lower cash balance driven by payments for our spectrum initiatives, along with lower effective money market rates.
Other income
﻿
Other income in Fiscal 2021 remained relatively flat as compared to Fiscal 2020.
Loss on equity method investment
We reported loss on investment for Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020 amounting to $39,000 and $9,000, respectively, relating to the 19.5% ownership interest in the LLC.
Income tax expense
﻿
﻿
﻿
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act was signed into law. The new CARES Act modified Section 172(b)(1)(A) of the Code to state that NOL arising in a taxable year beginning before January 1, 2018, is carried forward 20 years provided that a carryback claim is not effected. From this adjusted provision, our March 31, 2018 NOL carryforward changed from an indefinite life to a 20-year life. We used a discrete effective tax rate method to calculate taxes for Fiscal 2021. We determined that applying an estimate of the annual effective tax rate would not provide a reasonable estimate as small changes in estimated “ordinary” loss would result in significant changes in the estimated annual effective tax rate. Accordingly, for Fiscal 2021, we recorded a total deferred tax expense of $0.1 million, due to the inability to use some portion of federal and state NOL carryforwards against the deferred tax liability created by amortization of indefinite-lived intangibles.
A non-cash deferred income tax expense of $2.4 million was recorded for Fiscal 2020. The state income tax expense portion resulted from our determination that most of our state operating loss carryforwards are not indefinite. As a result, we recorded approximately $0.8 million of state deferred tax expense and additional related state deferred tax liability reflecting our inability to use state NOL carryforward against the infinite-lived intangible for Fiscal 2020. Due to a technical correction from the federal CARES Act relating to fiscal year effective dates on NOLs, we recorded a non-cash federal deferred income tax expense and liability of $1.6 million relating to temporary difference on indefinite-lived intangibles for Fiscal 2020.
﻿
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On March 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $117.5 million.
Cash Flows from Operating, Investing and Financing Activities
﻿
﻿
﻿
Net cash used by operating activities. Net cash used by operating activities was approximately $10.0 million and $27.8 million in Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively. The majority of net cash used by operating activities in Fiscal 2021 resulted from a net loss of $54.4 million, partially offset by contingent liability relating to the upfront payment we received from SDG&E of $20.0 million, non-cash compensation expense attributable to stock awards of $15.9 million, net loss on disposal of intangible assets of $3.8 million and depreciation of $3.5 million. The majority of net cash used by operating activities in Fiscal 2020 resulted from a net loss of $37.6 million, partially offset by non-cash compensation expense attributable to stock awards of $5.8 million and depreciation of $3.6 million.
Net cash used by investing activities. Net cash used by investing activities was approximately $14.2 million and $7.6 million for Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively. For Fiscal 2021, the net cash used by investing activities resulted from $13.9 million in wireless license acquisitions including refundable deposits and $0.2 million for the purchases of equipment. For Fiscal 2020, the net cash used by investing activities resulted from $7.1 million in wireless license acquisitions, including refundable deposits and $0.5 million for the purchase of equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was $4.2 million and $96.1 million for Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively. For Fiscal 2021, the net cash provided by financing activities primarily resulted $4.2 million in cash received from the proceeds of stock option exercises. For Fiscal 2020, the net cash provided by financing activities primarily resulted from $94.2 million net proceeds from the July 2019 follow-on offering and $2.4 million in cash received from the proceeds of stock option exercises.
Capital Requirements. We are now engaged in qualifying for and securing broadband licenses from the FCC pursuant to the Report and Order. At the same time, our sales and marketing departments are pursuing opportunities to lease the broadband licenses we secure to our targeted utility and critical infrastructure customers. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including: the timeline and costs to acquire broadband licenses pursuant to the Report and Order, including the costs to acquire additional spectrum, the costs related to retuning, or swapping spectrum held by, Covered Incumbents and the costs of paying Anti-Windfall Payments to the U.S. Treasury; costs related to the commercializing of our spectrum assets; and our ability to sign customer contracts and generate revenues from the license or transfer of any broadband licenses we secure; the terms and conditions of any customer contracts, including the timing of payments; the costs associated with expanding our business development, sales and marketing organization, the costs and ongoing obligations related to our former TeamConnect and pdvConnect businesses; the revenues we generate from royalties we may receive from our agreements we entered into with the buyers of our TeamConnect and our pdvConnect businesses; and our ability to control our operating expenses.
On April 3, 2020, we filed the Shelf Registration Statement on Form S-3 with the SEC that was declared effective by the SEC on April 20, 2020, which permits us to offer up to $150 million of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities and warrants in one or more offerings and in any combination, including in units from time to time. Our Shelf Registration Statement is intended to provide us with additional flexibility to access capital markets for general corporate purposes, which may include working capital, capital expenditures, repayment of debt, other corporate expenses and acquisitions of complementary products, technologies, or businesses.
We entered into the Sales Agreements with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. and B. Riley FBR, Inc. and on April 3, 2020, registered the sale of up to an aggregate of $50,000,000 in shares of our common stock in at the market sales transactions pursuant to the Sales Agreements under the Shelf Registration Statement. Through the date of this filing, we have not sold any shares of our common stock in at the market transactions or any securities under the Shelf Registration Statement.
We believe our cash and cash equivalents on hand will be sufficient to meet our financial obligations through at least the next 12 months. As noted above, our future capital requirements will depend on a number of factors, including among others, the costs and timing of securing broadband licenses, including our spectrum retuning activities, spectrum acquisitions and the Anti-Windfall Payments to the U.S. Treasury, and our operating activities and any revenues we generate through our commercialization activities. When combining our estimated clearing and spectrum acquisition costs with our anticipated Anti-Windfall Payments to the U.S. Treasury to effectively acquire additional spectrum from the FCC’s inventory in markets where we need it, we anticipate the combined total costs to range from $130 to $160 million, the significant majority of which we intend to spend over through the end of fiscal year 2024. We will deploy this capital at our determined pace based on several key ongoing factors, including customer demand, market opportunity, and offsetting income from spectrum leases. As we cannot predict the duration or scope of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our targeted customers, the potential negative financial impact to our results of operations and financial condition cannot be reasonably estimated. We are actively managing the business to maintain our cash flow and believe that we currently have adequate liquidity. To implement our business plans and initiatives, however, we may need to raise additional capital. We cannot predict with certainty the exact amount or timing for any future capital raises. See “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report for a reference to the risks and uncertainties that could cause our costs to be more than we currently anticipate and/or our revenue and operating results to be lower than we currently anticipate. If required, we intend to raise additional capital through debt or equity financings, including pursuant to our Shelf Registration Statement, or through some other financing arrangement. However, we cannot be sure that additional financing will be available if and when needed, or that, if available, we can obtain financing on terms favorable to our stockholders and to us. Any failure to obtain financing when required will have a material adverse effect on our business, operating results, financial condition and liquidity.
Warranties. Our agreements with our customers generally include certain provisions for indemnifying them against liabilities if our services infringe a third-party’s intellectual property rights or for other specified reasons. We have not incurred any costs relating to such warranties.
﻿
﻿
﻿
Contractual Obligations and Indebtedness
Leases. We are obligated under certain lease agreements for office space with lease terms expiring on various dates from October 31, 2024 through June 30, 2027, which includes a three to ten-year lease extension for its corporate headquarters. We entered into multiple lease agreements for tower space related to out TeamConnect business. The lease expiration dates range from April 30, 2021 to June 30, 2026.
Rent expense amounted to approximately $2.6 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 of which approximately $1.2 million are included in direct cost of revenue and the remainder of approximately $1.4 million included in general and administrative.
Rent expense amounted to approximately $2.7 million for the year ended March 31, 2020 of which approximately $1.7 million are included in direct cost of revenue and the remainder of approximately $1.0 million included in general and administrative.
As of March 31, 2021, our contractual obligations, including estimated payments due by fiscal year, are as follows:
﻿
(1)
Represents aggregate rentals, under non-cancellable leases for office and tower site locations (exclusive of real estate taxes, utilities, maintenance and other costs borne by us) for the remaining terms of the leases as described in Note 10 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for further information.
(2)
Represents the asset retirement obligations we have for our tower site locations. See Note 2 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for further information.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During Fiscal 2021 and 2020, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships that were established to facilitate off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Information regarding recent accounting pronouncements is provided in Note 2 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.