ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included therein, where certain terms have been defined.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations includes forward-looking statements. We base these forward-looking statements on our current plans, expectations and beliefs about future events. There are risks, including the factors discussed in “Risk Factors” in Item 1A and elsewhere in this Report, that our actual experience will differ materially from these expectations. For more information, see “Cautionary Notice Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” at the beginning of this Report.
In this Report, except as the context suggests otherwise, the words “Company,” “Atlanticus Holdings Corporation,” “Atlanticus,” “we,” “our,” “ours,” and “us” refer to Atlanticus Holdings Corporation and its subsidiaries and predecessors.
OVERVIEW
We utilize proprietary analytics and a flexible technology platform to enable financial institutions to provide various credit and related financial services and products to everyday Americans. According to data published by Experian, 41% of Americans had FICO® scores of less than 700 as of the second quarter of 2019. A recent survey conducted by Highland Solutions found that 63% of Americans lived “paycheck to paycheck” and 82% of people do not have access to an emergency fund. We believe this equates to a population of over 100 million everyday Americans in need of additional access to credit. These consumers often have financial needs that are not effectively met by larger financial institutions. By facilitating fairly priced consumer credit and financial service alternatives with value added features and benefits specifically curated for the unique needs of these consumers, we endeavor to empower everyday Americans on a path to improved financial well-being.
Currently, within our Credit and Other Investments segment, we are applying the experiences gained and infrastructure built from servicing over $26 billion in consumer loans over our 24-year operating history to support lenders who originate a range of consumer loan products. These products include private label and general purpose credit cards originated by lenders through multiple channels, including retail and healthcare point-of-sale (collectively "point-of-sale"), direct mail solicitation, online and partnerships with third parties. In the point-of-sale channel, we partner with retailers and service providers in various industries across the U.S. to allow them to provide credit to their customers for the purchase of a variety of goods and services including consumer electronics, furniture, elective medical procedures, healthcare, educational services and home-improvements. The services of our bank partners are often extended to consumers who may not have access to financing options with larger financial institutions. We specialize in supporting this “second-look” credit service. Our flexible technology platform allows our bank partners to integrate our paperless process and instant decisioning platform with the technology infrastructure of participating retailers and service providers. Our technology platform and proprietary analytics enable lenders to make instant credit decisions utilizing hundreds of inputs from multiple sources and thereby offer credit to consumers overlooked by many providers of financing who focus exclusively on consumers with higher FICO scores. By supporting a range of products through a multitude of channels, we enable lenders to provide the right type of credit, whenever and wherever the consumer has a need.
We are principally engaged in providing products and services to lenders in the U.S. and, in most cases, we invest in the receivables originated by such lenders who utilize our technology platform and other related services. From time to time, we also purchase receivables portfolios from third parties. In this Report, “receivables” or “loans” typically refer to receivables we have purchased from our bank partners or from third parties.
Using our infrastructure and technology platform, we also provide loan servicing, including risk management and customer service outsourcing, for third parties. Also through our Credit and Other Investments segment, we engage in testing and limited investment in consumer finance technology platforms as we seek to capitalize on our expertise and infrastructure.
Additionally, we report within our Credit and Other Investments segment: (1) the income earned from an investment in an equity-method investee that holds credit card receivables for which we are the servicer; and (2) gains or losses associated with investments previously made in consumer finance technology platforms. These include investments in companies engaged in mobile technologies, marketplace lending and other financial technologies. These investments are carried at the lower of cost or market valuation. None of these companies are publicly-traded and there are no material pending liquidity events. During the year ended December 31, 2020, one of the companies we invested in underwent a recapitalization which resulted in our receipt of $2.0 million in distributions. We retained our minority ownership stake in this company and will continue to carry the investment on our books at cost minus impairment, if any, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes.
The recurring cash flows we receive within our Credit and Other Investments segment principally include those associated with (1) point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer receivables, (2) servicing compensation and (3) credit card receivables portfolios that are unencumbered or where we own a portion of the underlying structured financing facility (such as those associated with our legacy credit card operations).
Subject to potential disruptions caused by COVID-19, we believe that our point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer receivables are generating, and will continue to generate, attractive returns on assets, thereby facilitating debt financing under terms and conditions (including advance rates and pricing) that will support attractive returns on equity, and we continue to pursue growth in this area.
Within our Auto Finance segment, our CAR subsidiary operations principally purchase and/or service loans secured by automobiles from or for, and also provide floor plan financing for, a pre-qualified network of independent automotive dealers and automotive finance companies in the buy-here, pay-here, used car business. We purchase auto loans at a discount and with dealer retentions or holdbacks that provide risk protection. Also within our Auto Finance segment, we are providing certain installment lending products in addition to our traditional loans secured by automobiles.
Beyond these activities within our Credit and Other Investments segment, we invest in and service portfolios of credit card receivables.
Subject to the availability of capital at attractive terms and pricing, we plan to continue to evaluate and pursue a variety of activities, including: (1) investments in additional financial assets associated with point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer finance and credit activities as well as the acquisition of interests in receivables portfolios; (2) investments in other assets or businesses that are not necessarily financial services assets or businesses and (3) the repurchase of our convertible senior notes and other debt and our outstanding common stock.
We elected the fair value option to account for certain loans receivable associated with our point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer platform that are acquired on or after January 1, 2020. We believe the use of fair value for these receivables more closely approximates the true economics of these receivables, better matching the yields and corresponding charge-offs. We believe the fair value option also enables us to report GAAP net income that provides increased transparency into our profitability and asset quality. Receivables arising in accounts originated prior to January 1, 2020 will continue to be accounted for in our 2020 and subsequent financial statements at amortized cost, net. We estimate the Fair Value Receivables using a discounted cash flow model, which considers various factors such as expected yields on consumer receivables, the timing of expected payments, customer default rates, estimated costs to service the portfolio, interest rates, and valuations of comparable portfolios. As a result of this fair value adoption, our loans, interest and fees receivable arising in accounts originated subsequent to January 1, 2020 will be carried at fair value with changes in fair value recognized directly in earnings, and certain fee billings (such as annual membership fees and merchant fees) and origination costs associated with these receivables will no longer be deferred. We reevaluate the fair value of our Fair Value Receivables at the end of each quarter.
COVID-19 Pandemic
On March 13, 2020, a national emergency was declared under the National Emergencies Act due to the COVID-19 pandemic. As of the date of filing this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the duration and severity of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic remain unknown. Likewise, we do not know the duration and severity of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all members of the Company’s ecosystem - our bank partner, merchants and consumers - as well as our employees. In addition to instituting a Company-wide remote work program to ensure the safety of all employees and their families, we are communicating to employees on a regular basis regarding such efforts as planning for contingencies related to the COVID-19 pandemic, providing updated information and policies related to the safety and health of employees, and monitoring the ongoing pandemic for new developments that may impact the Company, our work locations or our employees and are taking reasonable measures.
The following are anticipated key impacts on our business and response initiatives taken by the Company, in coordination with our partners, to mitigate such impacts:
Consumer spending behavior has been significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, principally due to restrictions on “non-essential” businesses, issuances of stay-at-home orders, and uncertainties about the extent and duration of the pandemic. Additionally, government stimulus programs have decreased consumer need for credit products and generally led to an increase in customer payments. While we have seen some improvements in this area, to the extent this change in consumer spending behavior continues, receivables purchases could decline relative to the prior year. The extent to which our merchants have remained open for business has varied across merchant category and geographic location within the U.S.
Borrowers impacted by COVID-19 requesting hardship assistance have been receiving temporary relief from payments. While we expect these measures to mitigate credit losses, we anticipate that the elevated unemployment rate, while partially mitigated by the effects of government stimulus and relief measures, such as the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act and the American Rescue Plan, may result in increased portfolio credit losses in the future.
As the impact of COVID-19 continues to evolve, the Company remains committed to serving our bank partner, merchants and consumers, while caring for the safety of our employees and their families. The potential impact that COVID-19 and related government stimulus and relief measures could have on our financial condition and results of operations remains highly uncertain. For more information, refer to Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” and, in particular, “- The global outbreak of COVID-19 has caused severe disruptions in the U.S. economy, and may have an adverse impact on our performance, results of operations and access to capital.”
CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Total operating revenue. Total operating revenue consists of: 1) interest income, finance charges and late fees on consumer loans, 2) other fees on credit products including annual and merchant fees and 3) ancillary, interchange and servicing income on loan portfolios.
Period-over-period results primarily relate to growth in point-of-sale finance and direct-to-consumer products, the receivables of which increased from $908.4 million as of December 31, 2019 to $1,085.9 million as of December 31, 2020. We are currently experiencing continued period-over-period growth in point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer receivables and to a lesser extent in our CAR receivables-growth which we expect to result in net period-over-period growth in our total interest income and related fees for these operations throughout 2021. Future periods’ growth is also dependent on the addition of new retail partners to expand the reach of point-of-sale operations as well as growth within existing partnerships and continued growth and marketing within the direct-to-consumer receivables. As discussed elsewhere in this Report, we have elected the fair value option to account for certain loan receivables associated with our point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer platform that are originated on or after January 1, 2020. As a result, annual fees and merchant fees that are charged upon the acquisition of the receivable will no longer be deferred and will be recognized in the loan acquisition period. This difference in recognition also served to increase our other fees on credit products (included as a component of "Fees and related income on earning assets" on our Consolidated Statements of Operations). Other revenue on our Consolidated Statements of Operations consists of ancillary, interchange and servicing income. Ancillary and interchange revenues are largely impacted by growth in our receivables as discussed above. These fees are earned when our customer's cards are used over established card networks. We earn a portion of the interchange fee the card networks charge merchants for the transaction. We earn servicing income by servicing loan portfolios for third parties (including our equity-method investee). Unless and/or until we grow the number of contractual servicing relationships we have with third parties or our current relationships grow their loan portfolios, we will not experience significant growth and income within this category, and we currently expect to experience continued declines in this category of revenue relative to revenue earned in prior periods. The above discussions on expectations for finance, fee and other income are based on our current expectations. The unknown impacts COVID-19 and related government stimulus and relief measures may have on our ability to acquire new receivables or the impact they may have on consumers' ability to make payments on outstanding loans and fees receivable could result in changes in these assumptions in the near term.
Other non-operating revenue. Included within our Other non-operating income category is income (or loss) associated with investments in non-core businesses or other items not directly associated with our ongoing operations. For the year ended December 31, 2019, this included $105.9 million associated with reductions in accruals related to one of our portfolios. The accrual was based upon our estimate of an amount that might have been claimed by customers and was based upon several factors including customer claims volume, average claim amount and a determination of the amount, if any, which might have been offered to resolve such claims. The assumptions used in the accrual estimate were subjective, mainly due to uncertainty associated with claims volumes and the resolution costs, if any, per claim. For the year ended December 31, 2020, other non-operating revenue included $2.0 million in distributions received from an investment in a consumer finance technology company.
Interest expense. Variations in interest expense are due to new borrowings associated with growth in point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer receivables and CAR operations as evidenced within Note 10, “Notes Payable,” to our consolidated financial statements offset by our debt facilities being repaid commensurate with net liquidations of the underlying credit card, auto finance and installment loan receivables that serve as collateral for the facilities. Outstanding notes payable, net of unamortized debt issuance costs and discounts, associated with our point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer platform increased from $691.5 million as of December 31, 2019 to $827.1 million as of December 31, 2020. We anticipate additional debt financing over the next few quarters as we continue to grow, and as such, we expect our quarterly interest expense to be above that experienced in the prior periods for these operations.
Provision for losses on loans, interest and fees receivable recorded at net realizable value. Our provision for losses on loans, interest and fees receivable recorded at net realizable value covers, with respect to such receivables, changes in estimates regarding our aggregate loss exposures on (1) principal receivable balances, (2) finance charges and late fees receivable underlying income amounts included within our total interest income category, and (3) other fees receivable. Recoveries of charged off receivables, consist of amounts received from the efforts of third-party collectors we employ and through the sale of charged-off accounts to unrelated third-parties. All proceeds received associated with charged-off accounts, are credited to the allowance for uncollectible loans, interest and fees receivable and effectively offset our provision for losses on loans, interest and fees receivable recorded at net realizable value.
We have experienced a period-over-period decrease in this category between the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020 primarily reflecting: 1) the effects of our adoption of the fair value option to account for certain loans receivable that are acquired on or after January 1, 2020 which has resulted in a decline in the outstanding receivables subject to this provision and 2) the overall reduction in delinquencies associated with these receivables in part due to recent government stimulus programs, which have served to increase payments on outstanding receivables. This reduction in provision has been offset somewhat due to additional reserves associated with accounts that have been impacted due to COVID-19. See Note 2, “Significant Accounting Policies and Consolidated Financial Statement Components,” to our consolidated financial statements and the discussions of our Credit and Other Investments and Auto Finance segments for further credit quality statistics and analysis. Given our adoption of fair value accounting for certain receivables acquired on or after January 1, 2020, and absent the unknown impacts COVID-19 and related government stimulus and relief measures may have on our ability to acquire new receivables or the impact they may have on our customers' ability to make payments on outstanding loans and fees receivable, we expect that our provision for losses on loans will continue to diminish as the underlying receivables that continue to be recorded at net realizable value liquidate.
Changes in fair value of loans, interest and fees receivable and notes payable associated with structured financings recorded at fair value. For credit card receivables for which we use fair value accounting (including those that we elected the fair value option for on January 1, 2020), we expect our change in fair value of credit card receivables recorded at fair value to increase throughout 2021 commensurate with growth in these receivables. Inversely (and to a lesser degree), we expect our change in fair value of notes payable associated with structured financings for our legacy credit card receivables recorded at fair value amounts to gradually diminish (absent significant changes in the assumptions used to determine these fair values) in the future. These amounts, however, are subject to potentially high levels of volatility if we experience changes in the quality of our credit card receivables or if there are significant changes in market valuation factors (e.g., interest rates and spreads) in the future.
Total operating expense. Total operating expense variances for the year ended December 31, 2019, relative to the year ended December 31, 2020, reflect the following:
•
increases in salaries reflecting marginal growth in both the number of employees and increases in related benefit costs. We expect some marginal increase in this cost for 2021 when compared to 2020 as we expect our receivables to continue to grow and as a result we expect to modestly increase our number of employees;
•
increases in card and loan servicing expenses in the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to growth in receivables associated with our investments in point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer receivables, which grew from $908.4 million outstanding to $1,085.9 million outstanding at December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020, respectively, offset by the continued net liquidations in our legacy credit card portfolios, the receivables of which declined from $6.4 million outstanding to $4.4 million outstanding at December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020, respectively. As many of the expenses associated with our card and loan servicing efforts are now variable based on the amount of underlying receivables, we would expect this number to continue to grow throughout 2021. As our receivables have grown, we have significantly reduced our servicing costs per account, realizing greater economies of scale.
•
slight decreases in marketing and solicitation costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to decreases in the pace of receivables growth associated with our direct-to-consumer and retail point-of-sale portfolios. Despite this decrease, we expect that increased origination and brand marketing support will result in overall increases in year-over-year costs during 2021 although the frequency and timing of marketing efforts could result in reductions in quarter-over-quarter marketing costs; and
• increases in other expenses primarily related to realized translation gains recognized during the prior period. Expenses in this category primarily relate to fixed costs associated with occupancy or other third party expenses that are largely fixed in nature. While we expect some increase in these costs as we continue to grow our receivable portfolios, we do not anticipate the increases to be meaningful.
Certain operating costs are variable based on the levels of accounts and receivables we service (both for our own account and for others) and the pace and breadth of our growth in receivables. However, a number of our operating costs are fixed and until recently have comprised a larger percentage of our total costs. This trend is reversing as we continue to grow our earning assets (including loans, interest and fees receivable) based principally on growth of point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer receivables and to a lesser extent, growth within our CAR operations. This is evidenced by the growth we experienced in our managed receivables levels over the past two years with minimal growth in the fixed portion of our card and loan servicing expenses as well as our salaries and benefits costs as we were able to better utilize our fixed costs to grow our asset base.
Notwithstanding our cost-management efforts, we expect increased levels of expenditures associated with anticipated growth in point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer credit card-related operations. These expenses will primarily relate to the variable costs of marketing efforts and card and loan servicing expenses associated with new receivable acquisitions. The above referenced unknown potential impacts related to COVID-19 could result in more variability in these expenses and could impair our ability to acquire new receivables, resulting in increased costs despite our efforts to manage costs effectively.
Noncontrolling interests. We reflect the ownership interests of noncontrolling holders of equity in our majority-owned subsidiaries as noncontrolling interests in our consolidated statements of operations. Unless we enter into significant new majority-owned subsidiary ventures with noncontrolling interest holders in the future, we expect to have negligible noncontrolling interests in our majority-owned subsidiaries and negligible allocations of income or loss to noncontrolling interest holders in future quarters.
On November 14, 2019, a wholly-owned subsidiary issued 50.5 million Class B preferred units at a purchase price of $1.00 per unit to an unrelated third party. The units carry a 16% preferred return to be paid quarterly, with up to 6 percentage points of the preferred return to be paid through the issuance of additional units or cash, at our election. The units have both call and put rights and are also subject to various covenants including a minimum book value, which if not satisfied, could allow for the securities to be put back to the subsidiary. On March 30, 2020, the subsidiary issued an additional 50.0 million Class B preferred units under the same terms. The proceeds from the transaction are being used for general corporate purposes. We have included the issuance of these Class B preferred units as temporary noncontrolling interests on the consolidated balance sheets and the associated dividends are included as a reduction of our net income attributable to common shareholders on the consolidated statements of operations.
Income Taxes. We experienced an effective income tax expense rate of 17.9% and 17.5% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Our effective income tax expense rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was below the statutory rate principally due to (1) our deduction for income tax purposes of amounts characterized in our consolidated financial statements as dividends on a preferred stock issuance, such amounts constituting deductible interest expense on a debt issuance for tax purposes and (2) the reversal in 2020 of our prior year accruals of interest and penalties on liabilities for unpaid taxes, such reversal arising from the complete abatement by the IRS of failure-to-pay penalties (and accrued interest thereon) related to a now-completed audit by the IRS of our 2008 tax returns. Our effective income tax expense rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 was below the statutory rate principally as a result of the release of a federal valuation allowance in that year.
We report income tax-related interest and penalties (including those associated with both our accrued liabilities for uncertain tax positions and unpaid tax liabilities) within our income tax line item on our consolidated statements of operations. We likewise report the reversal of income tax-related interest and penalties within such line item to the extent we resolve our liabilities for uncertain tax positions or unpaid tax liabilities in a manner favorable to our accruals therefor. For 2020, we reported a net reversal of income tax-related interest and penalties of $1.0 million within our income tax line item, and for 2019, we reported a net accrual of income tax-related interest and penalties $0.1 million within our income tax line item.
Credit and Other Investments Segment
Our Credit and Other Investments segment includes our activities relating to our servicing of and our investments in the point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer credit card operations, our various credit card receivables portfolios, as well as other product testing and investments that generally utilize much of the same infrastructure. The types of revenues we earn from our investments in receivables portfolios and services primarily include fees and finance charges, merchant fees or annual fees associated with the point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer receivables.
We record (i) the finance charges, merchant fees and late fees assessed on our Credit and Other Investments segment receivables in the Revenue - Consumer loans, including past due fees category on our consolidated statements of operations, (ii) the annual, activation, monthly maintenance, returned-check, cash advance and other fees in the Revenue - Fees and related income on earning assets category on our consolidated statements of operations, and (iii) the charge offs (and recoveries thereof) within our Provision for losses on loans, interest and fees receivable recorded at net realizable value on our consolidated statements of operations (for all credit product receivables other than those for which we have elected the fair value option) and within Changes in fair value of loans, interest and fees receivable and notes payable on our consolidated statements of operations (for all of our other receivables for which we have elected the fair value option). Additionally, we show the effects of fair value changes for those credit card receivables for which we have elected the fair value option as a component of Changes in fair value of loans, interest and fees receivable and notes payable associated with structured financings recorded at fair value in our consolidated statements of operations.
We historically have invested in receivables portfolios through subsidiary entities. If we control through direct ownership or exert a controlling interest in the entity, we consolidate it and reflect its operations as noted above. If we exert significant influence but do not control the entity, we record our share of its net operating results in the equity in income of equity-method investee category on our consolidated statements of operations.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to financial measures presented in accordance with GAAP, we present managed receivables, total managed yield, total managed yield ratio, combined net charge-off ratio, percent of managed receivables 30 or more days past due, percent of managed receivables 60 or more days past due and percent of managed receivables 90 or more days past due, all of which are non-GAAP financial measures. These non-GAAP financial measures aid in the evaluation of the performance of our credit portfolios, including our risk management, servicing and collection activities and our valuation of purchased receivables. The credit performance of our managed receivables provides information concerning the quality of loan originations and the related credit risks inherent with the portfolios. Management relies heavily upon financial data and results prepared on the “managed basis” in order to manage our business, make planning decisions, evaluate our performance and allocate resources.
These non-GAAP financial measures are presented for supplemental informational purposes only. These non-GAAP financial measures have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, GAAP financial measures. These non-GAAP financial measures may differ from the non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies. A reconciliation of each of these non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure is provided below for each of the fiscal periods indicated.
These non-GAAP financial measures include only the performance of those receivables underlying consolidated subsidiaries (for receivables carried at amortized cost basis and fair value) and exclude the performance of receivables held by our equity method investee. As the receivables underlying our equity method investee reflect a small and diminishing portion of our overall receivables base, we do not believe their inclusion or exclusion in the overall results is material. Additionally, we calculate average managed receivables based on the quarter-end balances.
The comparison of non-GAAP managed receivables to our GAAP financial statements requires an understanding that managed receivables reflect the face value of loans, interest and fees receivable without any consideration for potential loan losses or other adjustments to reflect fair value.
Below are (i) the reconciliation of Loans, interest and fees receivable, at fair value to Loans, interest and fees receivable, at face value and (ii) the calculation of managed receivables:
(1) As discussed in more detail above in "-Overview," we elected the fair value option to account for certain loans receivable associated with our point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer platform that are acquired on or after January 1, 2020.
(2) The fair value mark against receivables reflects the difference between the face value of a receivable and the net present value of the expected cash flows associated with that receivable. See Note 6, “Fair Value of Assets and Liabilities” to our consolidated financial statements included herein for further discussion on assumptions underlying this calculation.
As discussed above, our managed receivables data differ in certain aspects from our GAAP data in certain areas. First, managed receivables data are based on billings and actual charge offs as they occur without regard to any changes in our allowance for uncollectible loans, interest and fees receivable. Second, for managed receivables data, we amortize certain fees (such as annual and merchant fees) associated with our Fair Value Receivables over the expected life of the corresponding receivable and recognize certain costs, such as claims made under credit deferral programs, when paid. Under fair value accounting, these fees are recognized when billed or upon receivable acquisition. Third, managed receivables data excludes the impacts of equity in income of equity method investees. A reconciliation of our operating revenues to comparable amounts used in our calculation of Total managed yield ratios are as follows (in millions):
The calculation of Combined net charge offs used in our Combined net charge-off ratio, annualized is as follows (in millions):
Our delinquency and charge-off data at any point in time reflect the credit performance of our managed receivables. The average age of the accounts underlying our receivables, the timing and size of portfolio purchases, the success of our collection and recovery efforts and general economic conditions all affect our delinquency and charge-off rates. The average age of the accounts underlying our receivables portfolio also affects the stability of our delinquency and loss rates. We consider this delinquency and charge-off data in our allowance for uncollectible loans, interest and fees receivable for our other credit product receivables that we report at net realizable value. Our strategy for managing delinquency and receivables losses consists of account management throughout the life of the receivable. This strategy includes credit line management and pricing based on the risks. See also “Collection Strategy” in Item 1, “Business”.
The following table presents the delinquency trends of the receivables we manage within our Credit and Other Investments segment, as well as charge-off data and other non-GAAP managed receivables statistics (in thousands; percentages of total):
(1) The Total managed yield ratio, annualized is calculated using the annualized total managed yield as the numerator and period-end average managed receivables as the denominator.
(2) The Combined net charge-off ratio, annualized is calculated using the annualized combined net chargeoffs as the numerator and period-end average managed receivables as the denominator.
The following table presents additional trends and data with respect to our point-of-sale (“Retail”) and direct-to-consumer (“Direct”) receivables (dollars in thousands). Results of our legacy credit card receivables portfolios are excluded:
The following discussion relates to the tables above.
Managed receivables levels. We have continued to experience overall period-over-period quarterly receivables growth with over $177.5 million in net receivables growth associated with the point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer products offered by our bank partners during 2020. The addition of large point-of-sale retail partners and ongoing purchases of receivables arising in accounts issued by our bank partners to customers of our existing retail partners helped grow our point-of-sale receivables by $146.5 million and $139.9 million in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our direct-to-consumer acquisitions grew by over $31.0 million and $315.2 million, net during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We have noted recent recoveries in consumer spending behavior that have helped to increase the overall combined managed receivables levels, and we currently expect this trend to continue through the remainder of the year (absent further unknown impacts COVID-19 and related government stimulus and relief measures may have on our ability to acquire new receivables or the impact they may have on consumers' ability to make payments on outstanding loans and fees receivable). Growth in future periods largely is dependent on the addition of new retail partners to the point-of-sale origination platform, the timing and size of solicitations within the direct-to-consumer platform by our bank partner, as well as purchase activity of consumers. Further, the loss of existing retail partner relationships could adversely affect new loan acquisition levels. Our top five retail partnerships accounted for over 60% of the above referenced Retail period-end managed receivables outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
Delinquencies. Delinquencies have the potential to impact net income in the form of net credit losses. Delinquencies also are costly in terms of the personnel and resources dedicated to resolving them. We intend for the receivables management strategies we use on our portfolios to manage and, to the extent possible, reduce the higher delinquency rates that can be expected with the younger average age of the newer receivables in our managed portfolio. These management strategies include conservative credit line management and collection strategies intended to optimize the effective account-to-collector ratio across delinquency categories. We measure the success of these efforts by reviewing delinquency rates. These rates exclude receivables that have been charged off.
As we continue to acquire newer point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer receivables, we expect our delinquency rates to increase when compared to the same periods in prior years. Our delinquency rates have continued to be somewhat lower than what we ultimately expect for our new point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer receivables given the continued growth and age of the related accounts as well as recent government stimulus efforts. The aforementioned positive impacts related to recent government stimulus programs have served to increase consumer payment rates beyond expectations. The impact due to growth in the receivable base can be seen in periods of large growth in the charts above which result in lower delinquency rates. If and when growth for these product lines moderates, with no further government stimulus programs or other interventions, we expect increased overall delinquency rates when compared to prior periods. This increase would be similar to those noted in the first quarter of 2020 when compared to the first quarter of 2019, as the existing receivables mature through their peak charge-off periods. Additionally, in accordance with prescribed guidance discussed elsewhere in this Report, certain consumers negatively impacted by COVID-19 have been offered short-term payment deferrals and fee waivers (generally on a month-to-month basis). Receivables enrolled in these short-term payment deferrals continue to accrue interest and their delinquency status will not change through the deferment period. Through December 31, 2020, approximately 5.6% of accounts had received some form of short-term deferral related to COVID-19. Approximately 1.7% of accounts and their associated receivables were actively enrolled in short-term payment deferrals (representing $28.3 million of gross receivables outstanding) as of December 31, 2020. Nearly all of these customers are considered current and thus not included as delinquent receivables. The exclusion of these accounts has resulted in lower delinquency rates than we would otherwise expect. Given this, and absent the unknown impacts COVID-19 and related government stimulus and relief measures may have on our ability to acquire new receivables or the impact they may have on consumers' ability to make payments on outstanding loans and fees receivable and the corresponding impact on our delinquency rates, we expect to continue to see seasonal payment patterns on these receivables that impact our delinquencies in line with prior periods. For example, delinquency rates historically are lower in the first quarter of each year due to the benefits of seasonally strong payment patterns associated with year-end tax refunds for most consumers.
Total managed yield ratio, annualized. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we experienced growth in newer, higher yielding receivables, including direct-to-consumer receivables and our point-of-sale receivables. While this growth has contributed to higher total managed yield ratios, we expect this growth also will continue to (absent the beneficial impacts of recent government stimulus programs discussed elsewhere) result in higher charge-off and delinquency rates than those experienced historically. Direct-to-consumer receivables tend to have higher total yields than point-of-sale receivables, so declines in the portion of our managed receivables that includes direct-to-consumer receivables contributed to slightly lower total managed yield ratios for the second and third quarters of 2020 when compared to comparable periods in 2019. Additionally, lower delinquencies (and thus associated fee billings) noted during the second and third quarters of 2020, in addition to reductions in the prime rate that corresponds to lower yields charged on credit card receivables, contributed to an overall lower total managed yield ratio. Our fourth, third, second and first quarter 2019 total managed yield ratios exclude the impacts of $37.8 million, $26.7 million, $26.0 million and $15.4 million, respectively, associated with our aforementioned reduction in reserves associated with one of our portfolios.
Absent the unknown impacts COVID-19 may have on our ability to acquire new receivables or the impact it may have on consumers' ability to make payments on outstanding loans and fees receivable, we expect total managed yield ratios to continue to fluctuate somewhat based on the relative mix of growth in point-of-sale receivables and higher yielding direct-to-consumer credit card receivables.
Combined net charge-off ratio, annualized. We charge off our Credit and Other Investments segment receivables when they become contractually more than 180 days past due. For all of our products, we charge off receivables within 30 days of notification and confirmation of a customer’s bankruptcy or death. However, in some cases of death, we do not charge off receivables if there is a surviving, contractually liable individual or an estate large enough to pay the debt in full.
Growth within our direct-to-consumer receivables (as a percent of outstanding receivables) has resulted in increases in our charge-off rates over time. Combined net charge-off rates for the first quarter of 2019 reflect the expected higher charge-off rates associated with a mix shift to higher yielding products and ongoing testing of new products throughout 2018. The combined net charge-off ratio in the third quarter of 2019 further reflects the positive impacts of a bulk sale of charged off receivables. Absent this sale, the combined net charge-off ratio would have been 18.6%. The first and second quarters 2020 combined net charge-off ratios reflect receivable growth during 2019 reaching peak charge-off during those periods. The combined net charge-off ratio in the second quarter of 2020 further reflects the positive impacts of a bulk sale of charged off receivables in that period. Absent this sale, the combined net charge-off ratio would have been 29.1%. Improvements in our delinquency rates during 2020 as a result of the increases in customer payments noted during 2020 were fully realized in the fourth quarter of 2020. We expect these delinquency improvements to result in lower combined net charge-off rates, when compared to comparable prior periods for the first few quarters of 2021.
Notwithstanding the improvements we will see in the next few quarters due to recent improvements in delinquency rates, we expect the growth in point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer receivables to continue to result in higher charge-offs than those experienced historically. This expectation is based on the following: (1) higher expected charge off rates on the point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer receivables corresponding with higher yields on these receivables, (2) continued testing of receivables with higher risk profiles, which could lead to periodic increases in combined net charge-offs, (3) recent vintages reaching peak charge-off periods, (4) our current expectation for receivables growth during 2021 and (5) negative impacts on some consumers' ability to make payments on outstanding loans and fees receivable as a result of COVID-19. Further impacting our charge-off rates are the timing and size of solicitations that serve to minimize charge off rates in periods of high receivable acquisitions but also exacerbate charge-off rates in periods of lower receivable acquisitions. The unknown impacts COVID-19 and related government stimulus and relief measures may have on our ability to acquire new receivables or the impact they may have on consumers' ability to make payments on outstanding loans and fees receivable could lead to changes in these expectations.
We previously referred to this financial measure as "combined gross charge-off ratio." We have renamed this financial measure to more accurately describe its content and have not changed the calculation of this measure.
Average APR. Our average annual percentage rate (“APR”) charged to customers varies by receivable type, credit history and other factors. The APR for receivables originated through our point-of-sale platform range from 0% to 36.0%. For direct-to-consumer receivables, APR ranges from 19.99% to 36.0%. We have experienced minor fluctuations in our average APR based on the relative product mix of receivables purchased during a period. We currently expect our average APRs in 2021 to remain consistent with average APRs over the past several quarters; however, the timing and relative mix of receivables acquired could cause some minor fluctuations.
Receivables purchased during period. Receivables purchased during the period reflect the gross amount of investments we have made in a given period, net of any credits issued to consumers during that same period. For most periods presented, our point-of-sale receivable purchases experienced overall growth throughout the periods presented largely based on the addition of new point-of-sale retail partners, as previously discussed. We may experience periodic declines in these acquisitions due to: the loss of one or more retail partners; seasonal purchase activity by consumers; or the timing of new customer originations by our lending partners. We currently expect to see increases in receivable acquisitions when compared to the same period in prior years. Our direct-to-consumer receivable acquisitions tend to have more volatility based on the issuance of new credit card accounts by our lending partner and the availability of capital to fund new purchases. Nonetheless, absent the unknown impacts COVID-19 may have on our ability to acquire new receivables or the impact it may have on consumers' ability to make payments on outstanding loans and fees receivable, we expect continued growth in the acquisition of these receivables throughout 2021.
Auto Finance Segment
CAR, our auto finance platform acquired in April 2005, principally purchases and/or services loans secured by automobiles from or for, and also provides floor-plan financing for, a pre-qualified network of independent automotive dealers and automotive finance companies in the buy-here, pay-here used car business. We have expanded these operations to also include certain installment lending products in addition to our traditional loans secured by automobiles both in the U.S. and U.S. territories.
Collectively, as of December 31, 2020, we served more than 590 dealers through our Auto Finance segment in 33 states, the District of Columbia and two U.S. territories.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
For reasons set forth above within our Credit and Other Investments segment discussion, we also provide managed receivables-based financial, operating and statistical data for our Auto Finance segment. Reconciliation of the auto finance managed receivables data to GAAP data requires an understanding that our managed receivables data are based on billings and actual charge offs as they occur, without regard to any changes in our allowance for uncollectible loans, interest and fees receivable. Similar to the managed calculation above, the average managed receivables used in the ratios below is calculated based on the quarter ending balances of consolidated receivables.
A reconciliation of our operating revenues to comparable amounts used in our calculation of Total managed yield ratios follows (in millions):
The calculation of Combined net charge offs used in our Combined net charge-off ratio follows (in millions):
Financial, operating and statistical metrics for our Auto Finance segment are detailed (in thousands; percentages of total) in the following table:
(1) The total managed yield ratio, annualized is calculated using the annualized Total managed yield as the numerator and Period-end average managed receivables as the denominator.
(2) The Combined net charge-off ratio, annualized is calculated using the annualized Combined net chargeoffs as the numerator and Period-end average managed receivables as the denominator.
(3) The Recovery ratio, annualized is calculated using annualized Recoveries as the numerator and Period-end average managed receivables as the denominator.
Managed receivables. Absent the unknown impacts COVID-19 and related government stimulus and relief measures may have on our ability to acquire new receivables or the impact they may have on consumers' ability to make payments on outstanding loans and fees receivable, we expect modest growth in the level of our managed receivables for 2021 when compared to the same periods in prior years in both the U.S. and U.S. territories as CAR expands within its current geographic footprint and continues plans for service area expansion. Although we are expanding our CAR operations, the Auto Finance segment faces strong competition from other specialty finance lenders, as well as the indirect effects on us of our buy-here, pay-here dealership partners’ competition with other franchise dealerships for consumers interested in purchasing automobiles. Included in the fourth quarter of 2020 was an unplanned bulk purchase of receivables that increased our period over period growth. While we continually evaluate bulk purchases of receivables, the timing and size of the purchases are difficult to predict. Although receivable levels in each period of 2020 were roughly equal to those in 2019 (with the exception of the fourth quarter of 2020), this primarily reflects strong customer payments throughout 2020 offsetting receivables growth when compared to the same periods of 2019.
Delinquencies. Current delinquency levels are consistent with our expectations for levels in the near term with some improvement noted in 2020 periods (when compared to the same periods in 2019) due to stronger than anticipated customer payment behavior. Delinquency rates also tend to fluctuate based on seasonal trends and historically are lower in the first quarter of each year as seen above due to the benefits of strong payment patterns associated with year-end tax refunds for most consumers. As discussed, elsewhere in this Report, recent delinquency rates have benefitted from government stimulus programs that have resulted in customer payments in excess of historical experience. We are not concerned with modest fluctuations in delinquency rates and do not believe they will have a significantly positive or adverse impact on our results of operations; even at slightly elevated rates, we earn significant yields on CAR’s receivables and have significant dealer reserves (i.e., retainages or holdbacks on the amount of funding CAR provides to its dealer customers) to protect against meaningful credit losses.
Total managed yield ratio, annualized. We have experienced modest fluctuations in our total managed yield ratio largely impacted by the relative mix of receivables in various products offered by CAR as some shorter term product offerings tend to have higher yields. Yields on our CAR products over the last few quarters are consistent with our expectations. Further, we expect our total managed yield ratio to remain in line with current experience, with moderate fluctuations based on relative growth or declines in average managed receivables for a given quarter. These variations would be based on the relative mix of receivables in our various product offerings. Additionally, our product offerings in the U.S. territories tend to have slightly lower yields than those offered in the U.S. As such, continued growth in that region also will serve to slightly depress our overall total managed yield ratio, yet we expect growth in that region to continue to generate attractive returns on assets.
Combined net charge-off ratio, annualized and recovery ratio, annualized. We charge off auto finance receivables when they are between 120 and 180 days past due, unless the collateral is repossessed and sold before that point, in which case we will record a charge off when the proceeds are received. Combined net charge-off ratios in the above table reflect the lower delinquency rates we have recently experienced. While we anticipate our charge-offs to be incurred ratably across our portfolio of dealers, specific dealer-related losses are difficult to predict and can negatively influence our combined net charge-off ratio. This is evidenced by the slightly elevated combined net charge-off rate we experienced during 2019. We continually re-assess our dealers and will take appropriate action if we believe a particular dealer’s risk characteristics adversely change. While we have appropriate dealer reserves to mitigate losses across the majority of our pool of receivables, the timing of recognition of these reserves as an offset to charge offs is largely dependent on various factors specific to each of our dealer partners including ongoing purchase volumes, outstanding balances of receivables and current performance of outstanding loans. As such, the timing of charge-off offsets is difficult to predict; however, we believe that these reserves are adequate to offset any loss exposure we may incur. Additionally, the products we issue in the U.S. territories do not have dealer reserves with which we can offset losses. We also expect our recovery rate to fluctuate modestly from quarter to quarter due to the timing of the sale of repossessed autos. Given the unknown impacts COVID-19 and related government stimulus and relief measures may have on our ability to acquire new receivables or the impact they may have on consumers' ability to make payments on outstanding loans and fees receivable we could experience variation in these expectations.
Definitions of Certain Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Total managed yield ratio, annualized. Represents an annualized fraction, the numerator of which includes (as appropriate for each applicable disclosed segment) the: 1) finance charge and late fee income billed on all consolidated outstanding receivables and the amortization of merchant fees, collectively included in the consumer loans, including past due fees category on our consolidated statements of income; plus 2) credit card fees (including over-limit fees, cash advance fees, returned check fees and interchange income), earned, amortized amounts of annual membership fees and activation fees with respect to certain credit card receivables, collectively included in our fees and related income on earning assets category on our consolidated statements of income; plus 3) servicing, other income and other activities collectively included in our other operating income category on our consolidated statements of income. The denominator used represents our average managed receivables.
Combined net charge-off ratio, annualized. Represents an annualized fraction, the numerator of which is the aggregate consolidated amounts of finance charge, fee and principal losses from consumers unwilling or unable to pay their receivables balances, as well as from bankrupt and deceased consumers, less current-period recoveries (including recoveries from dealer reserve offsets for our CAR operations) and the related portion of unamortized fees and discounts, as reflected in Note 2 “Significant Accounting Policies and Consolidated Financial Statement Components-Loans, Interest and Fees Receivable”, and the denominator of which is average managed receivables. Recoveries on managed receivables represent all amounts received related to managed receivables that previously have been charged off, including payments received directly from consumers and proceeds received from the sale of those charged-off receivables. Recoveries typically have represented less than 2% of average managed receivables. We previously referred to this financial measure as "combined gross charge-off ratio."
We have renamed this financial measure to more accurately describe its content and have not changed the calculation of this measure.
LIQUIDITY, FUNDING AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As discussed elsewhere in this Report, we are closely monitoring the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic across our business, including the resulting uncertainties around consumer spending, credit quality and levels of liquidity. The ultimate impact of COVID-19 on our business, financial condition, liquidity and results of operations is dependent on future developments, which are highly uncertain.
We believe that our actions taken to date, future cash provided by operating activities, availability under our debt facilities, and access to the capital markets will provide adequate resources to fund our operating and financing needs.
Our primary focus is growing the point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer credit card receivables so that our revenues from these investments will help us maintain consistent profitability. Increases in new and existing retail partnerships and the expansion of our investments in direct-to-consumer finance products have resulted in year-over-year growth of total managed receivables levels, and we expect growth to continue in the coming quarters.
Accordingly, we will continue to focus on (i) obtaining the funding necessary to meet capital needs required by the growth of our receivables, (ii) adding new retail partners to our platform to continue growth of the point-of-sale receivables, (iii) continuing growth in direct-to-consumer credit card receivables and (iv) effectively managing costs.
All of our Credit and Other Investments segment’s structured financing facilities are expected to amortize down with collections on the receivables within their underlying trusts and should not represent significant refunding or refinancing risks to our consolidated balance sheets. Facilities that could represent near-term significant refunding or refinancing needs as of December 31, 2020 are those associated with the following notes payable in the amounts indicated (in millions):
Based on the state of the debt capital markets, the performance of our assets that serve as security for the above facilities, and our relationships with lenders, we view imminent refunding or refinancing risks with respect to the above facilities as low in the current environment, and we believe that the quality of our new receivables should allow us to raise more capital through increasing the size of our facilities with our existing lenders and attracting new lending relationships. Further details concerning the above debt facilities and our convertible senior notes are provided in Note 10, “Notes Payable,” and Note 11, “Convertible Senior Notes,” to our consolidated financial statements included herein.
In the first quarter of 2021, we repurchased $14.7 million in face amount of convertible senior notes. The remaining $19.1 million of outstanding convertible senior notes mature on November 30, 2035. During certain periods and subject to certain conditions, the convertible senior notes are convertible by holders into cash and, if applicable, shares of our common stock. Upon any conversion of the notes, we will deliver to holders of the notes cash of up to $1,000 per $1,000 aggregate principal amount of notes and, at our option, either cash or shares of our common stock in respect of the remainder of the conversion obligation, if any.
In February 2017, we (through a wholly owned subsidiary) established a program under which we sell certain receivables to a consolidated trust in exchange for notes issued by the trust. The notes are secured by the receivables and other assets of the trust. Simultaneously with the establishment of the program, the trust issued a series of variable funding notes and sold an aggregate amount of up to $90.0 million (subsequently reduced to $70.0 million) of such notes (of which $5.8 million was outstanding as of December 31, 2020) to an unaffiliated third party pursuant to a facility that can be drawn upon to the extent of outstanding eligible receivables. Interest rates on the notes are fixed at 14.0%.
In June 2018 and again in November 2018, we (through a wholly owned subsidiary) expanded the above mentioned program to sell up to an additional $100.0 million of notes ($200.0 million in total notes through the June and November 2018 expansions - subsequently reduced to $110.0 million in total capacity as of December 31, 2020) which are secured by the receivables and other assets of the trust (of which $12.5 million was outstanding as of December 31, 2020) to separate unaffiliated third parties pursuant to facilities that can be drawn upon to the extent of outstanding eligible receivables. Interest rates on the notes are based on commercial paper rates plus 3.75% and LIBOR plus 4.875%, respectively.
In June 2019, we sold $200.0 million of ABS secured by certain credit card receivables. A portion of the proceeds from the sale was used to pay-down our existing facilities associated with our credit card receivables. The terms of the ABS allow for a two-year revolving structure with a subsequent 12-month to 18-month amortization period. The weighted average interest rate on the securities is fixed at 5.37%.
In December 2020, we extended the maturity date of the revolving credit facility secured by the financial and operating assets of CAR to November 1, 2023, and, in October 2019, we expanded the borrowing capacity to $55.0 million. All other material terms remain unchanged.
In November 2019, we sold $200.0 million of ABS secured by certain credit card receivables. A portion of the proceeds from the sale was used to pay-down our existing facilities associated with our credit card receivables and the remaining proceeds were available to fund the acquisition of future receivables. The terms of the ABS allow for a three-year revolving structure with a subsequent 12-month to 18-month amortization period. The weighted average interest rate on the securities is fixed at 4.91%.
In July 2020, we sold $100.0 million of ABS secured by certain retail point-of-sale receivables. A portion of the proceeds from the sale was used to pay-down some of our existing revolving facilities associated with our point-of-sale receivables, and the remaining proceeds were used to fund the acquisition of receivables. The terms of the ABS allow for a three-year revolving structure with a subsequent 18-month amortization period. The weighted average interest rate on the securities is fixed at 5.47%.
In October 2020, we sold $250.0 million of ABS secured by certain retail point-of-sale receivables. A portion of the proceeds from the sale was used to paydown our existing term ABS associated with our point-of-sale receivables, noted above, and the remaining proceeds have been invested in the acquisition of receivables. The terms of the ABS allow for a 41 month revolving structure with an 18-month amortization period and the securities mature between August 2025 and October 2025. The weighted average interest rate on the securities is fixed at 4.1%.
On November 26, 2014, we and certain of our subsidiaries entered into a Loan and Security Agreement with Dove Ventures, LLC, a Nevada limited liability company (“Dove”). The agreement provided for a senior secured term loan facility in an amount of up to $40.0 million at any time outstanding. On December 27, 2019, the Company issued 400,000 shares of its Series A Preferred Stock (10,000,000 shares authorized, 400,000 shares outstanding) with an aggregate initial liquidation preference of $40.0 million, in exchange for full satisfaction of the $40.0 million that the Company owed Dove under the Loan and Security Agreement. Dividends on the preferred stock are 6% per annum (cumulative, non-compounding) and are payable as declared, and in preference to any common stock dividends, in cash. The Series A Preferred Stock is perpetual and has no maturity date. The Company may, at its option, redeem the shares of Series A Preferred Stock on or after January 1, 2025 at a redemption price equal to $100 per share, plus any accumulated and unpaid dividends. At the request of a majority of the holders of the Series A Preferred Stock, the Company is required to offer to redeem all of the Series A Preferred Stock at a redemption price equal to $100 per share, plus any accumulated and unpaid dividends, at the option of the holders thereof, on or after January 1, 2024. Upon the election by the holders of a majority of the Series A Preferred Stock, each share of the Series A Preferred Stock is convertible into the number of shares of the Company’s common stock as is determined by dividing (i) the sum of (a) $100 and (b) any accumulated and unpaid dividends on such share by (ii) an initial conversion price equal to $10 per share, subject to adjustment in certain circumstances to prevent dilution.
The use of the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) is expected to be phased out by mid-2023. Currently, LIBOR is used as a reference rate for certain of our financial instruments. In any event, the majority of our revolving credit facilities mature prior to the expected phase out of LIBOR. At this time, there is no definitive information regarding the future utilization of LIBOR or of any particular replacement rate; however, we continue to monitor the efforts of various parties, including government agencies, seeking to identify an alternative rate to replace LIBOR. Going forward, we will work with our lenders to use suitable alternative reference rates for our financial instruments. We will continue to monitor, assess and plan for the phase out of LIBOR; however, we currently do not expect the impact to be material to the Company.
At December 31, 2020, we had $178.1 million in unrestricted cash held by our various business subsidiaries. Because the characteristics of our assets and liabilities change, liquidity management has been a dynamic process for us, driven by the pricing and maturity of our assets and liabilities. We historically have financed our business through cash flows from operations, asset-backed structured financings and the issuance of debt and equity. Details concerning our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are as follows:
•
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated $212.7 million of cash flows from operations compared to our generation of $100.0 million of cash flows from operations during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash provided by operating activities was principally related to an increases in finance collections associated with growing point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer receivables.
•
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $292.6 million of cash from our investing activities, compared to use of $433.7 million of cash from investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease in cash used is primarily due to a decreased level of net investments (net of proceeds from earning assets) in point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer receivables for 2020 relative to 2019. The decrease in net investments in receivables during 2020 was largely due to reduced consumer spending patterns as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak coupled with higher than anticipated principal returns on our aforementioned investments in point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer receivables. We have noticed recent improvements in these spending patterns and we expect the level of net investments in receivables to increase for 2021 above levels noted for 2020.
•
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated $162.4 million of cash in financing activities, compared to our generating $368.7 million of cash in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019. In both periods, the data reflect borrowings associated with point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer receivables offset by net repayments of amortizing debt facilities as payments are made on the underlying receivables that serve as collateral. Both periods were positively impacted by the issuance of Class B preferred units at a purchase price of $1.00 per unit, by a wholly-owned subsidiary. For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, 50.5 million and 50.0 million of these Class B preferred units were issued, respectively. We expect our financing activities to continue in 2021 as we obtain additional funding to finance our planned growth in receivable acquisitions.
Beyond our immediate financing efforts discussed throughout this Report, we will continue to evaluate debt and equity issuances as a means to fund our investment opportunities. We expect to take advantage of any opportunities to raise additional capital if terms and pricing are attractive to us. Any proceeds raised under these efforts or additional liquidity available to us could be used to fund (1) additional investments in point-of-sale and direct-to-consumer finance receivables as well as the acquisition of credit card receivables portfolios and (2) further repurchases of our convertible senior notes and common stock. Pursuant to a share repurchase plan authorized by our Board of Directors on May 7, 2020, we are authorized to repurchase up to 5,000,000 shares of our common stock through June 30, 2022. As of December 31, 2020, we were authorized to repurchase a remaining 4,919,827 shares under this share repurchase plan.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS, COMMITMENTS AND OFF-BALANCE-SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
Commitments and Contingencies
We do not currently have any off-balance-sheet arrangements; however, we do have certain contractual arrangements that would require us to make payments or provide funding if certain circumstances occur; we refer to these arrangements as contingent commitments. We do not currently expect that these contingent commitments will result in any material amounts being paid by us. See Note 12, “Commitments and Contingencies,” to our consolidated financial statements included herein for further discussion of these matters.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
See Note 2, “Significant Accounting Policies and Consolidated Financial Statement Components,” to our consolidated financial statements included herein for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
We have prepared our financial statements in accordance with GAAP. These principles are numerous and complex. We have summarized our significant accounting policies in the notes to our consolidated financial statements. In many instances, the application of GAAP requires management to make estimates or to apply subjective principles to particular facts and circumstances. A variance in the estimates used or a variance in the application or interpretation of GAAP could yield a materially different accounting result. It is impracticable for us to summarize every accounting principle that requires us to use judgment or estimates in our application. Nevertheless, we describe below the areas for which we believe that the estimations, judgments or interpretations that we have made, if different, would have yielded the most significant differences in our consolidated financial statements.
On a quarterly basis, we review our significant accounting policies and the related assumptions, in particular, those mentioned below, with the audit committee of the Board of Directors.
Revenue Recognition
Consumer Loans, Including Past Due Fees
Consumer loans, including past due fees reflect interest income, including finance charges, and late fees on loans in accordance with the terms of the related customer agreements. Premiums, discounts and merchant fees paid or received associated with installment or auto loans that are not included as part of our Fair Value Receivables are deferred and amortized over the average life of the related loans using the effective interest method. Premiums, discounts and merchant fees paid or received associated with Fair Value Receivables are recognized upon receivable acquisition. Finance charges and fees, net of amounts that we consider uncollectible, are included in loans, interest and fees receivable and revenue when the fees are earned based upon the contractual terms of the loans.
Fees and Related Income on Earning Assets
Fees and related income on earning assets primarily include fees associated with the credit products, including the receivables underlying our U.S. point-of-sale finance and direct-to-consumer platform, and our legacy credit card receivables which include the recognition of annual fee billings and cash advance fees among others.
We assess fees on credit card accounts underlying our credit card receivables according to the terms of the related cardholder agreements and, except for annual membership fees, we recognize these fees as income when they are charged to the customers’ accounts. We accrete annual membership fees associated with our credit card receivables into income on a straight-line basis over the cardholder privilege period which is generally 12 months for amortized cost receivables, and when billed for Fair Value Receivables. Similarly, fees on our other credit products are recognized when earned, which coincides with the time they are charged to the customers' accounts. Fees and related income on earning assets, net of amounts that we consider uncollectible, are included in loans, interest and fees receivable and revenue when the fees are earned based upon the contractual terms of the loans.
Measurements for Loans, Interest and Fees Receivable at Fair Value and Notes Payable Associated with Structured Financings at Fair Value
Our valuation of loans, interest and fees receivable, at fair value is based on the present value of future cash flows using a valuation model of expected cash flows and the estimated cost to service and collect those cash flows. We estimate the present value of these future cash flows using a valuation model consisting of internally-developed estimates of assumptions third-party market participants would use in determining fair value, including estimates of gross yield, payment rates, expected credit loss rates, servicing costs, and discount rates. Similarly, our valuation of notes payable associated with structured financings, at fair value is based on the present value of future cash flows utilized in repayment of the outstanding principal and interest under the facilities using a valuation model of expected cash flows net of the contractual service expenses within the facilities. We estimate the present value of these future cash flows using a valuation model consisting of internally-developed estimates of assumptions third-party market participants would use in determining fair value, including: estimates of gross yield, payment rates, expected credit loss rates, servicing costs, and discount rates.
The estimates for credit losses, payment rates, servicing costs, contractual servicing fees, costs of funds, discount rates and yields earned on credit card receivables significantly affect the reported amount (and changes thereon) of our loans, interest and fees receivable, at fair value and our notes payable associated with structured financings, at fair value on our consolidated balance sheets and consolidated statements of operations.
Allowance for Uncollectible Loans, Interest and Fees
Through our analysis of loan performance, delinquency data, charge-off data, economic trends and the potential effects of those economic trends on consumers, we establish an allowance for uncollectible loans, interest and fees receivable as an estimate of the probable losses inherent within those loans, interest and fees receivable that we do not report at fair value. Our loans, interest and fees receivable consist of smaller-balance, homogeneous loans, divided into two portfolio segments: Credit and Other Investments; and Auto Finance. Each of these portfolio segments is further divided into pools based on common characteristics such as contract or acquisition channel. For each pool, we determine the necessary allowance for uncollectible loans, interest and fees receivable by analyzing some or all of the following unique to each type of receivable pool: historical loss rates; current delinquency and roll-rate trends; vintage analyses based on the number of months an account has been in existence; the effects of changes in the economy on consumers; changes in underwriting criteria; and estimated recoveries. These inputs are considered in conjunction with (and potentially reduced by) any unearned fees and discounts that may be applicable for an outstanding loan receivable. To the extent that actual results differ from our estimates of uncollectible loans, interest and fees receivable, our results of operations and liquidity could be materially affected.