ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
The following discussion is provided for the consolidated operations of the Company and its Banks. The purpose of this discussion is to focus on significant factors affecting the Company's financial condition and results of operations.
The Company does not engage in any material business activities apart from its ownership of the Banks. Products and services offered by the Banks are for commercial and consumer purposes, including loans, deposits and wealth management services. Some Banks also offer investment services through a third-party broker-dealer. The Company employs 15 individuals to assist with financial reporting, human resources, marketing, audit, compliance, technology systems, property appraisals, training and the coordination of management activities, in addition to 265 full-time equivalent individuals employed by the Banks.
The Company’s primary competitive strategy is to utilize seasoned and competent Bank management and local decision-making authority to provide customers with prompt response times and flexibility in the products and services offered. This strategy is viewed as providing an opportunity to increase revenues through the creation of a competitive advantage over other financial institutions. The Company also strives to remain operationally efficient to improve profitability while enabling the Banks to offer more competitive loan and deposit rates.
The principal sources of Company revenues and cash flows are: (i) interest and fees earned on loans made or held by the Company and Banks; (ii) interest on investments, primarily on bonds, held by the Banks; (iii) fees on wealth management services; (iv) service charges on deposit accounts maintained at the Banks; (v) merchant and card fees; (vi) gain on the sale of loans held for sale; and (vii) securities gains. The Company’s principal expenses are: (i) interest expense on deposit accounts and other borrowings; (ii) salaries and employee benefits; (iii) data processing costs primarily associated with maintaining the Banks’ loan and deposit functions; (iv) occupancy expenses for maintaining the Banks’ facilities; (v) professional fees; and (vi) business development. The largest component contributing to the Company’s net income is net interest income, which is the difference between interest earned on earning assets (primarily loans and investments) and interest paid on interest-bearing liabilities (primarily deposit accounts and other borrowings). One of management’s principal functions is to manage the spread between interest earned on earning assets and interest paid on interest-bearing liabilities in an effort to maximize net interest income while maintaining an appropriate level of interest rate risk.
The Company reported net income of $18,850,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $17,194,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This represents an increase in net income of 9.6% when comparing 2020 with 2019. The improvement in earnings in 2020 from 2019 is primarily the result of the Iowa State Bank Acquisition (the “Acquisition”) and a reduction in interest expense due to declines in market rates, offset in part by an increase in the provision for loan losses. Earnings per share for 2020 were $2.06 compared to $1.86 in 2019. All six Banks demonstrated profitable operations during 2020 and 2019.
The Company’s return on average equity for 2020 and 2019 was 9.48% for both periods. The return on average assets for 2020 was 1.01% compared to 1.14% in 2019. The decrease in return on return on average assets when comparing 2020 to 2019 was primarily a result of a higher asset base due to the increase in deposits.
The following discussion will provide a summary review of important items relating to:
●
Challenges and COVID-19 Status, Risks and Uncertainties
●
Key Performance Indicators
●
Industry Results
●
Critical Accounting Policies
●
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
●
Income Statement Review
●
Balance Sheet Review
●
Asset Quality Review and Credit Risk Management
●
Liquidity and Capital Resources
●
Interest Rate Risk
●
Inflation
●
Forward-Looking Statements and Business Risks
Challenges and COVID-19 Status, Risks and Uncertainties
Management has identified certain events or circumstances that have the potential to negatively impact the Company’s financial condition and results of operations in the future and is attempting to position the Company to best respond to those challenges.
●
If interest rates increase significantly over a relatively short period of time due to higher inflationary numbers or other factors, the interest rate environment may present a challenge to the Company. Increases in interest rates may negatively impact the Company’s net interest margin if interest expense increases more quickly than interest income, thus placing downward pressure on net interest income. The Company’s earning assets (primarily its loan and investment portfolio) have longer maturities than its interest-bearing liabilities (primarily deposits and other borrowings); therefore, in a rising interest rate environment, interest expense will tend to increase more quickly than interest income as the interest-bearing liabilities reprice more quickly than earning assets, resulting in a reduction in net interest income. In response to this challenge, the Banks model quarterly the changes in income that would result from various changes in interest rates. Management believes Bank earning assets have the appropriate maturity and repricing characteristics to optimize earnings and the Banks’ interest rate risk positions.
●
If market interest rates in the three to five year term remain at low levels as compared to the short term interest rates, the interest rate environment may present a challenge to the Company. The Company’s earning assets (typically priced at market interest rates in the three to five year range) will reprice at lower interest rates, but the deposits will not reprice at significantly lower interest rates, therefore the net interest income may decrease. Management believes Bank earning assets have the appropriate maturity and repricing characteristics to optimize earnings and the Banks’ interest rate risk positions.
●
The agricultural community is subject to commodity price fluctuations. Extended periods of low commodity prices, higher input costs or poor weather conditions could result in reduced profit margins, reducing demand for goods and services provided by agriculture-related businesses, which, in turn, could affect other businesses in the Company’s market area. Moreover, changes in U.S. trade policy could create further volatility for commodities prices as the volume of exports of agricultural products to these foreign markets could be adversely impacted. Lastly, uncertainty regarding governmental mandates affecting ethanol production could reduce the demand for corn in the Company’s trade area, thus introducing further price volatility for this commodity. Any combination of these factors could produce losses within the Company's agricultural loan portfolio and in the commercial loan portfolio with respect to borrowers whose businesses are directly or indirectly impacted by the health of the agricultural economy.
The Company conducts business in the State of Iowa and Iowa began to place significant restrictions on companies and individuals on March 9, 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The State of Iowa has eased many of the restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic. As an organization that focuses on community banking, we are concerned about the health of our customers, employees and local communities and keep that thought at the forefront of our decisions. The Company’s bank lobbies are open to the public, with business also being transacted through our drive up facilities, online, telephone or by appointment.
The onset and continuation of the COVID-19 pandemic has significantly heightened the level of challenges, risks and uncertainties facing our business and continuation of operations, including the following:
●
As the economic slowdown continues to evolve due to the pandemic, some of the Company’s customers may experience decreased revenues, which may correlate to an inability to make timely loan payments or maintain payrolls. This, in turn, could adversely impact the revenues and earnings of the Company by, among other things, requiring further increases in the allowance for loan losses and increases in the level of charge-offs in the loan portfolio. Management anticipates additional increases in the allowance if the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic continue to negatively impact the loan portfolio.
●
Market interest rates have declined significantly and these reductions, especially if prolonged, could adversely affect our net interest income, net interest margin and earnings;
●
We may experience a potential slowdown in demand for our products and services, including the demand for traditional loans, although we believe the decline may be offset, in whole or in part, due to the new volume of PPP loans under the CARES Act and other governmental programs established in response to the pandemic;
●
We have experienced, and anticipate we will continue to experience, an increase in risk of delinquencies, defaults and foreclosures, as well as declining collateral values and further impairment of the ability of our borrowers to repay their loans, all of which may result in additional credit charges and other losses in our loan portfolio;
●
Goodwill is currently evaluated for impairment quarterly and goodwill has been determined to not be impaired as of December 31, 2020. In the future goodwill may be impaired if the effects of the economic slowdown negatively impacts our net income and fair value, particularly of our most recent acquisition. An impairment of goodwill would decrease the Company’s earnings during the period in which the impairment is recorded;
●
Declines in fair value of investment securities in our portfolio could result in impairment charges and reduce the unrealized gains reported as part of our consolidated comprehensive income (loss); and
●
In meeting our objective to maintain our capital levels and liquidity position through the COVID-19 pandemic, our Board of Directors could reduce or determine to altogether forego payment of future dividends in order to maintain and/or strengthen our capital and liquidity position.
Key Performance Indicators
Certain key performance indicators for the Company and the industry are presented in the following chart. The industry figures are compiled by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and are derived from 5,001 commercial banks and savings institutions insured by the FDIC. Management reviews these indicators on a quarterly basis for purposes of comparing the Company’s performance from quarter to quarter against the industry as a whole.
Selected Indicators for the Company and the Industry
Key performance indicators include:
●
Return on Assets
This ratio is calculated by dividing net income by average assets. It is used to measure how effectively the assets of the Company are being utilized in generating income. The Company’s return on assets ratio was higher than the industry average for 2020.
●
Return on Equity
This ratio is calculated by dividing net income by average equity. It is used to measure the net income or return the Company generated for the shareholders’ equity investment in the Company. The Company’s return on equity ratio was higher than the industry average for 2020.
●
Net Interest Margin
This ratio is calculated by dividing tax-equivalent net interest income by average earning assets. Earning assets consist primarily of loans and investments that earn interest. This ratio is used to measure how well the Company is able to maintain interest rates on earning assets above those of interest-bearing liabilities, which is the interest expense paid on deposit accounts and other borrowings. The Company’s net interest margin was higher than the industry average for 2020.
●
Efficiency Ratio
This ratio is calculated by dividing noninterest expense by net interest income and noninterest income. The ratio is a measure of the Company’s ability to manage noninterest expenses. The Company’s efficiency ratio was lower than the industry average for 2020.
●
Capital Ratio
The capital ratio is calculated by dividing average total equity capital by average total assets. It measures the level of average assets that are funded by shareholders’ equity. Given an equal level of risk in the financial condition of two companies, the higher the capital ratio, generally the more financially sound the company. The Company’s capital ratio was higher than the industry average for 2020.
Industry Results
The FDIC Quarterly Banking Profile reported the following results for the fourth quarter of 2020:
Full-Year 2020 Net Income Declines 36.5% to $147.9 Billion
For the 5,001 FDIC-insured commercial banks and savings institutions, full-year 2020 net income totaled $147.9 billion, a decline of $84.9 billion (36.5%) from 2019. The decline was primarily attributable to higher provision expenses in the first half of 2020 tied to pandemic-related deterioration in economic activity. Provision expenses increased by $77.1 billion (140%), and net interest income declined by $20 billion (3.7%). Average net interest margin (NIM) declined by 54 basis points from 2019 to 2.82%, as the yield on average earning assets declined at a faster rate than the cost of funds. The average return on assets (ROA) ratio declined from 1.29% in 2019 to 0.72% in 2020.
Quarterly Net Income Increases 9.1% From a Year Ago to $59.9 Billion
Fourth quarter 2020 quarterly net income totaled $59.9 billion, an increase of $5 billion (9.1%) from a year ago. The primary driver of higher net income this quarter was the reduction in provision expenses. More than half of all banks (57.4%) reported year-over-year increases in quarterly net income. The share of unprofitable institutions remained relatively stable from a year ago at 7.3%. The average ROA ratio was 1.11% during fourth quarter 2020, down 8 basis points from a year ago but below a recent high of 1.41% in third quarter 2018.
Net Interest Margin Remains Unchanged From Third Quarter and at a Record Low Level
The banking industry reported aggregate net interest income of $131.3 billion during the fourth quarter, a decline of $5.4 billion (3.9%) from a year ago. This marks the fifth consecutive quarter that net interest income declined. Almost 43% of all banks reported annual declines in net interest income. The average NIM was 2.68% in fourth quarter 2020, unchanged from the third quarter but down 60 basis points from fourth quarter 2019. Banks of all asset size groups featured in the Quarterly Banking Profile (QBP) reported average NIM compression relative to a year ago, as the contraction in earning asset yields exceeded the decline in funding costs. At fourth quarter 2020, both earning asset yields and funding costs dropped to the lowest levels ever reported in the QBP.
Noninterest Income Expands 6.5% From the Year-Ago Quarter
Noninterest income rose by $4.3 billion (6.5%) from a year ago, with nearly 61% of all banks reporting annual increases. The annual improvement in noninterest income was led by the growth in net gains on loan sales, which rose by $3.9 billion (104%), and net gains on sales of other assets, which increased by $1.6 billion. Trading revenue, which was the largest dollar contributor to the overall increase in noninterest income during second quarter 2020, declined for the second consecutive quarter and was down $799.7 million (11%) from fourth quarter 2019.
Noninterest Expense Increases Almost 3% From a Year Ago
Noninterest expense rose by $3.3 billion (2.7%) from a year ago, as almost two-thirds of all banks (66.4%) reported annual increases. The rise in noninterest expense was driven by higher salary and employee benefit expenses, which expanded by $3.7 billion (6.6%). The average assets per employee increased from $9 million in fourth quarter 2019 to $10.6 million in fourth quarter 2020.
Provisions for Credit Losses Decline to the Lowest Level Since Second Quarter 1995
With the improving economic outlook, provisions for credit losses decreased by $11.4 billion (76.5%) from a year ago to $3.5 billion, the lowest level since second quarter 1995. The decline in provisions for credit losses was not broad-based, as less than one-third (31.2%) of all banks reported year-over-year declines. In the fourth quarter, 279 banks used the current expected credit losses (CECL) accounting standard and reported an aggregate $1.4 billion in provisions for credit losses, down $ 11.2 billion (88.9%) from a year ago. For non-CECL adopters, provisions for credit losses totaled $2.1 billion, down $ 186.6 million (8.2%) from a year ago.
The Net Charge-Off Rate Falls 13 Basis Points From Fourth Quarter 2019
The net charge-off rate fell by 13 basis points from fourth quarter 2019 to 0.41%. Net charge-offs totaled $11.2 billion, down $2.8 billion (19.7%) from a year ago. The year-over-year decline in net charge-offs was driven by the reduction in credit card loan charge offs (down $3.4 billion, or 39.7%). Net charge-offs on nonfarm nonresidential (NFNR) properties increased by $657.9 million (348.3%) from a year ago. The net charge-off rate for NFNR properties increased by 17 basis points from a year ago to 0.22% but remained below the high of 1.40% in fourth quarter 2010. The net charge-off rate for the commercial and industrial (C&I) loan portfolio increased by 4 basis points from a year ago to 0.47%, below the recent high of 0.64% in second quarter 2020.
The Noncurrent Loan Rate Expands Modestly to 1.18%
The noncurrent rate rose by 1 basis point from third quarter 2020 to 1.18%. Noncurrent loan balances (90 days or more past due or in nonaccrual status) increased by $944.9 million (0.7%) from the previous quarter. One-third of all banks (33.3%) reported quarterly increases in noncurrent loan balances. The quarterly increase in noncurrent loan balances was led by NFNR properties (up $2.1 billion, or 15.7%) and credit card balances (up $1.4 billion, or 17%). The noncurrent rate for NFNR properties increased by 13 basis points to 1.00% in the fourth quarter 2020, while the noncurrent rate for credit card balances rose by 13 basis points to 1.16%.
Total Assets Increase 3.1% From the Previous Quarter
Total assets increased by $664 billion (3.1%) from third quarter 2020. The banking industry’s liquidity position continued to strengthen. Cash and balances due from depository institutions rose by $357 billion (12.6%), and security holdings posted a record high quarterly dollar increase of $321.4 billion (6.7%). Mortgage-backed securities increased by $244.9 billion (8.8%).
Loan Balances Decline From the Previous Quarter, Led by Lower Commercial and Industrial Lending Activity
Total loan and lease balances totaled $10.9 trillion in fourth quarter 2020, $47.7 billion (0.4%) less than third quarter 2020. The quarterly decline in total loan and leases balances was led by the C&I loan portfolio, which fell by $103.8 billion (4.1%). Small Business Administration-guaranteed Paycheck Protection Program loans declined by $83.9 billion (17.1%) from the previous quarter. The decline in the C&I loan portfolio was partially offset by increases in loans to nondepository financial institutions (up $30.2 billion, or 5.5%) and credit card balances (up $25.6 billion, or 3.2%). Total loan and lease balances increased by $345 billion (3.3%) from a year ago, the lowest annual growth rate since fourth quarter 2013. The annual increase in total loan and lease balances was driven by the C&I loan portfolio, which rose by $232.8 billion (10.6%), primarily in the first half of 2020.
Deposits Increase 4.1% From Third Quarter 2020
Total deposit balances rose by $706.9 billion (4.1%) between the third and fourth quarters of 2020. While the quarterly growth in deposits is below the levels reported in the first half of 2020, it is the third largest quarterly dollar increase ever reported in the QBP. Interest-bearing account balances rose by $399.2 billion (3.5%), and noninterest-bearing account balances expanded by $220.5 billion (5%). Deposits in accounts with balances larger than $250,000 increased by $467.5 billion (5.4%) from the previous quarter. Nondeposit liabilities fell by $124.2 billion (11.1%) from the previous quarter, led by Federal Home Loan Bank advances that declined by $48.5 billion (15.9%).
Equity Capital Increases Almost 2% From the Previous Quarter
Equity capital totaled $2.2 trillion in fourth quarter 2020, up $41.9 billion (1.9%) from the previous quarter. Declared dividends totaled $21.8 billion, down $27.4 billion (55.7%) from fourth quarter 2019. Seven insured institutions with $498.4 million in total assets were below the requirements for the well-capitalized category as defined for Prompt Corrective Action.
Three New Banks Open in Fourth Quarter 2020
The number of FDIC-insured commercial banks and savings institutions that filed quarterly Call Reports declined from 5,033 in third quarter 2020 to 5,001 in fourth quarter 2020. Three new banks were added, 31 institutions were absorbed by mergers, two banks failed, one bank sold most of its assets to a credit union, and one bank did not file in time for this analysis. For full-year 2020, six new banks were added, 168 institutions were absorbed by mergers, and four banks failed. The number of institutions on the FDIC’s “Problem Bank List” remained unchanged from the previous quarter at 56. Total assets of problem banks increased from $53.9 billion in third quarter 2020 to $55.8 billion in fourth quarter 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion contained in this Item 7 and other disclosures included within this Annual Report are based on the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements which appear in Item 8 of this Annual Report. These statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The financial information contained in these statements is, for the most part, based on the financial effects of transactions and events that have already occurred. However, the preparation of these statements requires management to make certain estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses.
The Company’s significant accounting policies are described in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” accompanying the Company’s audited financial statements. Based on its consideration of accounting policies that involve the most complex and subjective estimates and judgments, management has identified the allowance for loan losses, the fair value determination of investment securities and the assessment of goodwill to be the Company’s most critical accounting policies.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses is established through a provision for loan losses that is treated as an expense and charged against earnings. Loans are charged against the allowance for loan losses when management believes that collectability of the principal is unlikely. The Company has policies and procedures for evaluating the overall credit quality of its loan portfolio, including timely identification of potential problem loans. On a quarterly basis, management reviews the appropriate level for the allowance for loan losses, incorporating a variety of risk considerations, both quantitative and qualitative. Quantitative factors include the Company’s historical loss experience, delinquency and charge-off trends, collateral values, known information about individual loans and other factors. Qualitative factors include various considerations regarding the general economic environment in the Company’s market area. To the extent actual results differ from forecasts and management’s judgment, the allowance for loan losses may be greater or lesser than future charge-offs. Due to potential changes in conditions, including the economic disruption and uncertainties resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, it is at least reasonably possible that change in estimates will occur in the near term and that such changes could be material to the amounts reported in the Company’s financial statements.
For further discussion concerning the allowance for loan losses and the process of establishing specific reserves, see the section of this Annual Report entitled “Asset Quality Review and Credit Risk Management” and “Analysis of the Allowance for Loan Losses”.
Fair Value of Investment Securities
The Company’s securities available-for-sale portfolio is carried at fair value with “fair value” being defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants. A fair value measurement assumes that the transaction to sell the asset or transfer the liability occurs in the principal market for the asset or liability or, in the absence of a principal market, the most advantageous market for the asset or liability. The price in the principal (or most advantageous) market used to measure the fair value of the asset or liability is not adjusted for transaction costs. An orderly transaction is a transaction that assumes exposure to the market for a period prior to the measurement date to allow for marketing activities that are usual and customary for transactions involving such assets and liabilities; it is not a forced transaction. Market participants are buyers and sellers in the principal market that are (i) independent, (ii) knowledgeable, (iii) able to transact, and (iv) willing to transact.
Declines in the fair value of available-for-sale securities below their cost that are deemed to be other-than-temporary are reflected in earnings as realized losses. In estimating other-than-temporary impairment losses, management considers (1) the intent to sell the investment securities and the more likely than not requirement that the Company will be required to sell the investment securities prior to recovery (2) the length of time and the extent to which the fair value has been less than cost and (3) the financial condition and near-term prospects of the issuer. Due to potential changes in conditions, including the economic disruption and uncertainties resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, it is at least reasonably possible that changes in management’s assessment of other-than-temporary impairment will occur in the near term and that such changes could be material to the amounts reported in the Company’s financial statements.
Goodwill
Goodwill arose in connection with four acquisitions consummated in previous periods. Goodwill is tested annually for impairment or more often if conditions indicate a possible impairment. For the purposes of goodwill impairment testing, determination of the fair value of a reporting unit involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. Impairment would arise if the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. Due to the economic weakness resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company completed a quantitative assessment of goodwill as of May 31, 2020 which indicated that goodwill was not impaired. Subsequently, the Company determined there were no adverse changes in criteria and key considerations to the previous assessment. Accordingly, the Company concluded that there is no impairment of goodwill as of December 31, 2020. Goodwill may be impaired in the future if actual future test results differ from the present evaluation of impairment due to changes in the conditions used in the current evaluation. The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic may negatively impact our net income, fair value and correspondingly goodwill. An impairment of goodwill would decrease the Company’s earnings during the period in which the impairment is recorded.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This Annual report contains references to financial measures that are not defined in GAAP. Such non-GAAP financial measures include the Company’s presentation of net interest income and net interest margin on a fully taxable equivalent (FTE) basis. Management believes these non-GAAP financial measures are widely used in the financial institutions industry and provide useful information to both management and investors to analyze and evaluate the Company’s financial performance. Limitations associated with non-GAAP financial measures include the risks that persons might disagree as to the appropriateness of items included in these measures and that different companies might calculate these measures differently. These non-GAAP disclosures should not be considered an alternative to the Company’s GAAP results. The following table reconciles the non-GAAP financial measures of net interest income and net interest margin on an FTE basis to GAAP (dollars in thousands).
Reconciliation of net interest income and annualized net interest margin on an FTE basis to GAAP:
(1) Computed on a tax-equivalent basis using an incremental federal income tax rate of 21 percent for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, adjusted to reflect the effect of the nondeductible interest expense associated with owning tax-exempt securities and loans.
Income Statement Review
The following highlights a comparative discussion of the major components of net income and their impact for the last two years.
Average Balances and Interest Rates
The following two tables are used to calculate the Company’s non-GAAP net interest margin on an FTE basis. The first table includes the Company’s average assets and the related income to determine the average yield on earning assets. The second table includes the average liabilities and related expense to determine the average rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities. The net interest margin is equal to the interest income less the interest expense divided by average earning assets. Refer to the net interest income discussion following the tables for additional detail. (dollars in thousands)
ASSETS
(1) Average loan balance includes nonaccrual loans, if any. Interest income collected on nonaccrual loans has been included.
(2) Tax-exempt income has been adjusted to a tax-equivalent basis using an incremental tax rate of 21% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Average Balances and Interest Rates (continued)
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
(3)
Net interest income (FTE) and Spread Analysis (FTE) are non-GAAP financial measures. For further information, refer to the Non-GAAP Financial Measures section of this report.
Rate and Volume Analysis
The rate and volume analysis is used to determine how much of the change in interest income or expense is the result of a change in volume or a change in interest rate. For example, real estate loan interest income increased $3,697,000 in 2020 compared to 2019. Increased volume of real estate loans increased interest income in 2020 by $6,405,000 and lower interest rates decreased interest income in 2020 by $2,708,000.
The following table sets forth, on a tax-equivalent basis, a summary of the changes in net interest income resulting from changes in volume and rates (in thousands).
(1)
The change in interest due to both volume and yield/rate has been allocated to change due to volume and change due to yield/rate in proportion to the absolute value of the change in each.
Net Interest Income
The Company’s largest contributing component to net income is net interest income, which is the difference between interest earned on earning assets and interest paid on interest-bearing liabilities. The volume of and yields earned on earning assets and the volume of and the rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities determine net interest income. Refer to the tables preceding this paragraph for additional detail. Interest earned and interest paid is also affected by general economic conditions, particularly changes in market interest rates, by government policies and the action of regulatory authorities. Net interest income divided by average earning assets is referred to as net interest margin. For the years December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company's non-GAAP net interest margin was 3.13% and 3.21%, respectively, computed on an FTE basis. For further information, refer to the Non-GAAP Financial Measures section of this report.
Net interest income during 2020 and 2019 totaled $54,843,000 and $45,248,000, respectively, representing a 21.2% increase in 2020 compared to 2019. Net interest income increased in 2020 as compared to 2019 due primarily to the Acquisition, reduction in interest expense due to declines in market rates on deposits, and PPP loans and related fees, offset in part by a reduction in interest rates on loans. PPP loans of approximately $50.9 million are outstanding as of December 31, 2020. In addition to interest income on PPP loans, fee income of $2.3 million was recognized into interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The high level of competition in the local markets will continue to put downward pressure on the net interest margin of the Company. Currently, the Company’s primary market in Ames, Iowa, has eleven banks, six credit unions and several other financial investment companies. Multiple banks are also located in the Company’s other market areas in central, north-central and south-central Iowa creating similarly competitive environments.
Provision for Loan Losses
The provision for loan losses reflects management's judgment of the expense to be recognized in order to maintain an adequate allowance for loan losses. The Company’s provision for loan losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $5,681,000 compared to $1,314,000 for the previous year. Net charge offs totaled $1,085,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $379,000 for the previous year. The increase in provision for loan losses was primarily due to the effects of the economic slowdown associated with the COVID-19 pandemic on our loan portfolio and was necessary to maintain an adequate allowance for loan losses on the increasing outstanding loan portfolio. Classified loans, excluding 1-4 family and consumer loans, increased $35.7 million to $79.2 million in 2020 primarily due to effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the credit quality of our loan portfolio. This increase was primarily in the commercial real estate portfolio and related mainly to hospitality and entertainment loans. Refer to the “Asset Quality Review and Credit Risk Management” discussion for additional details with regard to loan loss provision expense.
Management believes the allowance for loan losses is adequate to absorb probable losses in the current portfolio. This statement is based upon management's continuing evaluation of inherent risks in the current loan portfolio, current levels of classified assets and general economic factors. The Company will continue to monitor the allowance and make future adjustments to the allowance as conditions dictate. Due to potential changes in conditions, including the economic disruption and uncertainties resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, it is at least reasonably possible that change in estimates will occur in the near term and that such changes could be material to the amounts reported in the Company’s financial statements.
Noninterest Income and Expense
Total noninterest income is comprised primarily of fee-based revenues from wealth management and trust services, bank-related service charges on deposit activities, net securities gains, merchant and card fees related to electronic processing of merchant and cash transactions and gain on the sale of loans held for sale.
Noninterest income during the years ended 2020 and 2019 totaled $10,620,000 and $8,629,000, respectively. The increase in noninterest income in 2020 compared to 2019 is primarily due to an increase in gains on sale of residential loans held for sale due to increased refinancing in a low interest rate environment, the Acquisition, and security gains.
Noninterest expense for the Company consists of all operating expenses other than interest expense on deposits and other borrowed funds. Salaries and employee benefits are the largest component of the Company’s operating expenses and comprise 63% and 62% of noninterest expense in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Noninterest expense during the years ended 2020 and 2019 totaled $36,551,000 and $31,522,000, respectively, representing a 16% increase in 2020 compared to 2019. Most of the increase in 2020 was due to the Acquisition. Excluding the Acquisition, the increase was primarily related to salaries and employee benefits due to normal increases including health insurance. The percentage of noninterest expense to average assets was 2.0% in 2020, compared to 2.1% during 2019.
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes for 2020 and 2019 was $4,381,000 and $3,847,000, respectively. This amount represents an effective tax rate of 18.9% and 18.3%, respectively. The Company's federal income tax rate was 21% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The lower than expected tax rate was due primarily to tax-exempt interest income and New Markets Tax Credits recognized in both years. These tax credits were generated by First National’s investment in qualified community development entities. The credits totaled $6.0 million and are recognized over a seven-year period beginning in 2019.
Balance Sheet Review
The Company’s assets are comprised primarily of loans and investment securities. The majority of average earning asset maturity or repricing dates are generally five years or less for the combined portfolios as the assets are funded for the most part by short term deposits with either immediate availability or less than one-year average maturities. This exposes the Company to risk with regard to changes in interest rates.
Total assets increased to $1,975,648,000 in 2020 compared to $1,737,183,000 in 2019, a 13.7% increase. The increase is primarily due to investment securities, Paycheck Protection Program loans, organic loan growth and to a lesser extent growth in interest-bearing deposits in financial institutions. This growth was funded by deposit growth driven by government stimulus programs.
Loan Portfolio
Net loans as of December 31, 2020 totaled $1,129,505,000, an increase of 7.8% from the $1,048,147,000 as of December 31, 2019. Loans increased primarily due to organic growth in the commercial real estate loan portfolio and government guaranteed loans under the Paycheck Protection Program. Loans are the primary contributor to the Company’s revenues and cash flows. The average yield on loans was 202 and 228 basis points higher in 2020 and 2019, respectively, in comparison to the average tax-equivalent investment portfolio yields.
Types of Loans
The following table sets forth the composition of the Company's loan portfolio for the past five years ending at December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
The Company's loan portfolio consists of real estate, commercial, agricultural and consumer loans. As of December 31, 2020, gross loans totaled approximately $1,147,577,000, which equals approximately 66.9% of total deposits and 58.1% of total assets. The Iowa State Average Report (consisting of 253 banks in the State of Iowa) loan to deposit ratio as of December 31, 2020 was 71%. As of December 31, 2020, the majority of the loans were originated directly by the Banks to borrowers within the Banks’ principal market areas. There are no foreign loans outstanding during the years presented.
Real estate loans include various types of loans for which the Banks hold real property as collateral and consist of loans primarily on commercial, agricultural and multifamily properties and single-family residences. Real estate loans typically have fixed rates for up to five years, with the Company’s loan policy permitting a maximum fixed rate maturity of up to 15 years. The majority of construction loan volume is given to contractors to construct 1-4 family residence and commercial buildings and these loans generally have maturities of up to 12 months. The Banks also originate residential real estate loans for sale to the secondary market for a fee.
Commercial loans consist primarily of loans to businesses for various purposes, including revolving lines to finance current operations, floor-plans, inventory and accounts receivable; capital expenditure loans to finance equipment and other fixed assets; and letters of credit. These loans generally have short maturities, have either adjustable or fixed rates and are unsecured or secured by inventory, accounts receivable, equipment and/or real estate.
Agricultural loans play an important part in the Banks’ loan portfolios. Iowa is a major agricultural state and is a national leader in both grain and livestock production. The Banks play a significant role in their communities in financing operating, livestock and real estate activities for area producers.
Consumer loans include loans extended to individuals for household, family and other personal expenditures not secured by real estate. The majority of the Banks’ consumer lending is for vehicles, consolidation of personal debts and improvements.
The interest rates charged on loans vary with the degree of risk and the amount and maturity of the loan. Competitive pressures, market interest rates, the availability of funds and government regulation further influence the rate charged on a loan. The Banks follow a loan policy, which has been approved by both the board of directors of the Company and the Banks, and is overseen by both Company and Bank management. These policies establish lending limits, review and grading criteria and other guidelines such as loan administration and allowance for loan losses. Loans are approved by the Banks’ board of directors and/or designated officers in accordance with respective guidelines and underwriting policies of the Company. Credit limits generally vary according to the type of loan and the individual loan officer’s experience. Loans to any one borrower are limited by applicable state and federal banking laws.
Maturities and Sensitivities of Loans to Changes in Interest Rates as of December 31, 2020
The contractual maturities of the Company's loan portfolio are as shown below. Actual maturities may differ from contractual maturities because individual borrowers may have the right to prepay loans with or without prepayment penalties (in thousands).
Loans Held For Sale
There was $1,621,000 of mortgage origination funding awaiting delivery to the secondary market as of December 31, 2020 and $2,777,000 as of December 31, 2019. Residential mortgage loans are originated by the Banks and sold to several secondary mortgage market outlets based upon customer product preferences and pricing considerations. The mortgages are sold in the secondary market to eliminate interest rate risk and to generate secondary market fee income. It is not anticipated at the present time that loans held for sale will become a significant portion of total assets.
Investment Portfolio
Total investments as of December 31, 2020 were $596,999,000, an increase of $117.2 million or 24.4% from the prior year end. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the investment portfolio comprised 30% and 28% of total assets, respectively. The increase in investments is primarily due to purchases in excess of maturities of mortgage-backed securities and municipal bonds as deposit growth was deployed.
The following table presents the fair values, which represent the carrying values due to the available-for-sale classification, of the Company’s investment portfolio as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. This portfolio provides the Company with a significant amount of liquidity (in thousands).
Investments in states and political subdivisions represent purchases of municipal bonds located primarily in the state of Iowa and contiguous states.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company did not recognize an other-than-temporary impairment. Management estimates at the present time there exists no other-than-temporary impairments in the securities available-for-sale portfolio at December 31, 2020; however, it is possible that the Company may incur impairment losses in 2021 and thereafter.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company did not have securities from a single issuer, except for the United States Government or its agencies, which exceeded 10% of consolidated stockholders’ equity.
Management’s process for obtaining and validating the fair value of investment securities is discussed in Note 17 of the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements,” which is included in Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Investment Maturities as of December 31, 2020
The investments in the following table are reported by contractual maturity. Expected maturities may differ from contractual maturities because issuers of the securities may have the right to call or prepay obligations with or without prepayment penalties (in thousands).
(1)
Yields on tax-exempt obligations of states and political subdivisions have been computed on a tax-equivalent basis.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company’s investment securities portfolio included securities issued by 279 and 251 government municipalities and agencies located within 24 and 18 states with a fair value of $251,584,000 and $195,302,000, respectively. No one municipality or agency represents a concentration within this segment of the investment portfolio. Storm Lake, Iowa, general obligation bonds with a fair value of $8.7 million (approximately 3.5% of the fair value of the government municipalities and subdivisions) represent the largest exposure to any one municipality or subdivision for the Company as of December 31, 2020; the bonds are repayable from the levy of continuing annual tax on all the taxable property within the territory of the city of Storm Lake.
The Company’s procedures for evaluating investments in states, municipalities and political subdivisions include but are not limited to reviewing the offering statement and the most current available financial information, comparing yields to yields of bonds of similar credit quality, confirming capacity to repay, assessing operating and financial performance, evaluating the stability of tax revenues, considering debt profiles and local demographics, and for revenue bonds, assessing the source and strength of revenue structures for municipal authorities. These procedures, as applicable, are utilized for all municipal purchases and are utilized in whole or in part for monitoring the portfolio of municipal holdings. The Company does not utilize third party credit rating agencies as a primary component of determining if the municipal issuer has an adequate capacity to meet the financial commitments under the security for the projected life of the investment, and, therefore, does not compare internal assessments to those of the credit rating agencies. Credit rating downgrades are utilized as an additional indicator of credit weakness and as a reference point for historical default rates.
The following table summarizes the total general obligation and revenue bonds in the Company’s investment securities portfolios as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 identifying the state in which the issuing government municipality or agency operates (in thousands):
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the revenue bonds in the Company’s investment securities portfolios were issued by government municipalities and agencies to fund public services such as community school facilities, college and university dormitory facilities and water utilities. The revenue bonds are to be paid from 14 and 13 revenue sources in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The revenue sources that represent 5% or more, individually, as a percent of the total revenue bonds are summarized in the following table (in thousands):
Other Assets
Other assets were $5,678,000 and $6,041,000 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease of $363,000 between periods can be primarily attributed to amortization of Iowa-based New Markets Tax Credit projects in 2020.
Deposits
Total deposits were $1,716,446,000 and $1,493,175,000 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase of $223,271,000 between the periods can be primarily attributed to federal government stimulus programs and increases in core deposits, including retail and commercial funds. Balances fluctuate as customer’s liquidity needs vary and could be impacted by distressed economic conditions or additional government stimulus.
The Company’s primary source of funds is customer deposits. The Banks attempt to attract noninterest-bearing deposits, which are a low-cost funding source. In addition, the Banks offer a variety of interest-bearing accounts designed to attract both short-term and longer-term deposits from customers. Interest-bearing accounts earn interest at rates established by Bank management based on competitive market factors and the Company’s need for funds. While 68.2% of the Banks’ certificates of deposit mature in the next year, it is anticipated that a majority of these certificates will be renewed. Rate sensitive certificates of deposits in excess of $100,000 are subject to somewhat higher volatility with regard to renewal volume as the Banks adjust rates based upon funding needs. In the event a substantial volume of certificates is not renewed, the Company has sufficient liquid assets and borrowing lines to fund significant runoff. A sustained reduction in deposit volume would have a significant negative impact on the Company’s operations and liquidity. The Company had $8,730,000 and $7,118,000 of brokered deposits as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Average Deposits by Type
The following table sets forth the average balances for each major category of deposit and the weighted average interest rate paid for deposits during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands).
Deposit Maturity
The following table shows the amounts and remaining maturities of time certificates of deposit that had balances of $100,000 and over as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands).
Borrowed Funds
Borrowed funds that may be utilized by the Company are comprised of FHLB advances, federal funds purchased and securities sold under agreements to repurchase (repurchase agreements). Borrowed funds are an alternative funding source to deposits and can be used to fund the Company’s assets and unforeseen liquidity needs. FHLB advances are loans from the FHLB that can mature daily or have longer maturities for fixed or floating rates of interest. Federal funds purchased are borrowings from other banks that mature daily. Repurchase agreements are similar to deposits as they are funds lent by various Bank customers; however, investment securities are pledged to secure such borrowings. The Company’s repurchase agreements reprice daily.
The following table summarizes the outstanding amount of, and the average rate on, borrowed funds as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands).
Average Annual Borrowed Funds
The following table sets forth the average amount of, the average rate paid and maximum outstanding balance on, borrowed funds for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands).
Dividends Payable
There were no dividends payable as of December 31, 2020 as compared to $2,213,000 as of December 31, 2019. In the past, dividends were declared in one quarter and then paid in the subsequent quarter. For the quarter ended December 31, 2020 the dividend was not declared until January 13, 2021 and will be paid on February 15, 2021.
Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangements
The Company is party to financial instruments with off-balance-sheet risk in the normal course of business. These financial instruments include commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit that assist customers with their credit needs to conduct business. The instruments involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit risk in excess of the amount recognized in the balance sheet. As of December 31, 2020, the most likely impact of these financial instruments on revenues, expenses, or cash flows of the Company would come from unidentified credit risk causing higher provision expense for loan losses in future periods. These financial instruments are not expected to have a significant impact on the liquidity or capital resources of the Company. For additional information, including quantification of the amounts involved, see Note 15 of the “Notes to Consolidated Statements” and the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section of this discussion.
Asset Quality Review and Credit Risk Management
The Company’s credit risk is centered in the loan portfolio, which on December 31, 2020, totaled $1,129,505,000 as compared to $1,048,147,000 as of December 31, 2019, an increase of 7.8%. Net loans comprise approximately 57% of total assets as of the end of 2020. The objective in managing loan portfolio risk is to reduce the risk of loss resulting from a customer’s failure to perform according to the terms of a transaction and to quantify and manage credit risk on a portfolio basis. As the following chart indicates, the Company’s non-performing assets have increased by 72% from December 31, 2019 and total $15,530,000 as of December 31, 2020. The Company’s level of non-performing loans as a percentage of loans of 1.33% as of December 31, 2020, is higher than the Iowa State Average peer group of FDIC insured institutions as of December 31, 2020, of 0.66%. Management believes that the allowance for loan losses as of December 31, 2020 remains adequate based on its analysis of the non-performing assets and the portfolio as a whole.
Non-performing Assets
The following table sets forth information concerning the Company's non-performing assets for the past five years ended December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
The accrual of interest on nonaccrual and other impaired loans is generally discontinued at 90 days or when, in the opinion of management, the borrower may be unable to meet payments as they become due. When interest accrual is discontinued, all unpaid accrued interest is reversed. Interest income is subsequently recognized only to the extent cash payments are received and when principal obligations are expected to be recoverable. Interest income on restructured loans is recognized pursuant to the terms of the new loan agreement. Interest income on other impaired loans remaining on accrual is monitored and income is recognized based upon the terms of the underlying loan agreement. However, the recorded net investment in impaired loans, including accrued interest, is limited to the present value of the expected cash flows of the impaired loan or the observable fair value of the loan’s collateral.
Non-performing loans totaled $15,312,000 as of December 31, 2020 and were $10,269,000 higher than the non-performing loans as of December 31, 2019. The increase in non-performing loans was due primarily to one hospitality loan relationship in the commercial real estate portfolio. The Company considers non-performing loans to generally include nonaccrual loans, loans past due 90 days or more and still accruing and other loans that may or may not meet the former nonperforming criteria but are considered to meet the definition of impaired.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had 24 COVID-19 related loan modifications still in the modification period with a total outstanding principal balance of $45.9 million. In addition to these modifications, there were $572,000 of modified loans more than 30 days past due after the modification period was completed. Modified loans continue to accrue interest and are evaluated for past due status based on the revised payment terms.
The allowance for loan losses related to these impaired loans was approximately $1,819,000 and $209,000 at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The average balances of impaired loans for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $14,412,000 and $4,328,000, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, interest income, which would have been recorded under the original terms of nonaccrual loans, was approximately $975,000 and $473,000, respectively. There was $39,000 of loans greater than 90 days past due and still accruing interest as of December 31, 2020 and there was $255,000 of loans greater than 90 days past due and still accruing interest at December 31, 2019.
Summary of the Allowance for Loan Losses
The provision for loan losses represents an expense charged against earnings to maintain an adequate allowance for loan losses. The allowance for loan losses is management’s best estimate of probable losses inherent in the loan portfolio as of the balance sheet date. Factors considered in establishing an appropriate allowance include: an assessment of the financial condition of the borrower; a realistic determination of value and adequacy of underlying collateral; historical charge-offs; the condition of the local economy; the condition of the specific industry of the borrower; an analysis of the levels and trends of loan categories; and a review of delinquent and classified loans.
The adequacy of the allowance for loan losses is evaluated quarterly by management, the Company and respective Bank boards. This evaluation focuses on specific loan reviews, changes in the type and volume of the loan portfolio given the current economic conditions and historical loss experience. Any one of the following conditions may result in the review of a specific loan: concern about whether the customer’s cash flow or collateral are sufficient to repay the loan; delinquent status; criticism of the loan in a regulatory examination; the accrual of interest has been suspended; or other reasons, including when the loan has other special or unusual characteristics which warrant special monitoring.
While management uses available information to recognize losses on loans, further reductions in the carrying amounts of loans may be necessary based on changes in economic conditions. In addition, regulatory agencies, as an integral part of their examination process, periodically review the estimated losses on loans. Such agencies may require the Company to recognize additional losses based on their judgment about information available to them at the time of their examination. Due to potential changes in conditions, including the economic disruption and uncertainties resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, it is at least reasonably possible that change in estimates will occur in the near term and that such changes could be material to the amounts reported in the Company’s financial statements.
Analysis of the Allowance for Loan Losses
The Company’s policy is to charge-off loans when, in management’s opinion, the loan is deemed uncollectible, although concerted efforts are made to maximize future recoveries. The following table sets forth information regarding changes in the Company's allowance for loan losses for the most recent five years (dollars in thousands):
General reserves for loan categories range from 1.10% to 2.79% of the outstanding loan balances as of December 31, 2020. In general as loan volume increases, the general reserve levels increase with that growth and as loan volume decreases, the general reserve levels decrease with that decline. The higher level of reserves at the top end of the range was due to historical charge-offs at one bank affiliate in the commercial operating loan category. The allowance relating to commercial real estate is the largest reserve component. Construction, commercial operating and agricultural operating loans have higher general reserve levels as a percentage than the other loan categories as management perceives more risk in this type of lending. Elements contributing to the higher risk level include a higher percentage of watch, special mention, substandard and impaired loans and less favorable economic conditions for those portfolios. As of December 31, 2020, commercial real estate loans have general reserves ranging from 1.39% to 1.64%.
Other factors considered when determining the adequacy of the general reserve include historical losses; watch, substandard and impaired loan volume; the ability to collect past due loans; loan growth; loan-to-value ratios; loan administration; collateral values; and economic factors. The Company’s concentration risks include geographic concentration in Iowa; the local economy’s dependence upon several large governmental entity employers, including Iowa State University; and the health of Iowa’s agricultural sector that, in turn, is dependent on crop and livestock prices, weather conditions, trade policies and government programs. No assurances can be made that losses will remain at the relatively favorable levels experienced over the past five years.
Loans that the Banks have identified as having higher risk levels are reviewed individually in an effort to establish adequate loss reserves. These reserves are considered specific reserves and are directly impacted by the credit quality of the underlying loans. The specific reserves are dependent upon assumptions regarding the liquidation value of collateral and the cost of recovering collateral including legal fees. Changing the amount of specific reserves on individual loans has historically had a significant impact on the reallocation of the allowance among different parts of the portfolio. The following table sets forth information regarding changes in the Company's specific reserve on loans individually evaluated for impairment and loans individually evaluated for impairment for the most recent five years (dollars in thousands):
Allocation of the Allowance for Loan Losses
The following table sets forth information concerning the Company’s allocation of the allowance for loan losses for the most recent five years (dollars in thousands):
* Percent of loans in each category to total loans.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity management is the process by which the Company, through its Banks’ Asset and Liability Committees (ALCO), ensures adequate liquid funds are available to meet its financial commitments on a timely basis, at a reasonable cost and within acceptable risk tolerances. These commitments include funding credit obligations to borrowers, funding of mortgage originations pending delivery to the secondary market, withdrawals by depositors, maintaining adequate collateral for pledging for public funds, trust deposits and borrowings, paying dividends to shareholders, payment of operating expenses, funding capital expenditures and maintaining deposit reserve requirements.
Liquidity is derived primarily from core deposit growth and retention; principal and interest payments on loans; principal and interest payments, sale, maturity and prepayment of investment securities; net cash provided from operations; and access to other funding sources. Other funding sources include federal funds purchased lines, FHLB advances and other capital market sources.
As of December 31, 2020, the level of liquidity and capital resources of the Company remain at a satisfactory level and compare favorably to that of other FDIC insured institutions. Management believes that the Company's liquidity sources will be sufficient to support its existing operations for the foreseeable future.
The liquidity and capital resources discussion will cover the following topics:
●
Review of the Company’s Current Liquidity Sources
●
Review of the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
●
Review of Company Only Cash Flows
●
Review of Commitments for Capital Expenditures, Cash Flow Uncertainties and Known Trends in Liquidity and Cash Flow Needs
●
Capital Resources
Review of the Company’s Current Liquidity Sources
Liquid assets of cash on hand, balances due from other banks and interest-bearing deposits in financial institutions for December 31, 2020 and 2019 totaled $191,523,000 and $143,565,000, respectively. The higher balance of liquid assets at December 31, 2020 primarily relates to increased funds on deposit at the Federal Reserve Bank and a lack of other fixed income alternatives.
Other sources of liquidity available to the Banks as of December 31, 2020 include available borrowing capacity with the FHLB of $208,017,000 and federal funds borrowing capacity at correspondent banks of $107,771,000. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had outstanding FHLB advances of $3,000,000, no federal funds purchased, securities sold under agreements to repurchase of $37,293,000 and no other borrowings.
Total investments as of December 31, 2020, were $596,999,000 compared to $479,843,000 as of year-end 2019. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the investment portfolio as a percentage of total assets was 30% and 28%, respectively. The investment portfolio provides the Company with a significant amount of liquidity since all investments are classified as available-for-sale as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 and have pretax net unrealized gains of $21,363,000 and $5,486,000, respectively.
The investment portfolio serves an important role in the overall context of balance sheet management in terms of balancing capital utilization and liquidity. The decision to purchase or sell securities is based upon the current assessment of economic and financial conditions, including the interest rate environment, liquidity and credit considerations. The portfolio’s scheduled maturities represent a significant source of liquidity.
Review of the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
Net cash provided by operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 totaled $29,712,000 and $20,180,000, respectively. The change in net cash provided by operating activities in 2020 was primarily due to an increase in net income and the provision for loan losses.
Net cash (used in) investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $(245,343,000) and $(78,961,000), respectively. The change in net cash (used in) investing activities in 2020 was primarily due to an increase in purchases of securities and a higher level of loans, partially offset by an increase in maturities and calls of securities available-for-sale.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 totaled $205,833,000 and $63,014,000, respectively. The change in net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 was due primarily to an increase in deposits.
Review of Company Only Cash Flows
The Company’s liquidity on an unconsolidated basis is heavily dependent upon dividends paid to the Company by the Banks. The Company requires adequate liquidity to pay its expenses and pay stockholder dividends. In 2020, dividends from the Banks amounted to $9,599,000 compared to $25,068,000 in 2019. The higher amount of dividends in 2019 was used to partially fund the purchase of the Iowa State Bank Acquisition. Various federal and state statutory provisions limit the amount of dividends banking subsidiaries are permitted to pay to their holding companies without regulatory approval. Federal Reserve policy further limits the circumstances under which bank holding companies may declare dividends. For example, a bank holding company should not continue its existing rate of cash dividends on its common stock unless its net income is sufficient to fully fund each dividend and its prospective rate of earnings retention appears consistent with its capital needs, asset quality and overall financial condition. In addition, the Federal Reserve and the FDIC have issued policy statements which provide that insured banks and bank holding companies should generally pay dividends only out of current operating earnings. Federal and state banking regulators may also restrict the payment of dividends by order.
First National and United Bank, as national banks, generally may pay dividends, without obtaining the express approval of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (“OCC”), in an amount up to their retained net profits for the preceding two calendar years plus retained net profits up to the date of any dividend declaration in the current calendar year. Retained net profits, as defined by the OCC, consists of net income less dividends declared during the period. Boone Bank, Reliance Bank, State Bank and Iowa State Bank are also restricted under Iowa law to paying dividends only out of their undivided profits. Additionally, the payment of dividends by the Banks is affected by the requirement to maintain adequate capital pursuant to applicable capital adequacy guidelines and regulations, and the Banks generally are prohibited from paying any dividends if, following payment thereof, the Bank would be undercapitalized.
The Company has unconsolidated cash and interest-bearing deposits totaling $2,588,000 that is available at December 31, 2020 to provide additional liquidity to the Banks.
Review of Commitments for Capital Expenditures, Cash Flow Uncertainties and Known Trends in Liquidity and Cash Flow Needs
Commitments to extend credit totaled $222,660,000 as of December 31, 2020 compared to a total of $207,168,000 at the end of 2019. The timing of these credit commitments varies with the underlying borrowers; however, the Company has satisfactory liquidity to fund these obligations as of December 31, 2020. The primary cash flow uncertainty would be a sudden decline in deposits causing the Banks to liquidate securities. Historically, the Banks have maintained an adequate level of short-term marketable investments to fund the temporary declines in deposit balances. There are no other known trends in liquidity and cash flow needs as of December 31, 2020, that are of concern to management.
Capital Resources
The Company’s total stockholders’ equity increased to $209,486,000 at December 31, 2020, from $187,579,000 at December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, stockholders’ equity as a percentage of total assets was 10.6 % and 10.8%, respectively. The increase in stockholders’ equity was primarily the result of net income and an increase in accumulated other comprehensive income, offset in part by dividends declared and stock repurchases. The capital levels of the Company currently exceed applicable regulatory guidelines to be considered “well capitalized” as of December 31, 2020.
From time to time, the Company’s board of directors has authorized stock repurchase plans. No stock repurchase plans are currently in place at the Company. Stock repurchase plans allow the Company to proactively manage its capital position and return excess capital to shareholders. 100,000 shares of common stock were repurchased under stock repurchase plans in 2020 and 70,558 shares of common stock were repurchased in 2019. Also see Part II, Item 5 - Market For Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities, included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Interest Rate Risk
Interest rate risk refers to the impact that a change in interest rates may have on the Company’s earnings and capital. Management’s objectives are to control interest rate risk and to ensure predictable and consistent growth of earnings and capital. Interest rate risk management focuses on fluctuations in net interest income identified through computer simulations to evaluate volatility, varying interest rate, spread and volume assumptions. The risk is quantified and compared against tolerance levels.
The Company uses a third-party computer software simulation modeling program to measure its exposure to potential interest rate changes. For various assumed hypothetical changes in market interest rates, numerous other assumptions are made such as prepayment speeds on loans, the slope of the Treasury yield curve, the rates and volumes of the Company’s deposits and the rates and volumes of the Company’s loans. This analysis measures the estimated change in net interest income in the event of hypothetical changes in interest rates.
Another measure of interest rate sensitivity is the gap ratio. This ratio indicates the amount of interest-earning assets repricing within a given period in comparison to the amount of interest-bearing liabilities repricing within the same period of time. A gap ratio of 1.0 indicates a matched position, in which case the effect on net interest income due to interest rate movements will be minimal. A gap ratio of less than 1.0 indicates that more liabilities than assets reprice within the time period, while a ratio greater than 1.0 indicates that more assets reprice than liabilities.
The simulation model process provides a dynamic assessment of interest rate sensitivity, whereas a static interest rate gap table is compiled as of a point in time. The model simulations differ from a traditional gap analysis, as a traditional gap analysis does not reflect the multiple effects of interest rate movement on the entire range of assets and liabilities and ignores the future impact of new business strategies.
Inflation
The primary impact of inflation on the Company’s operations is to increase asset yields, deposit costs and operating overhead. Unlike most industries, virtually all of the assets and liabilities of a financial institution are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates generally have a more significant impact on a financial institution’s performance than they would on non-financial companies. Although interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or to the same extent as the price of goods and services, increases in inflation generally have resulted in increased interest rates. The effects of inflation can magnify the growth of assets and, if significant, require that equity capital increase at a faster rate than would be otherwise necessary.
Forward-Looking Statements and Business Risks
Certain statements contained in the foregoing Management’s Discussion and Analysis and elsewhere in this Annual Report that are not statements of historical fact constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (the “Act”), notwithstanding that such statements are not specifically identified. In addition, certain statements may be contained in the Company’s future filings with the SEC, in press releases and in oral and written statements made by or with the Company’s approval that are not statements of historical fact and constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Act. Examples of forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to: (i) projections of revenues, expenses, income or loss, earnings or loss per share, the payment or nonpayment of dividends, capital structure and other financial items; (ii) statements of plans, objectives and expectations of the Company or its management, including those relating to products or services; (iii) statements of future economic performance; and (iv) statements of assumptions underlying such statements. Words such as “believes”, “anticipates”, “expects”, “intends”, “targeted”, “projected”, “continue”, “remain”, “will”, “should”, “may” and other similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements but are not the exclusive means of identifying such statements.
Forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from those in such statement. The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic have magnified these risks and uncertainties. Factors that could cause actual results to differ from those discussed in the forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to:
●
The severity, magnitude and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the direct and indirect impact of such pandemic, as well as responses to the pandemic by the government, business and consumers, on our operations and personnel, commercial activity and demand across our business and our customers' business.
●
The disruption of global, national, state and local economies associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, which could affect our liquidity and capital positions, impair the ability of our borrowers to repay outstanding loans, impair collateral values and further increase our allowance for credit losses.
●
Local, regional and national economic conditions and the impact they may have on the Company and its customers, and management’s assessment of that impact on its estimates including, but not limited to, the allowance for loan losses and fair value of other real estate owned. Of particular relevance are the economic conditions in the concentrated geographic area in central, north-central and south-central Iowa in which the Banks conduct their operations.
●
Adequacy of the allowance for loan losses and changes in the level of nonperforming assets and charge-offs.
●
Changes in the fair value of securities available-for-sale and management’s assessments of other-than-temporary impairment of such securities.
●
The effects of and changes in trade and monetary and fiscal policies and laws, including the changes in assessment rates established by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation for its Deposit Insurance Fund and interest rate policies of the Federal Open Market Committee of the Federal Reserve Board.
●
Changes in sources and uses of funds, including loans, deposits and borrowings, including the ability of the Banks to maintain unsecured federal funds lines with correspondent banks.
●
Changes imposed by regulatory agencies to increase capital to a level greater than the level currently required for well capitalized financial institutions.
●
Inflation and interest rate, securities market and monetary fluctuations.
●
Political instability, acts of war or terrorism and natural disasters.
●
The timely development and acceptance of new products and services and perceived overall value of these products and services by customers.
●
Revenues being lower than expected.
●
Changes in consumer spending, borrowings and savings habits.
●
Changes in the financial performance and/or condition of the Company’s borrowers.
●
Credit quality deterioration, which could cause an increase in the provision for loan losses.
●
Technological changes and risks related to breaches of data security and cyber-attacks.
●
The ability to increase market share and control expenses.
●
Changes in the competitive environment among financial or bank holding companies and other financial service providers.
●
The effect of changes in laws and regulations with which the Company and the Banks must comply, including developments and changes related to the implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act and the effect of any Federal tax reform on the operations of the Company and its customers.
●
Changes in the securities markets.
●
The effect of changes in accounting policies and practices, as may be adopted by the regulatory agencies, as well as the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, the FASB and other accounting standard setters, including the International Financial Reporting Standards.
●
The costs and effects of legal and regulatory developments, including the resolution of regulatory or other governmental inquiries and the results of regulatory examinations or reviews.
●
Recent changes in the U.S. trade policy, including imposition of tariffs by the U.S. government and retaliatory tariffs imposed by foreign governments and the potential negative effect of these actions on the Company’s borrowers.
●
The ability of the Company to successfully integrate the operations of financial institutions it has acquired or may acquire in the future.
●
The Company’s success at managing the risks involved in the foregoing items.
Certain of the foregoing risks and uncertainties are discussed in greater detail under the heading “Risk Factors” in Item 1A herein.
These factors may not constitute all factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those discussed in any forward-looking statement. The Company operates in a continually changing business environment and new facts emerge from time to time. The Company cannot predict such factors nor can it assess the impact, if any, of such factors on its financial condition or its results of operations. Accordingly, forward-looking statements should not be relied upon as a predictor of actual results. The Company disclaims any responsibility to update any forward-looking statement provided in this document.