Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion contains management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations and should be read together with the historical consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 “Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” This discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs and involve numerous risks and uncertainties, including but not limited to those described in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. You should carefully read “Special Note About Forward-Looking Statements” and Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.”
Overview and Recent Developments
Overview
We are a global biopharmaceutical company dedicated to becoming a leader in the discovery, development and commercialization of next generation drugs for the treatment of cancer. Our mission is to improve the lives of cancer patients by creating more effective, safer and tolerable treatments. We have assembled a strong and experienced leadership team and have established global operations across the pharmaceutical value chain to execute our goal of becoming a global leader in bringing innovative cancer treatments to the market and improving health outcomes.
We are organized around three operating segments: (1) our Oncology Innovation Platform, dedicated to the research and development of our proprietary drugs; (2) our Commercial Platform, focused on the sales and marketing of our specialty drugs and the market development of our proprietary drugs; and (3) our Global Supply Chain Platform, dedicated to providing a stable and efficient supply of APIs for our clinical and commercial efforts. Our current clinical pipeline in the Oncology Innovation Platform is derived from four different proprietary technologies: (1) Orascovery, based on a P-glycoprotein or P-gp pump, inhibitor, (2) Src Kinase inhibition, (3) T-cell Receptor-engineered T-cells (“TCR-T”), and (4) arginine deprivation therapy.
Significant Developments in the Oncology Innovation Platform
Orascovery Platform
Our Orascovery technology is based on the novel P-gp pump inhibitor molecule, encequidar. Oral administration of encequidar in combination with established chemotherapy agents such as paclitaxel, irinotecan, docetaxel, topotecan and eribulin has been shown in our clinical studies to date to improve the absorption of these agents by blocking the P-gp pump in the intestinal wall. Oral paclitaxel and encequidar, formerly known as Oraxol (“Oral Paclitaxel”) is our lead asset in our Orascovery platform. We are also advancing the following clinical candidates for the treatment of solid tumors on this platform: oral irinotecan and encequidar, formerly known as Oratecan (“Oral Irinotecan”); oral docetaxel and encequidar, formerly known as Oradoxel (“Oral Docetaxel”); oral topotecan and encequidar, formerly known as Oratopo (“Oral Topotecan”); and oral eribulin and encequidar, formerly known as Eribulin ORA (“Oral Eribulin”).
Significant developments in our Orascovery platform in 2020 include the following:
On February 26, 2021, we received a CRL from the FDA regarding our NDA for Oral Paclitaxel for the treatment of metastatic breast cancer. The FDA issues a CRL to indicate that the review cycle for an application is complete and that the application is not ready for approval in its present form. In the CRL, the FDA indicated its concern of safety risk to patients in terms of an increase in neutropenia-related sequelae on the Oral Paclitaxel arm compared with the IV paclitaxel arm in the Phase III study. The FDA also expressed concerns regarding the uncertainty over the results of the primary endpoint of ORR at week 19 conducted by BICR. The agency stated that the BICR reconciliation and re-read process may have introduced unmeasured bias and influence on the BICR. Additionally, the FDA recommended that we conduct a new adequate and well-conducted clinical trial in a patient population with MBC representative of the population in the U.S. The agency determined that additional risk mitigation strategies to improve toxicity, which may involve dose optimization and / or exclusion of patients deemed to be at higher risk of toxicity, are required to support potential approval of the NDA. We are working to consider the appropriate next steps in the development of Oral Paclitaxel. We plan to request a meeting with the FDA to discuss the FDA’s response, engage in a dialogue on the design and scope of a clinical trial to address the agency’s requirements and align on the next steps required to obtain approval.
On September 1, 2020, we announced that the FDA accepted for filing our NDA for Oral Paclitaxel for the treatment of metastatic breast cancer (“MBC”) and granted the application Priority Review. Under the Prescription Drug User Fee Act (“PDUFA”), the FDA set a target action date of February 28, 2021.
On December 9, 2020, we presented updated Phase 3 data on survival and tolerability associated with Oral Paclitaxel in metastatic breast cancer patients at the 2020 San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium (SABCS). Progression free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) data presented indicates benefits of Oral Paclitaxel versus IV paclitaxel and supports the superiority of increased overall response rate observed with Oral Paclitaxel. In the intent-to-treat (ITT) population, Oral Paclitaxel showed a benefit on PFS versus IV paclitaxel and showed a trend favoring Oral Paclitaxel on OS versus IV paclitaxel. Oral Paclitaxel demonstrated a median PFS of 8.4 months vs. 7.4 months, hazard ratio (HR) 0.768 (95% CI: 0.584, 1.01), p=0.046. Oral Paclitaxel demonstrated a median OS of 22.7 months vs. 16.5 months, HR 0.794 (95% CI: 0.607, 1.037), p=0.082.
On September 8, 2020, we and Quantum Leap Healthcare Collaborative (“Quantum Leap”) jointly announced the launch of two new study arms of the I-SPY 2 TRIAL to evaluate Oral Paclitaxel in combination with GlaxoSmithKline’s (“GSK”) dostarlimab, an investigational antibody binding PD-1, in the neoadjuvant chemotherapy setting, targeting stage 2/3 HER2+ and HER2- breast cancers. The I-SPY 2 TRIAL, sponsored by Quantum Leap, is a standing Phase 2 randomized, controlled, multicenter platform with a Bayesian adaptive randomization design aimed to rapidly screen and identify promising new treatments in specific subgroups of adults with newly-diagnosed, high-risk (high likelihood of recurrence), locally-advanced breast cancer that is either Stage II or Stage III. GSK will provide dostarlimab. We will provide Oral Paclitaxel. Quantum Leap will be responsible for running the trial.
On May 29, 2020, we presented interim data from an ongoing Phase II clinical trial in which Oral Paclitaxel monotherapy showed encouraging efficacy and tolerability in elderly patients with unresectable cutaneous angiosarcoma, an aggressive malignancy with poor prognosis. The interim results were presented at the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) 2020 Virtual Scientific Program and reflected data from 22 evaluable patients out of 26 enrolled patients. The interim data showed a clinical benefit rate (CR+PR+SD) of 100% in 22 evaluable patients who reached their first post treatment efficacy evaluation. All 22 patients experienced a reduction in tumor size. Complete responses (CR) were observed in 27.3% of patients (6/22), partial responses (PR) were observed in 22.7% of patients (5/22), and stable disease was observed in 50% of patients (11/22). Oral Paclitaxel has been generally well tolerated in this predominantly elderly population.
We are also evaluating Oral Paclitaxel in combination with other therapies, including anti-VEGF and anti-PD-1 therapies. We are studying Oral Paclitaxel with ramucirumab in a Phase 1b study in patients with advanced gastric cancer who failed previous chemotherapy and the expansion phase of the study has completed enrollment. Our Phase 1/2 study of Oral Paclitaxel in combination with pembrolizumab in patients with advanced solid malignancies is ongoing.
In addition to our lead product candidate, development of our other Orascovery product candidates is ongoing. We are planning Phase 2 studies for both Oral Irinotecan and Oral Docetaxel. A Phase 1 study of Oral Eribulin in patients with solid tumors is ongoing.
Our goal with Oral Paclitaxel, in the event we decide to continue development after our meeting with the FDA, is to establish Oral Paclitaxel as the chemotherapy of choice for patients receiving chemotherapy for MBC, although we can provide no assurance that we will be successful in obtaining the FDA’s approval to commercialize Oral Paclitaxel. We intend to explore establishing Oral Paclitaxel in other oncology indications where we believe taxanes will continue to be a foundational treatment and continue to explore combination therapies. Our strategy is to develop and, if we receive approval from the FDA, commercialize Oral Paclitaxel in the U.S. by leveraging our Commercial Platform and sales and marketing capabilities established in the U.S. We also plan to evaluate marketing options outside of the U.S., including using our internal resources, partnering with others, or out-licensing the product.
Src Kinase Inhibition Platform
Our Src Kinase inhibition platform technology is based on novel small molecule compounds that have multiple mechanisms of action, including the inhibition of the activity of Src Kinase and the inhibition of tubulin polymerization, which may limit the growth or proliferation of cancerous cells. We believe the combination of these mechanisms of action provides a broader range of anti-cancer activity compared to either mechanism of action alone. Our lead product candidate on our Src Kinase inhibition platform is tirbanibulin ointment, which we are advancing for the treatment of AK as well as psoriasis and skin cancer. Our other clinical candidates and their indications in this platform include tirbanibulin oral for solid and liquid tumors and KX2-361 for brain cancers, such as GBM.
Significant developments in our Src Kinase inhibition platform in 2020 include the following:
On December 15, 2020, we announced that the FDA has approved Klisyri® (tirbanibulin) for the topical treatment of actinic keratosis (AK) on the face or scalp. Klisyri is the first FDA approved branded proprietary product for Athenex and was launched in the U.S., led by our partner Almirall S.A. (“Almirall”) on February 18, 2021. Klisyri will be manufactured by Athenex, highlighting the vertically integrated capabilities of the company ranging from a preclinical lead to a developed product for market launch. The FDA approved Klisyri based on the data from two pivotal, randomized, double-blind, vehicle-controlled Phase 3 studies (KX01-AK-003 and KX01-AK-004) that evaluated the efficacy and safety of Klisyri (tirbanibulin) ointment 1% in 702 adults with AK of the face or scalp. Tirbanibulin demonstrated complete clearance of AK lesions at day 57 in treated face or scalp areas in a significantly higher number of patients compared to vehicle. The most common adverse events were application site pruritus and pain reported by 9% and 10% of treated patients, respectively.
The New England Journal of Medicine published the pivotal Phase 3 trial results on Klisyri® for the topical treatment of AK of the face or scalp in the February 11, 2021 issue.
In March 2020, our partner Almirall announced that the European Medicines Agency (EMA) accepted the filing of a European marketing authorization for tirbanibulin ointment for the treatment of AK.
The development of our other Src Kinase programs/product candidates is ongoing.
Other Platforms
The other technologies in our Oncology Innovation Platform are our TCR-T immunotherapy technology under which we are advancing TCR affinity-enhancing specific T-cell (TAEST) therapy with our first T cell therapy product, TCRT-ESO-A2, and our arginine deprivation therapy technology under which we are advancing PT01, also known as Pegtomarginase.
In September 2020, we announced that the FDA allowed our Investigational New Drug (IND) application for TCRT-ESO-A2, an autologous TCR-T cell therapy targeting solid tumors that are NY-ESO-1 positive in HLA-A*02:01 positive patients. TCRT-ESO-A2 is being developed by Axis Therapeutics Limited, a joint venture between Athenex and Xiangxue Life Sciences Limited (“XLifeSc”). TCRT-ESO-A2 is similar to TAEST16001, an autologous cell-based therapy being developed simultaneously by XLifeSc for clinical application in China in that both therapies express the same affinity-enhanced TCR.
PT01 targets cancer growth and survival by removing the supply of arginine to cancers that have a disrupted urea cycle. The FDA allowed our IND application for the clinical investigation of PT01 for the treatment of patients with advanced malignancies in 2019. We plan to initiate first human exposure in 2021.
Recent business updates and COVID-19 related measures
Since early 2020, after monitoring developments related to the spread of COVID-19, we have undertaken a number of measures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, with a goal to prioritize the health and safety of our employees and ensure continuity in our business. These measures included implementing a work-from-home policy at various times and other efforts in accordance with recommendations by local authorities for certain of our personnel across the globe as well as imposing restrictions on travel and in-person meetings to protect the health and safety of our workforce while we continue to advance our clinical programs and operations. We have continued to add additional safety procedures and tools in all our locations. We adhere to all state and federal requirements as the same may be in force from time to time. While our operations in China were disrupted from late January to early March due to the COVID-19 pandemic, during March our Chinese operations returned to normal operation. We have been deemed an “essential business” by New York State and as a result, we have experienced minimal disruptions at our New York-based operations in Clarence and Buffalo. Despite these efforts, we may from time to time experience additional disruptions related to COVID-19. For instance, in January 2021, we experienced disruptions related to our Chairman and Chief Executive Officer falling ill with COVID-19. We have supplied our employees with face coverings and other necessary personal protective equipment and have taken other measures to reduce the risk of the spread of COVID-19 at our work sites. Despite the delay in construction in both Dunkirk facility and API plant due to the pandemic, as of December 31, 2020, both facilities were in the final stage of completion. We accepted the API building and entered into a lease agreement with the local government in January 2021. Dunkirk facility is expected to commence operations in the second half of 2021. We are actively monitoring our operations and supply chain across the globe and are making adjustments to respond to logistical challenges that arise due to COVID-19 where appropriate. Further, we have opened up our production facilities to produce medicines that are used to treat COVID-19 as part of our commitment to contribute to the COVID-19 relief effort.
With respect to our clinical development program, our anticipated timelines for our later-stage product candidates remain largely unaffected by COVID-19. However, for our earlier stage product candidates, in line with the industry overall, we have experienced and expect to continue to experience, slowed enrollment for our clinical trials as well as suspensions in our clinical trials as healthcare resources are diverted to address the COVID-19 pandemic. We remain committed to advancing our pipeline while ensuring the safety of all participants as well as the integrity of the data and will monitor developments with respect to COVID-19 as well as industry and regulatory best practices for continuing clinical development programs during the pandemic, including, if and where appropriate, the use of virtual communications, interviews and visits as well as self-administration and remote monitoring techniques to address health and safety concerns while minimizing disruptions and delays to our clinical development timelines.
We also put in place a number of measures intended to adjust/allocate resources towards prioritizing key business operations such as clinical and regulatory activities for later-stage product candidates and pre-launch commercial activities, and to delay or defray compensation costs in order to preserve our cash on hand and liquidity during a volatile period in the U.S. and global capital markets.
On March 31, 2020, we entered into a letter agreement with Xiangxue Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. (“Xiangxue”) to amend certain provisions of the license agreement entered into with Xiangxue in December 2019 (the “2019 Xiangxue License”). On June 30, 2020, we entered into a second supplemental agreement to amend certain provisions of the 2019 Xiangxue License to facilitate our receipt of payment from Xiangxue, providing, among other things, that notwithstanding the provisions of the 2019 Xiangxue License to the contrary, Xiangxue shall be entitled to make the USD $30 million upfront payment in Chinese Renminbi to Chongqing Taihao Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd. (“Taihao”), our wholly owned subsidiary in China, and we would bear the responsibility for indirect taxes in connection with license payments made under the 2019 Xiangxue License rather than Xiangxue. In the third quarter of 2020, pursuant to the 2019 Xiangxue License, we recognized $9.4 million license revenue, net of $0.6 million value added tax, for a milestone achievement. As of February 28, 2021, we have only received $1.5 million of the $10.0 million milestone achievement. After consideration of historical collection rates, the current financial status of the counterparty, and other macroeconomic factors, we have recorded a provision for its expected credit losses for the outstanding balance of $8.5 million and $0.4 million related to currency conversion in our consolidated financial statements for the three months and year ended December 31, 2020, respectively.
In order to strengthen our short-term liquidity and to ensure financial flexibility, on June 19, 2020, we entered into a senior secured loan agreement and related security agreements (the “Senior Credit Agreement”) with Oaktree Fund Administration, LLC, as administrative agent, and the lenders party thereto (collectively, “Oaktree”) to borrow up to $225.0 million in five tranches with a maturity date of June 19, 2026, bearing interest at a fixed annual rate of 11.0%. The first three tranches with a combined value of $150.0 million was funded, with a portion of the upfront loan proceeds being used to repay in full our credit facility with Perceptive Advisors LLC and its affiliates (“Perceptive”). The early repayment of the Perceptive facility resulted in a one-time loss on extinguishment of debt of $7.2 million. Additional debt tranches of $75.0 million in aggregate are available, subject to our achievement of certain regulatory and commercial milestones (see Liquidity and Capital Resources-Debt and Equity Financings-Oaktree Senior Credit Agreement). In connection with our entry into the Senior Credit Agreement, we granted warrants to Oaktree to purchase up to an aggregate of 908,393 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $12.63 per share and entered into a registration rights agreement with Oaktree on June 19, 2020, pursuant to which, among other things, we agreed to register for resale the shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of the warrants. On August 6, 2020, we filed with the SEC a Registration Statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-241665) registering for resale the shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of the warrants.
On August 4, 2020, we entered into a Revenue Interest Financing Agreement with Sagard Healthcare Royalty Partners, LP (“Sagard”), pursuant to which Sagard has agreed to pay us $50.0 million (the “Product Payment”) to provide funding for our development and commercialization of Oral Paclitaxel upon receipt of marketing authorization for Oral Paclitaxel by the U.S. FDA for the treatment of MBC. In exchange for the Product Payment, we have agreed to make payments to Sagard equal to 5.0% of our world-wide net sales of Oral Paclitaxel, subject to a hard cap equal to the lesser of 170% of the Product Payment and the Put/Call Price set forth in the Revenue Interest Financing Agreement (the “Hard Cap”). We are required to make certain additional payments to Sagard to the extent Sagard has not received Payments equaling at least $20.0 million by September 30, 2024 and at least $50.0 million by August 4, 2026, in the amount of the applicable shortfall, and, subject to the Hard Cap, if Sagard has not received payments equaling at least $85.0 million by the tenth anniversary of the date the Product Payment is funded, in an amount such that Sagard will have obtained a 6.0% internal rate of return on the Product Payment (see Note 11 - Debt and Lease Obligations).
Sagard and its co-investors OPB SHRP Co-Invest Credit Limited and SIMCOE SHRP Co-Invest Credit Ltd. (the “IMCO Investors”) also acquired by assignment (the “Assignment”) term loans and commitments equal to $50.0 million under the Senior Credit Agreement. In connection with the Assignment, we granted warrants to Sagard and the IMCO Investors to purchase up to an aggregate of 201,865 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $12.63 per share. As a result of the issuance of the additional warrants, we evaluated the debt modification in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 470 and concluded that the assigned debt qualified for a partial debt extinguishment of the existing Senior Credit Agreement with Oaktree. Therefore, we recorded a loss on partial extinguishment of debt in the amount of $3.0 million for the three months ended September 30, 2020.
In September 2020, we completed an underwritten follow-on public offering in which we sold 11,500,000 shares of our common stock, including 1,500,000 shares of common stock pursuant to the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, at a public offering price of $11.00 per share and received net proceeds of $118.7 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses of $7.9 million.
Overview of Our Business Organization Commercial Platform U.S. Sales & Marketing Chicago, IL Global Partnering Chicago, IL Oncology Innovation Platform Research Labs Buffalo, NY Clinical Development Buffalo, NY Hong Kong, HK Cranford, NJ Chongqing, China Taipei, Taiwan Buffalo, NY Cranford, NJ Chongqing, China Taipei, Taiwan Regulatory Global Supply Chain Platform cGMP High Potency API Facilities Chongqing, China Under Development cGMP Manufacturing Clarence, NY Formulation Labs Buffalo
Outlook
We have a comprehensive and experienced leadership team who have come together under one organization to achieve our mission of improving the lives of cancer patients by creating more effective, safer and tolerable treatments. We have the goal of becoming a global leader in bringing innovative cancer treatments to the market and improving health outcomes. To achieve our goal, we have established the following strategic priorities, which, after receipt of a CRL for our NDA for Oral Paclitaxel, are currently under review by management:
Obtain regulatory approval for our product candidates and prepare to commercialize Klisyri and our other approved products in the U.S. and abroad - On February 26, 2021, we received a CRL from the FDA regarding our NDA for our lead product candidate, Oral Paclitaxel, for the treatment of metastatic breast cancer. We are working to consider the appropriate next steps in the development of Oral Paclitaxel. We plan to request a meeting with the FDA to discuss the FDA’s response, engage in a dialogue on the design and scope of a clinical trial to address the agency’s requirements and align on the next steps required to obtain approval. Our goal with Oral Paclitaxel, in the event we decide to continue development after our meeting with the FDA, is to establish it, if approved, as the chemotherapy of choice for patients with MBC and to commercialize Oral Paclitaxel in the U.S. by leveraging our commercialization capabilities in the U.S. We also plan to evaluate marketing options outside of the U.S., including using our internal resources, partnering with others, or out-licensing the product. The FDA has approved Klisyri® (tirbanibulin) for the topical treatment of AK on the face or scalp. Our strategic partner Almirall launched Klisyri in the U.S. on February 18, 2021 and will employ its expertise to support the development of tirbanibulin in Europe. If approved, Almirall will also commercialize the product in European countries, including Russia.
Rapidly and concurrently advance our other clinical programs and product candidates - We intend to pursue the fastest feasible pathways to approval of our existing clinical product pipeline. We plan to continue to advance our studies evaluating Oral Paclitaxel in other indications. As part of our label expansion strategy, we intend to pursue those indications where paclitaxel is already indicated by FDA approval or is on National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines, and we also intend to explore combinations with new modalities, such as immunotherapies and targeted therapies. We will continue to advance the development of our other Orascovery product candidates to maximize the value of the Orascovery platform. In addition, we continue to make progress with the development of the clinical program for tirbanibulin. We will also evaluate options to enter into partnerships and collaborations where appropriate.
Enhance and expand our other new technology platforms - We intend to continue expanding and broadening our oncology pipeline. In 2020, the FDA allowed the IND application for TCRT-ESO-A2, which represents Athenex’s first T cell therapy product cleared to advance to the first stage of clinical development in the U.S. The FDA also allowed the IND application for the clinical investigation of PT01, an arginine deprivation therapy, for the treatment of patients with advanced malignancies and we plan to initiate first human exposure in 2021. In addition to our existing portfolio of clinical candidates, our research and development teams are evaluating additional applications of our novel technology platforms. For example, our novel Cytochrome P450 (“CYP”) and P-gp dual inhibitor technology could expand the breadth of application for our oral enabling platform.
Leverage our global research and development operations to continue development of an oncology-focused product pipeline - We have research and development operations in the U.S., U.K., China, Taiwan and Latin America that are focused on advancing our existing product pipeline and on developing additional novel clinical drug product candidates in order to replenish our development pipeline as other candidates mature. We have developed a core competency in oral absorption technology and apply that skill to develop new methods of drug discovery and to identify new pipeline candidates. In addition, we may leverage our research and development capabilities to partner with others for the development of new pipeline candidates. We believe that we can create substantial long-term value by pursuing a robust, ongoing research and development program.
Continue to build an integrated business model that leverages our proprietary commercial platform, supply chain and cGMP manufacturing capabilities - We built our U.S. commercial operation in preparation for future FDA approvals of our proprietary product candidates. We believe that our experienced product commercialization team can build an infrastructure that leverages both our global facilities and collaborative relationships to achieve global distribution of any products approved by the FDA and regulatory authorities in other jurisdictions, as applicable, in a timely and cost-effective manner. Our strategic partner Almirall will employ its expertise to support the development in Europe and also to commercialize tirbanibulin in the U.S. and if approved, European countries, including Russia. In addition, we currently expect to continue to invest in our CMC development for our product candidates and manufacturing infrastructure, which may involve significant capital expenditures, utilizing U.S. current Good Manufacturing Practices (“cGMP”) manufacturing facilities from our public/private partnerships in both the China and U.S. markets as a mechanism to build-out our supply chain around the world. We plan to commence 503B compounding at our Dunkirk facility when it is operational later this year, and to utilize the facility for ointment, injectables, and ultimately our proprietary drugs.
Selectively pursue strategic M&A, licensing or partnership opportunities to complement our existing operations - We continue to pursue acquisitions, licensing and partnership opportunities. We will continue to target opportunities that will complement our existing portfolio and operations to create value for stockholders and support our business strategy and mission.
As we pursue these strategic priorities, we expect to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for the foreseeable future. We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially as we seek to:
•
Continue to advance our lead programs, Orascovery and Src Kinase inhibition technology platforms, through clinical development;
•
Continue to invest in further developing our Commercial Platform ahead of our intended proprietary drug launch of Oral Paclitaxel and other drug candidates upon approval;
•
Continue our current preclinical and clinical research program and development activities;
•
Continue to invest in our manufacturing facilities;
•
Advance the preclinical and clinical research program and development activities of our in-licensed technology platforms, TCR-T immunotherapy and arginine deprivation therapy;
•
Seek to identify additional research programs and product candidates within existing platform technologies;
•
Attain new drugs and technologies through acquisitions or in-licensing opportunities;
•
Hire additional research, development and business personnel;
•
Maintain, expand and protect our IP portfolio; and
•
Incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company.
Results of Operations
Except where otherwise noted, the following discussion compares fiscal years 2019 and 2020 results. For a discussion on the comparison between fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2019 results, see the Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, as filed with the SEC and incorporated by reference herein.
Since inception, we have devoted a substantial amount of our resources to research and development of our lead product candidates under our Orascovery, Src Kinase inhibition, TCR-T immunotherapy and arginine deprivation therapy technology platforms, to sales and general administrative costs associated with our operations, and to the development of our specialty drug operations in our Commercial Platform and 503B operations. We have incurred significant net losses since inception. Our net losses were $148.4 million, $125.5 million, and $128.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $713.6 million and $567.5 million, respectively.
We have funded our operations to date primarily from the issuance and sale of our common stock through public offerings, private placements, debt and convertible bonds, and to a lesser extent, through revenue generated from our Global Supply Chain Platform. Our operating activities used $131.2 million, $97.5 million and $109.4 million of cash during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $69.6 million, restricted cash of $16.5 million, and short-term investments of $138.6 million.
Key Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We derive our consolidated revenue primarily from (i) the sales of generic injectable products by our Commercial Platform; (ii) licensing and collaboration projects conducted by our Oncology Innovation Platform, which generates revenue in the form of upfront payments, milestone payments, and payments received for providing research and development services for our collaboration projects and for other third parties; (iii) the sales of 503B and API products by our Global Supply Chain Platform; and (iv) grant awards from government agencies and universities for our continuing research and development efforts.
The following table sets forth the components of our consolidated revenue and the amount as a percentage of total revenue for the periods indicated.
Cost of Sales
Along with sourcing from third-party manufacturers, we manufacture clinical products in our U.S. current Good Manufacturing Practices (“cGMP”) facility in New York. Cost of sales primarily includes the cost of finished products, raw materials, labor costs, manufacturing overhead expenses and reserves for expected scrap, as well as transportation costs. Cost of sales also includes depreciation expense for production equipment, changes to our excess and obsolete inventory reserves, certain direct costs such as shipping costs, net of costs charged to customers, and sublicense fees related to in-license agreements.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development (“R&D”) expenses primarily consist of the costs associated with in-licensing of product candidates, milestone payments, conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, activities related to regulatory filings and other R&D activities. The following table sets forth the components of our R&D expenses and the amount as a percentage of total R&D expenses for the periods indicated.
Our current R&D activities mainly relate to the clinical development of our Oncology Innovation Platform.
We expense R&D costs as incurred. We record costs for certain development activities, such as clinical trials, based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment or clinical site activations. We do not allocate employee-related costs, depreciation, rental and other indirect costs to specific R&D programs because these costs are deployed across multiple product programs under R&D.
We cannot determine with certainty the duration, costs and timing of the current or future preclinical or clinical studies of our drug candidates. The duration, costs, and timing of clinical studies and development of our drug candidates will depend on a variety of factors, including:
•
The scope, rate of progress, and costs of our ongoing, as well as any additional, clinical studies and other R&D activities;
•
Future clinical study results;
•
Uncertainties in clinical study enrollment rates;
•
Significant and changing government regulation; and
•
The timing and receipt of any regulatory approvals.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a drug candidate, including delays caused by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that drug candidate.
R&D activities are central to our business model. We expect our R&D expenses to continue to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue to support the clinical trials of Oral Paclitaxel, Oral Irinotecan, Oral Docetaxel, Oral Topotecan, Oral Eribulin, tirbanibulin ointment, tirbanibulin oral and KX2-361, as well as initiate and prepare for additional clinical and preclinical studies, including TCR-T immunotherapy and arginine deprivation therapy program activities. We also expect spending to increase in the R&D for API, 503B and specialty products. There are numerous factors associated with the successful commercialization of any of our drug candidates, including future trial design and various regulatory requirements, many of which cannot be determined with accuracy at this time based on our stage of development. Additionally, future commercial, regulatory and public health, including the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, factors beyond our control will likely impact our clinical development programs and plans.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative, (“SG&A”), expenses primarily consist of compensation, including salary, employee benefits and stock-based compensation expenses for sales and marketing personnel, and for administrative personnel that support our general operations such as executive management, legal counsel, financial accounting, information technology, and human resources personnel. SG&A expenses also include professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, auditing and tax services, as well as other direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, development of the facility in Dunkirk, New York, insurance and other supplies used in the selling, marketing, general and administrative activities. SG&A expenses also include costs associated with our commercialization efforts for our proprietary drugs, such as market research, brand strategy and development work on market access, scientific publication, product distribution, and patient support.
We anticipate that our SG&A expenses will increase in future periods to support increases in our research and development and commercialization activities. We expect these increases will likely result in increased headcount, increased share compensation charges, expanded infrastructure and increased costs for insurance. We also anticipate increases to legal, compliance, accounting and investor and public relations expenses associated with being a public company.
Interest Expense and Interest Income
Interest expense consists primarily of interest on our long-term loans and the amortization of our debt discount. Interest income consists primarily of interest generated from our cash and short-term investments in U.S. Treasury securities, U.S. agency securities, high rated commercial papers and corporate bonds.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
The loss on extinguishment of debt is the result of refinancing the senior secured loan agreement with Perceptive with the Senior Credit Agreement with Oaktree, as well as the subsequent assignment of a portion of the Senior Credit Agreement to Sagard. The refinancing of the senior secured loan agreement with Perceptive resulted in an exit fee and the recognition of the unamortized debt discount as a loss on extinguishment of debt in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. The assignment of a portion of the Senior Credit Agreement to Sagard qualified as a partial debt extinguishment and resulted in a proportional loss from the existing unamortized debt discount, inclusive of unamortized deferred financing fees.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth a summary of our consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, together with the changes in those items in dollars and as a percentage. This information should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. Our operating results in any period are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any future period.
Revenue
Product sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $105.3 million, an increase of $24.7 million, or 31%, as compared to $80.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily attributable to a significant increase in specialty product sales of $39.1 million as a result of increased demand for COVID-19 related drugs due to the global health pandemic and the launch of additional products. We experienced an increase in purchases from our existing customers as well as obtaining large, non-recurring orders of specialty products from new customers. Fluctuations in the infection rate and the spread of the global health pandemic and market demand can significantly affect our product sales in the future. If and when the COVID-19 pandemic recedes temporarily or is quelled, we expect to see a significant softening in demand for these products. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in API and 503B products sales of $9.1 million, and $5.0 million, respectively, due to the suspension of production of commercial batches at our old API facility in May 2019, and the discontinued sales of compounded vasopressin drug products in ready-to-use form in August 2019. Contract manufacturing revenue also decreased by $0.3 million during the period.
We recognized $39.1 million and $20.0 million in collaboration and license revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $37.7 million in license revenue, net of $2.3 million VAT pursuant to the 2019 Xiangxue License to develop and commercialize Oral Paclitaxel, Oral Irinotecan, and tirbanibulin ointment in People’s Republic of China (“PRC” or “China”), Hong Kong, and Macau, and $1.0 million in license revenue pursuant to the license agreement we entered into with PharmaEssentia Corp. (“PharmaEssentia”) to develop and commercialize Oral Paclitaxel, Oral Irinotecan, and Oral Docetaxel in Taiwan, Singapore, and Vietnam. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized $20.0 million in collaboration and license revenue pursuant to the license agreement entered into with Almirall in December 2017 under which Almirall acquired an exclusive license to research, develop and commercialize tirbanibulin in the U.S., Europe, and Russia.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales totaled $95.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $25.7 million, or 37%, as compared to $69.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in our cost of specialty product sales was in-line with the increase in revenue and we continued to incur fixed costs despite decreased production at our old API facility in Chongqing. Additionally, we incurred sublicense fees of $5.8 million on our license revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
R&D expenses totaled $75.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $8.5 million, or 10%, as compared to $84.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily due to a decrease in clinical operations, drug licensing fees, and included the following:
•
$9.1 million decrease in clinical studies costs related to the supply of clinical studies and patient costs on Oral Paclitaxel, and tirbanibulin ointment, as all Phase 3 studies wound down, and we filed an NDA with the FDA for Oral Paclitaxel in September 2020 and for tirbanibulin ointment in March 2020;
•
$5.6 million decrease in drug development for specialty products, and licensing costs primarily related to TCR-T immunotherapy technology and arginine deprivation therapy technology incurred during the prior year; and
•
$0.5 million decrease in regulatory costs in connection with our NDA preparation that began during 2019.
The decrease in these R&D expenses was partially offset by an increase of $3.5 million in medical affairs related to preparing our proprietary drugs for commercialization, API research and development, and a $3.2 million increase related to the expansion of our R&D teams in Latin America and Taiwan.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses totaled $96.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $30.1 million, or 45%, as compared to $66.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily due to an increase of $16.7 million primarily related to preparations for the commercialization of our proprietary drugs, if approved, a provision for credit losses of $8.9 million related to our license milestone receivable, an increase of $2.6 million in costs related to the expanded work forces at our manufacturing plants, and an increase of $1.9 million of general, administrative expense, including professional service fees, IT, insurance, and other operating expenses.
Interest Income and Interest Expense
Interest income consisted of interest earned on our short-term investments and decreased by $1.0 million, or 54%, from 2019 to 2020 due a significant decrease in market rates for commercial paper, corporate bonds, and U.S. Treasury securities. Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $11.2 million, an increase of $4.2 million, or 61%, as compared to $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to increased borrowings. Interest expense in 2020 included interest on borrowings under the credit agreement with Perceptive we entered into in June 2018, and the Senior Credit Agreement with Oaktree we entered into in June 2020 to finance, in part, to repay in full the outstanding loan and fees under the credit agreement with Perceptive. The majority of interest expense in the prior period was incurred from the Perceptive debt.
Loss on Debt Extinguishment
We recognized a $7.2 million loss on the extinguishment of debt related to the termination of the senior secured loan agreement with Perceptive and a $3.0 million loss on the partial extinguishment of debt related to the assignment of a portion of the senior secured loan from Oaktree’s co-investors to Sagard during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Tax Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred income tax expense of $4.1 million, compared to $0.9 million for the same period in 2019. The increase in income tax expenses was primarily attributable to $3.9 million foreign tax withholding in relation to license revenue recognized in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have incurred net losses and negative cash flows from our operations. Our cash requirement was primarily cash used for our R&D programs, SG&A costs associated with our operations, the development of our specialty drug operations in our Commercial Platform and 503B operations, and the investment we are making in our pre-launch activities in anticipation of commercializing our proprietary drugs. We incurred net losses of $148.4 million, $125.5 million and $128.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $713.6 million. Our operating activities used $131.2 million, $97.5 million and $109.4 million of cash during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. We intend to continue to advance our various clinical and pre-clinical programs which we expect will lead to increased cash outflow of research and development costs and increase our investments in commercialization activities for our proprietary drugs. In addition, we can provide no assurance that the funding requirements to diversify the product portfolio for specialty drug products in the Commercial Platform and 503B operations will decline in the future. Our principal sources of liquidity as of December 31, 2020 were cash and cash equivalents totaling of $69.6 million, restricted cash of $16.5 million, held in a controlled bank account in connection with the Senior Credit Agreement with Oaktree, and short-term investments totaling $138.6 million, which are generally high-quality investment grade corporate debt securities.
In September 2020, we successfully raised $118.7 million through public offering of our shares, thus alleviated the substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern as of June 30, 2020. We believe that our cash from operations and existing cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash, and short-term investments will enable us to meet our current operational liquidity needs and fund operations into the second quarter of 2022. The Company’s estimates are based on relevant conditions that are known and reasonably knowable at the date of these consolidated financial statements being available for issuance, and are subject to change due to changes in business, industry or macroeconomic conditions. This forecasted cash runway does not reflect additional funding available to us through the existing Senior Credit Agreement with Oaktree, or the Revenue Interest Financing Agreement with Sagard. Further, we do not expect to have access to additional capital under these facilities and will need to find alternative sources of financing until such time as Oral Paclitaxel is approved or we will need to renegotiate these arrangements.
Debt and Equity Financings
Public Offering of Stock
In September 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 10,000,000 shares of its common stock. We granted the underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional 1,500,000 shares of common stock, which was exercised in full in September 2020. All shares were offered at a price of $11.00 per share. Net proceeds were $118.7 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses of $7.9 million.
Revenue Interest Financing Agreement
On August 4, 2020, we entered into a Revenue Interest Financing Agreement with Sagard, pursuant to which Sagard has agreed to pay the Company us $50.0 million to provide funding for the Company’s development and commercialization of Oral Paclitaxel upon receipt of marketing authorization for Oral Paclitaxel by the U.S. FDA for the treatment of MBC. In exchange for the Product Payment, we have agreed to make payments to Sagard equal to 5.0% of our world-wide net sales of Oral Paclitaxel, subject to a hard cap equal to the lesser of 170% of the Product Payment and the Put/Call Price set forth below (the “Hard Cap”). We are required to make certain additional payments to Sagard to the extent Sagard has not received Payments equaling at least $20.0 million by September 30, 2024 and at least $50.0 million by August 4, 2026. In addition, if Sagard has not received Payments equaling at least $85.0 million by the tenth anniversary of the date the Product Payment is funded (the “Funding Date”), then subject to the Hard Cap, we will be required to pay Sagard an amount such that Sagard will have obtained a 6.0% internal rate of return, calculated on a quarterly basis and calculated from the Funding Date to the tenth anniversary of the Funding Date, on the amount of the Product Payment, taking into account all other payments received by Sagard from us under the Revenue Interest Financing Agreement.
Our obligations under the Revenue Interest Financing Agreement are secured, subject to customary permitted liens and other agreed upon exceptions and subject to an intercreditor agreement with Oaktree, as administrative agent for the lenders under our Senior Credit Agreement, by a perfected security interest in (i) accounts receivable arising from net sales of Oral Paclitaxel and (ii) intellectual property that is claiming or covering Oral Paclitaxel itself or any method of using, making or manufacturing Oral Paclitaxel.
At any time after August 4, 2022, we will have the right, but not the obligation (the “Call Option”), to buy out Sagard’s interest in the Payments at a repurchase price (the “Put/Call Price”) equal to (a) on or before August 4, 2023, a payment sufficient to generate an internal rate of return of 18.0% of the Product Payment, (b) after August 4, 2023 and on or before August 4, 2024, a payment sufficient to generate an internal rate of return of 16.0% of the Product Payment, (c) after August 4, 2024 and on or before August 4, 2025, a payment sufficient to generate an internal rate of return of 15.0% of the Product Payment, and (d) thereafter, the greater of (i) an amount that, when paid to Sagard, would generate an internal rate of return of 13.0% of the Product Payment, and (ii) an amount equal to the product of the Product Payment and 165%, in the case of each foregoing clause (a) through (d), taking into account all other payments received by Sagard from us under the Revenue Interest Financing Agreement.
The Revenue Interest Financing Agreement contains customary representations and warranties and certain restrictions on our ability to incur indebtedness and grant liens on intellectual property related to Oral Paclitaxel. In addition, the Revenue Interest Financing Agreement provides that if certain events (“Put Option Events”) occur, including certain bankruptcy events, non-payment of Payments, a change of control, an out-license or sale of all of the rights in and to Oral Paclitaxel in the U.S. (other than any out-licensing transaction that includes all or substantially all of the U.S. and European development and commercialization rights to Oral Paclitaxel with a pharmaceutical company with global annual revenues for its most recently completed fiscal year that is greater than or equal to $500.0 million attributable to its oncology business) and (subject to applicable cure periods) non-compliance with the covenants in the Revenue Interest Financing Agreement, Sagard may require us to repurchase its interests in the Payments at the Put/Call Price. Our ability to access capital under the agreement is dependent upon receiving regulatory approval for Oral Paclitaxel in the U.S. for the treatment of MBC and Sagard may also terminate the Revenue Interest Financing Agreement if we have not received marketing authorization for Oral Paclitaxel by the FDA for the treatment of metastatic breast cancer by December 31, 2021. Due to our receipt of a CRL for our Oral Paclitaxel NDA requiring an additional clinical trial, we will likely not receive FDA approval before December 31, 2021 and Sagard will have the ability to exercise the termination right absent our renegotiation of this provision.
Sagard and the IMCO Investors also acquired by the Assignment term loans and commitments equal to $50.0 million under the Senior Credit Agreement. In connection with the Assignment, we granted warrants to Sagard and the IMCO Investors to purchase up to an aggregate of 201,865 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $12.63 per share. As a result of the issuance of the additional warrants, we evaluated the debt modification in accordance with ASC 470 and concluded that the assigned debt qualified for a partial debt extinguishment of the existing Senior Credit Agreement with Oaktree. Therefore, we recorded a loss on partial extinguishment of debt in the amount of $3.0 million for the three months ended September 30, 2020.
Oaktree Senior Credit Agreement
On June 19, 2020 (the “Closing Date”), we entered into the Senior Credit Agreement to borrow up to $225.0 million in five tranches with a maturity date of June 19, 2026, bearing interest at a fixed annual rate of 11.0%, payable quarterly. We are required to make quarterly interest-only payments until the second anniversary of the Closing Date, after which we are required to make quarterly amortizing payments, with the remaining balance of the principal plus accrued and unpaid interest due at maturity. After the date that is 90 days after the Closing Date, we will be required to pay a commitment fee on any undrawn commitments equal to 0.6% per annum, payable on each subsequent funding date and the commitment termination date. We are also required to pay an exit fee at maturity equal to 2.0% of the aggregate principal amount of the loans funded under the Senior Credit Agreement.
The first tranche of $100.0 million was drawn prior to June 30, 2020, with $54.1 million of the proceeds used in part to repay in full the outstanding loan and fees under the credit agreement with Perceptive and an additional $11.0 million of the upfront loan proceeds held by us as restricted cash in a debt service reserve account, and $6.4 million in fees and expenses incurred in connection with the financing, leaving $28.5 million in available proceeds from the first tranche. The second tranche of $25.0 million was drawn prior to September 30, 2020 and the third tranche of $25.0 million was drawn prior to December 31, 2020. Tranche C and E of $75.0 million in the aggregate are available for borrowing from time to time prior to the date that is either 24 or 36 months after the Closing Date, subject to our achievement of certain regulatory and commercial milestones, each as further set forth below:
Tranche
Funding Condition
Tranche Commitment Amount
Tranche C
The receipt of approval from the FDA of an NDA in respect of the use of Oral Paclitaxel permitting the marketing of Oral Paclitaxel in interstate commerce in the United States to treat metastatic breast cancer.
$25.0 million
Tranche E
The achievement of (A) net sales for the twelve (12) consecutive month period ending on the last day of a fiscal quarter in excess of $200.0 million and (B) net sales attributable to Oral Paclitaxel for such quarter in excess of $40.0 million.
$50.0 million
We may voluntarily prepay the Senior Credit Agreement at any time subject to a prepayment premium which up until the second anniversary of the Closing Date is equal to the amount of interest that would have been paid up to, but not including, the second anniversary date (excluding interest amounts already paid), plus 3.0% of the principal amount of the senior secured loans being repaid. Thereafter, the prepayment premium equals 3.0% of the principal amount of the senior secured loans being repaid and is reduced over time until the fourth anniversary date, after which no prepayment premium is required.
We are required to make mandatory prepayments of the senior secured loans with net cash proceeds from certain asset sales or insurance proceeds or condemnation awards, in each case, subject to certain exceptions and reinvestment rights.
Our obligations under the Senior Credit Agreement are guaranteed by us and certain of our existing domestic subsidiaries and subsequently acquired or organized subsidiaries subject to certain exceptions. Our obligations under the Senior Credit Agreement and the related guarantees thereunder are secured, subject to customary permitted liens and other agreed upon exceptions, by (i) a pledge of all of the equity interests of our direct subsidiaries, and (ii) a perfected security interest in all of our tangible and intangible assets.
The Senior Credit Agreement contains customary representations and warranties and customary affirmative and negative covenants, including, among other things, restrictions on indebtedness, liens, investments, mergers, dispositions, prepayment of other indebtedness, and dividends and other distributions, subject to certain exceptions, including specific exceptions with respect to product commercialization and development activities. In addition, the Senior Credit Agreement contains certain financial covenants, including, among other things, maintenance of minimum liquidity and a minimum revenue test, measured quarterly until the last day of the second consecutive fiscal quarter where the consolidated leverage ratio does not exceed 4.5 to 1, provided that thereafter we cannot allow our consolidated leverage ratio to exceed 4.5 to 1, measured quarterly. Failure of the Company to comply with the financial covenants will result in an event of default, subject to certain cure rights of the Company. At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all applicable covenants.
The Senior Credit Agreement contains events of default which are customary for financings of this type, in certain circumstances subject to customary cure periods. Following an event of default and any cure period, if applicable, Oaktree will have the right upon notice to terminate any undrawn commitments and may accelerate all amounts outstanding under the Senior Credit Agreement, in addition to other remedies available to it as a secured creditor of the Company.
In connection with our entry into the Senior Credit Agreement, we granted warrants to Oaktree to purchase up to an aggregate of 908,393 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $12.63 per share and entered into a registration rights agreement with Oaktree on June 19, 2020, pursuant to which, among other things, we agreed to register for resale the shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of the warrants of no later than the 45th day following the issuance of the warrants. On August 6, 2020, we filed with the SEC a Registration Statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-241665) registering for resale the shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of the warrants.
Outlook
We have borrowed and, in the future, may borrow additional capital from institutional and commercial banking sources to fund future growth, including pursuant to the Senior Credit Agreement, or potentially pursuant to new arrangements with different lenders. We may borrow additional funds on terms that may include restrictive covenants, including covenants that further restrict the operation of our business, liens on assets, high effective interest rates, financial performance covenants and repayment provisions that reduce cash resources and limit future access to capital markets. In addition, we expect to continue to opportunistically seek access to the equity capital markets to support our development efforts and operations. To the extent that we raise additional capital by issuing equity securities, our stockholders may experience substantial dilution. To the extent that we raise additional funds through collaboration or partnering arrangements, we may be required to relinquish some of our rights to our technologies or rights to market and sell our products in certain geographies, grant licenses on terms that are not favorable to us, or issue equity that may be substantially dilutive to our stockholders.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $69.6 million, restricted cash of $16.5 million, and short-term investments of $138.6 million. We believe that the existing cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash, and short-term investments will fund operations into the second quarter of 2022. The Company’s estimates are based on relevant conditions that are known and reasonably knowable at the date of these consolidated financial statements being available for issuance, and are subject to change due to changes in business, industry or macroeconomic conditions. This forecasted cash runway also does not contemplate the additional funding we may receive through the Senior Credit Agreement and Revenue Interest Financing Agreement. Further, we do not expect to have access to additional capital under these facilities and will need to find alternative sources of financing until such time as Oral Paclitaxel is approved or will need to renegotiate these arrangements. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and it could spend the available financial resources much faster than expected and need to raise additional funds sooner than anticipated.
We expect that our expenses will increase as we continue to fund clinical and preclinical development of our research programs, pre-launch activities of our proprietary drugs, funding of our Commercial Platform and manufacturing facilities, and working capital and other general corporate purposes. We have based our estimates on assumptions that might prove to be wrong, and we might use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of our drug candidates, we are unable to accurately estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenditures necessary to complete the development and commercialization of our drug candidates.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, some or all of which may be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, including:
•
Our ability to generate revenue and profits from our Commercial Platform or otherwise;
•
The costs, timing and outcome of regulatory reviews and approvals;
•
Progress of our drug candidates to progress through clinical development successfully;
•
The initiation, progress, timing, costs and results of nonclinical studies and clinical trials for our other programs and potential drug candidates;
•
The costs of preparing our Commercial Platform for the commercialization of our proprietary drugs;
•
The costs of construction and fit-out of planned drug at both Dunkirk and API manufacturing facilities;
•
The number and characteristics of the drug candidates we pursue;
•
The costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our IP rights and defending IP related claims;
•
The extent to which we acquire or in-license other products and technologies; and
•
Our ability to maintain and establish collaboration arrangements on favorable terms, if at all.
Until we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements, and government grants. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect rights of holders of common stock. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends and might require the issuance of warrants, which could potentially dilute the ownership interest of holders of common stock. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we might have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams or research programs or to grant licenses on terms that might not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we might be required to delay, limit, reduce, or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market products or drug candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
The use of cash in all periods presented resulted primarily from our net losses adjusted for non-cash charges and changes in components of working capital. The primary use of our cash in all periods presented was to fund our R&D, regulatory and other clinical trial costs, drug licensing costs, inventory purchases, pre-launch commercialization activities, and other expenditures related to sales, marketing and administration. Our prepaid expenses and other current assets, accounts payable and accrued expense balances in all periods presented were affected by the timing of vendor invoicing and payments.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $131.2 million of cash, which resulted principally from our net loss of $148.4 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $37.2 million and cash used by our operating assets and liabilities of $20.0 million. Our non-cash charges during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of $10.9 million of stock-based compensation, $10.3 million of loss on extinguishment of debt, $9.5 million provision for expected credit losses, $4.5 million of depreciation and amortization, and $1.8 million of amortization of debt discount. Our operating assets increased $16.4 million for accounts receivable mainly related to the contract asset recognized from license revenue in the current period and the increased sales of specialty products during the year ended December 31, 2020 and decreased by $5.7 million for prepaids related to the Dunkirk construction, as it entered into the final stage of completion, and other assets, and $3.8 million for inventory of all drug products. Our operating liabilities decreased by $13.1 million mainly due to a decrease in accrued construction costs and accrued inventory purchases, offset by an increase in accrued selling costs and rebates, an increase in accrued interest, and other operating liabilities.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, operating activities used $97.5 million of cash, which resulted principally from our net loss of $125.5 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $15.4 million. Cash provided by our operating assets and liabilities was $12.6 million primarily due to increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses. Our net non-cash charges during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily consisted of $3.8 million in depreciation and amortization expense, $9.9 million in stock-based compensation expense, and $1.0 million in amortization of debt discount.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, operating activities used $109.4 million of cash, which resulted principally from our net loss of $128.7 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $46.8 million and partially offset by $0.4 million change in deferred income taxes. Cash used in our operating assets and liabilities was $27.1 million. Our net non-cash charges during the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily consisted of $3.3 million in depreciation and amortization expense, $11.0 million in stock-based compensation expense, $0.5 million in amortization of debt discount, and $31.5 million license in fees settled with stock.
Net Cash (Used in) Provided by Investing Activities
In 2020, cash used in investing activities of $119.0 million was primarily attributable to $105.5 million in purchases of short-term investments, net of sales and maturities, $13.3 million in purchasing property and equipment, and $0.2 million in payment for licenses.
In 2019, cash provided by investing activities of $7.5 million was primarily attributable to $24.4 million in sale and maturity of short-term investments, net of purchases, and $0.9 million provided by the acquisition of CIDAL, offset by $13.6 million in purchasing property and equipment, and $4.2 million in payment for licenses.
In 2018, cash used in investing activities of $49.0 million was primarily attributable to $3.3 million in purchasing property and equipment, $45.5 million in net purchases of short-term investments, and $0.1 million in payment for licenses.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
In 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $209.4 million, which primarily consisted of $127.0 million from the sale of common stock and $143.0 million from the draw downs of debt from our Senior Credit Agreement with Oaktree and $2.1 million to fund our new API plant in China, $7.0 million from the issuance of warrants to Oaktree and Sagard, and $1.7 million from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by $54.4 million repayment of the Perceptive loan and other long-term debt, and $7.9 million and $9.4 million issuance costs related to sale of our common stock in our underwritten follow-on public offering and the issuance of the new Oaktree debt and warrants to Oaktree and Sagard, respectively.
In 2019, cash provided by financing activities was $167.5 million, which primarily consisted of net proceeds of $161.1 million from the issuance of our common stock mostly from private placements, net of offering expenses of approximately $1.1 million, and $6.5 million from the issuance of debt to fund our new API plant in China, offset by $1.0 million repayment of debt and finance lease obligations.
In 2018, cash provided by financing activities was $169.0 million, consisting primarily of $123.1 million in proceeds from the sales of common stock in our 2018 follow-on offering and private placement of shares to Perceptive, $50.0 million in proceeds from the issuance of a senior secured loan with Perceptive, and $4.0 million from the exercise of options to purchase common stock, offset by $7.5 million in costs associated with the sale of stock and the issuance of debt and $0.5 million in repayment of capital lease obligations and long-term debt.
Indebtedness
We had $158.1 million and $63.9 million of debt as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, this primarily consisted of finance and operating lease obligations, the Senior Credit Agreement entered into with Oaktree during 2020, and a credit agreement with Chongqing Maliu Riverside Development and Investment Co., LTD.
In 2020, we entered into a Senior Credit Agreement with Oaktree to borrow up to $225.0 million in five tranches with a maturity date of June 19, 2026, bearing interest at a fixed annual rate of 11.0%, payable quarterly. We are required to make quarterly interest-only payments until the second anniversary of the Senior Credit Agreement, after which we are also required to make quarterly amortizing payments, with the remaining balance of the principal plus accrued and unpaid interest due at maturity. Ninety days after the date of the Senior Credit Agreement, we will be required to pay a commitment fee on any undrawn commitments equal to 0.6% per annum, payable on each subsequent funding date and the commitment termination date. We are also required to pay an exit fee at maturity equal to 2.0% of the aggregate principal amount of the loans funded under the Senior Credit Agreement.
In 2019, we entered into a credit agreement which amended the existing partnership agreement with Chongqing Maliu Riverside Development and Investment Co., LTD (“CQ”), for a Renminbi ¥50.0 million (USD $7.2 million at December 31, 2019) line of credit to be used for the construction of the new API plant in China. We are required to repay the principal amount with accrued interest within three years after the plant receives cGMP certification, with 20% of the total loan with accrued interest is due within the first twelve months following receiving the certification, 30% of the total loan with accrued interest due within twenty-four months, and the remaining balance with accrued interest due within thirty-six months. Interest accrues at the three-year loan interest rate by the People’s Bank of China for the same period on the date of the deposit of the full loan amount. If we fail to obtain the cGMP certification within three years upon the completion and acceptance of the plant, we shall return all renovation costs with the accrued interest to CQ, in a single transaction within the first ten business days of the next day. If we fail to obtain the cGMP certification within three years of the acceptance of the plant, we are required to return all renovation costs with accrued interest to CQ within ten business days. As of December 31, 2020, the balance due to CQ was $7.6 million.
Capital Expenditures
Our liquidity position and capital requirements are subject to a number of factors. For example, our cash inflow and outflow may be impacted by the following:
•
Our ability to generate revenue;
•
Our ability to improve margins on our commercial products;
•
Fluctuations in working capital; and
•
Our ability to raise additional funds.
Our primary short-term capital needs, which are subject to change, include expenditures related to:
•
Continuous support of the development and research of our proprietary drug products;
•
Build out of our new API plant in China and improvements in our existing manufacturing capacity and efficiency;
•
Build out of our manufacturing facility in Dunkirk;
•
New research and product development efforts; and
•
Support of our commercialization efforts related to our current and future products.
Although we believe the foregoing items reflect our most likely uses of cash in the short term, we cannot predict with certainty all of our short-term cash uses or the timing or amounts of cash used. If cash generated from operations is insufficient to satisfy our working capital and capital expenditure requirements, we may be required to sell additional equity or debt securities or obtain credit financing. This capital may not be available on satisfactory terms, if at all. Furthermore, any additional equity financing may be dilutive to our stockholders, and debt financing, if available, may include restrictive covenants.
In 2015, we entered into two public-private partnerships. New York State is investing in a 409,000 square foot, ISO Class 5 high potency oral and sterile injectable pharmaceutical manufacturing facility, which is under construction in Dunkirk, New York. We will be able to occupy the space on concessionary terms. In Chongqing, China, funded by the Banan District government, a cGMP API and a GMP pharmaceutical manufacturing plant is being built, which we will occupy on concessionary terms. We plan to utilize these plants to manufacture API and the finished drugs in which these API will be used. New York State and the Banan District governments will each fund a majority of the construction costs and hold ownership of the manufacturing and office facilities. We are responsible for the costs of all equipment and technology for the facilities. In addition, in July 2017 we entered into a 20-year payment in-lieu of tax agreement for the construction of our Dunkirk facility with the CCIDA, valued at approximately $9.1 million. In December 2017, we entered into an agreement with M+W U.S., Inc., or M+W (now renamed Exyte U.S. Inc.), whereby M+W will be responsible for the design and construction of the Dunkirk facility at a cost estimated about $208.0 million. We are also responsible for the cost of furnishing the facility. Payments under the December 2017 agreement will be made to M+W over time based upon completion of certain milestones under the agreement, and ESD must approve any payment from the grant funds. As of December 31, 2020, construction of the Dunkirk manufacturing facility and the new API manufacturing facility in Chongqing was in the final stage of completion. We accepted the API building and entered into a lease agreement with CQ in January 2021 and commenced operations since. We expect Dunkirk facility to commerce operations in the second half of 2021.
Future Capital Requirements
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash, and short-term will fund operations into the second quarter of 2022. The Company’s estimates are based on relevant conditions that are known and reasonably knowable at the date of these consolidated financial statements being available for issuance, and are subject to change due to changes in business, industry or macroeconomic conditions. This cash runway does not reflect additional funding available to us through our existing Senior Credit Agreement with Oaktree, as administrative agent, or the Revenue Interest Financing Agreement with Sagard. Further, we do not expect to have access to additional capital under these facilities and will need to find alternative sources of financing until such time as Oral Paclitaxel is approved or will need to renegotiate these arrangements. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and it could spend the available financial resources much faster than expected and need to raise additional funds sooner than anticipated. Operations have been funded primarily through the sale of common stock, senior secured loans, and to a lesser extent, from convertible bond financing, revenue, and grant funding. Although we plan to raise additional funds or access additional funding via the Senior Credit Agreement and Revenue Interest Financing, these plans are subject to market conditions which are outside of our control and based on the satisfaction of future milestone funding conditions, and therefore cannot be deemed to be probable. There can be no assurance that such additional financing, if available, can be obtained on terms acceptable to us. If we are unable to obtain such additional financing, we would need to reevaluate our future operating plans.
Contractual Obligations
A summary of our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 is as follows:
Our operating and finance leases are principally for facilities and equipment. We currently lease office space in the U.S. and foreign countries to support our operations as a global organization. The operating leases in the above table include our several locations with the amounts committed by each location: (1) the rental of our global headquarters in the Conventus Center for Collaborative Medicine in Buffalo, NY; (2) the rental of our research and development facility in the IC Development Centre in Hong Kong; (3) the rental of the Commercial Platform headquarters in Chicago, IL; (4) the rental of our clinical research headquarters in Cranford, NJ; (5) the rental of our clinical data management center in Taipei, Taiwan; (6) the rental of our contract research organization throughout Latin America; (7) the rental of our Global Supply Chain distribution office in Houston, TX; (8) the rental of our Global Supply Chain API manufacturing facility in Chongqing, China; and (9) the rental of other facilities and equipment located mainly in Buffalo, NY. These locations represent $7.2 million, $0.6 million, $2.2 million, $0.2 million, $0.8 million, $0.3 million, $0.4 million, $0.4 million, and $2.6 million, respectively, of the total amounts committed. In addition to the minimum rental commitments on our operating leases we may also be required to pay amounts for taxes, insurance, maintenance and other operating expenses.
The long-term debt includes our senior secured loan, the mortgage assumed in connection with the acquisition of CDE, and the credit agreement with CQ. The finance lease obligations represent three leases of equipment in our 503B manufacturing facility outside of Buffalo, NY. The license fees in the above table represent the amount committed and accrued under in-license agreements for specialty drug products by the Commercial platform.
In addition, we have certain obligations under licensing arrangements with third parties contingent upon achieving various development, regulatory, and commercial milestones. Pursuant to our license agreement with Polytom, we may be required to make payments worth up to $44.0 million of our common stock or cash upon the occurrence of certain regulatory milestones related to a pegylated genetically modified human arginase, and make royalty payments representing a percentage of net sales of the licensed products. Pursuant to our license agreement with Avalon HepaPOC, we may be required to make payments worth up to $4.8 million of our common stock or cash upon the occurrence of certain regulatory and sales milestones related to the meter and strips for conduct of liver function tests in humans taking our oncology drugs and make royalty payments representing a percentage of aggregate net sales of the licensed product. Pursuant to the license agreement with XLifeSc, our 55% owned joint venture Axis Therapeutics Limited, we may be required to make cash payments worth up to $108.0 million upon the occurrence of certain regulatory milestones related to XLifeSc’s proprietary TCR-T technology, and make royalty payments representing a percentage of aggregate net income generated by sales of licensed products. Pursuant to our license agreements with Hanmi, we may be required to make equity payment of $24.0 million upon regulatory approval of a product within the Orasovery platform and make tiered royalty payments based on net sales of any product using the licensed intellectual property. These amounts are not included in the table above.
Under our partnerships with New York State and CQ, we are obligated to contribute to the building of manufacturing facilities in Dunkirk, NY and Chongqing, China. Pursuant to our arrangement with New York State, we are committed to bear the costs of the construction of the facility in Dunkirk, NY in excess of approximately $208.0 million, as described in Capital Expenditures above. Further, we are entitled to lease the facility and all equipment at a rate of $1.00 per year for an initial 10-year term and for the same rate if we elect to extend the lease for an additional 10-year term. We are responsible for all operating costs and expenses for the facility and are committed to spending $1.52 billion on operational expenses in our first 10-year term in the facility, and an additional $1.5 billion on operational expenses if we elect to extend the lease for a second 10-year term. Pursuant to our arrangement with CQ, the Finance Bureau of Banan District of Chongqing is responsible for investing in the construction of the API and formulation plants and completing renovation in accordance with U.S. cGMP standards, and we are required to commit capital of no less than $30 million, which can be used as working capital in the normal course of the business. As of December 31, 2020, we had contributed a total of $14.1 million of capital to our subsidiary. The remaining $15.9 million commitment is not included in the table above. We are allowed to lease the facility rent free, for the first 10-year term, with an option to extend the lease for an additional 10-year term, during which, if we are profitable, we will pay a monthly rent of 5 RMB per square meter of space occupied, or, we shall have the option to purchase the land and building. If we do not purchase the land and building after 20 years at the price described above, we shall have the option to lease the land and building with rental fee charged at market price of construction area. We are responsible for the costs of all equipment and technology for the facilities. Neither of these facilities in New York State and Chongqing, China were operational as of December 31, 2020 and the amounts under these agreements described above are not included in the table above.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the periods. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis, including but not limited to, estimating the useful lives of long-lived assets, assessing the impairment of long-lived assets, stock-based compensation expenses, and the realizability of deferred income tax assets. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, contractual milestones and other various factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Changes in the accounting estimates are likely to occur from period to period. Actual results could be significantly different from these estimates. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgment and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
1.
Oncology Innovation Platform
The Company out-licenses certain of its IP to other pharmaceutical companies in specific territories that allow the customer to use, develop, commercialize, or otherwise exploit the licensed IP. In accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“Topic 606”), the Company analyzes the contracts to identify its performance obligations within the contract. Most of the Company’s out-license arrangements contain multiple performance obligations and variable pricing. After the performance obligations are identified, the Company determines the transaction price, which generally includes upfront fees, milestone payments related to the achievement of developmental, regulatory, or commercial goals, and royalty payments on net sales of licensed products. The Company considers whether the transaction price is fixed or variable, and whether such consideration is subject to return. Variable consideration is only included in the transaction price to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. If any portion of the transaction price is constrained, it is excluded from the transaction price until the constraint no longer exists. The Company then allocates the transaction price to the performance obligation to which the consideration is related. Where a portion of the transaction price is received and allocated to continuing performance obligations under the terms of the arrangement, it is recorded as deferred revenue and recognized as revenue when (or as) the underlying performance obligation is satisfied.
The Company’s contracts may contain one or multiple promises, including the license of IP and development services. The licensed IP is capable of being distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the contract and is distinct within the context of the contract, as upon transfer of the IP, the customer is able to use and benefit from it, and the customer could obtain the development services from other parties. The Company also considers the economic and regulatory characteristics of the licensed IP and other promises in the contract to determine if it is a distinct performance obligation. The Company considers if the IP is modified or enhanced by other performance obligations through the life of the agreement and whether the customer is contractually or practically required to use updated IP. The IP licensed by the Company has been determined to be functional IP. The IP is not modified during the license period and therefore, the Company recognizes revenues from any portion of the transaction price allocated to the licensed IP when the license is transferred to the customer and they can benefit from the right to use the IP. The Company recognized $37.7 million in license revenue, net of $2.3 million value added tax (“VAT”), and $1.0 million in license revenue from two of the Company’s out-license arrangements for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company recognized revenue allocated to the licensed IP performance obligation upon transfer of the license of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other performance obligations included in most of the Company’s out-licensing agreements include performing development services to reach clinical and regulatory milestone events. The Company satisfies these performance obligations at a point-in-time, because the customer does not simultaneously receive and consume the benefits as the development occurs, the development does not create or enhance an asset controlled by the customer, and the development does not create an asset with no alternative use. The Company considers milestone payments to be variable consideration measured using the most likely amount method, as the entitlement to the consideration is contingent on the occurrence or nonoccurrence of future events. The Company allocates each variable milestone payment to the associated milestone performance obligation, as the variable payment relates directly to the Company’s efforts to satisfy the performance obligation and such allocation depicts the amount of consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled for satisfying the corresponding performance obligation. The Company re-evaluates the probability of achievement of such performance obligations and any related constraint and adjusts its estimate of the transaction price as appropriate. To date, no amounts have been constrained in the initial or subsequent assessments of the transaction price. The Company did not recognize revenue from other performance obligations included in the Company’s out-licensing agreements during the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company recognized revenue allocated to development performance obligations upon transfer to the customer of $20.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Certain out-license agreements include performance obligations to manufacture and provide drug product in the future for commercial sale when the licensed product is approved. For the commercial, sales-based royalties, the consideration is predominantly related to the licensed IP and is contingent on the customer’s subsequent sales to another commercial customer. Consequently, the sales- or usage-based royalty exception would apply. Revenue will be recognized for the commercial, sales-based milestones as the underlying sales occur.
The Company exercises significant judgment when identifying distinct performance obligations within its out-license arrangements, determining the transaction price, which often includes both fixed and variable considerations, and allocating the transaction price to the proper performance obligation. The Company did not use any other significant judgments related to out-licensing revenue during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
2.
Global Supply Chain Platform
The Company’s Global Supply Chain Platform manufactures API for use internally in its research and development activities as well as its clinical studies, and for sale to pharmaceutical customers globally. The Company generates additional revenue on this platform, by providing small to mid-scale cGMP manufacturing of clinical and commercial products for pharmaceutical and biotech companies and selling pharmaceutical products under 503B regulations set forth by the U.S. FDA.
Revenue earned by the Global Supply Platform is recognized when the Company has satisfied its performance obligation, which is the shipment or the delivery of drug products. The underlying contracts for these sales are generally purchase orders and the Company recognizes revenue at a point-in-time. Any remaining performance obligations related to product sales are the result of customer deposits and are reflected in the deferred revenue contract liability balance.
3.
Commercial Platform
The Company’s Commercial Platform generates revenue by distributing specialty products through independent pharmaceutical wholesalers. The wholesalers then sell to an end-user, normally a hospital, alternative healthcare facility, or an independent pharmacy, at a lower price previously established by the end-user and the Company. Upon the sale by the wholesaler to the end-user, the wholesaler will chargeback the difference, if any, between the original list price and price at which the product was sold to the end-user. The Company also offers cash discounts, which approximate 2.3% of the gross sales price, as an incentive for prompt customer payment, and, consistent with industry practice, the Company’s return policy permits customers to return products within a window of time before and after the expiration of product dating. Further, the Company offers contractual allowances, generally in the form of rebates or administrative fees, to certain wholesale customers, group purchasing organizations (“GPOs”), and end-user customers, consistent with pharmaceutical industry practices. Revenues are recorded net of provisions for variable consideration, including discounts, rebates, GPO allowances, price adjustments, returns, chargebacks, promotional programs and other sales allowances. Accruals for these provisions are presented in the consolidated financial statements as reductions in determining net sales and as a contra asset in accounts receivable, net (if settled via credit) and other current liabilities (if paid in cash). As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company’s total provision for chargebacks and other deductions included as a reduction of accounts receivable totaled $12.5 million and $14.4 million, respectively. The Company’s total provision for chargebacks and other revenue deductions was $89.3 million, $87.2 million, and $36.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
The Company exercises significant judgment in its estimates of the variable transaction price at the time of the sale and recognizes revenue when the performance obligation is satisfied. Factors that determine the final net transaction price include chargebacks, fees for service, cash discounts, rebates, returns, warranties, and other factors. The Company estimates all of these variables based on historical data obtained from previous sales finalized with the end-user customer on a product-by-product basis. At the time of sale, revenue is recorded net of each of these deductions. Through the normal course of business, the wholesaler will sell the product to the end-user, determining the actual chargeback, return products, and take advantage of cash discounts, charge fees for services, and claim warranties on products. The final transaction price per product is compared to the initial estimated net sale price and reviewed for accuracy. The final prices and other factors are immediately included in the Company’s historical data from which it will estimate the transaction price for future sales. The underlying contracts for these sales are generally purchase orders including a single performance obligation, generally the shipment or delivery of products and the Company recognizes this revenue at a point-in-time.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses represent costs associated with developing our proprietary drug candidates, our collaboration agreements for such drugs, and our ongoing clinical studies.
Clinical trial costs are a significant component of our research and development expenses. We have a history of contracting with third parties that perform various clinical trial activities on our behalf in the ongoing development of our drug candidates. Expenses related to clinical trials are accrued based on our estimates of the actual services performed by the third parties for the respective period. If the contracted amounts are revised or the scope of a contract is revised, we will modify the accruals accordingly on a prospective basis and will do so in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become reasonably certain.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In the normal course of business, we evaluate all new accounting pronouncements issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board, SEC, or other authoritative accounting bodies to determine the potential impact they may have on our Consolidated Financial Statements. Refer to Note 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 of this report for additional information about these recently issued accounting standards and their potential impact on our financial condition or results of operations.