ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
The following discussion of the financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements, which are based on assumptions about the future of the Company's business. The actual results could differ materially from those contained in the forward-looking statements. Please read “Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this report for additional information regarding forward-looking statements.
Company Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company seeking to discover and develop innovative medicines in areas of significant unmet medical need in oncology and infectious diseases, with a current focus on breast cancer, other breast conditions and COVID-19. Our drug under development for breast cancer and other breast conditions is Endoxifen which is being developed primarily in two settings: one to reduce tumor cell activity in breast cancer patients in the “window of opportunity” between diagnosis of breast cancer and surgery; and another for women with dense breast tissue to reduce the density. Our two COVID-19 drugs under development are AT-H201, to improve lung function of moderate to severely ill, hospitalized COVID-19 patients by inhalation; and AT-301, a nasal spray for COVID-19 patients for at-home use. Our business strategy is to advance our programs through clinical studies including with partners, and opportunistically add programs in areas of high unmet medical need through acquisition, collaboration, or internal development.
Summary of Leading Programs
Endoxifen for MBD. Mammographic breast density ("MBD") is an emerging public health issue affecting over 10 million women in the U.S. Studies conducted by others have shown that MBD increases the risk of developing breast cancer and that reducing MBD can reduce the incidence of breast cancer. We believe our proprietary oral Endoxifen may reduce MBD, based in part on our previous successful Phase 2 study of our topical Endoxifen. Endoxifen is an active metabolite of tamoxifen which is an FDA-approved drug to treat and prevent breast cancer in high risk women. Endoxifen has been studied in over 160 participants in Atossa-conducted clinical studies.
We contracted with Stockholm South General Hospital to conduct a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled Phase 2 study of our oral Endoxifen in pre-menopausal women with measurable MBD who will be dosed over six months. This study will evaluate safety, tolerability and efficacy of Endoxifen. The study is subject to approval by the European Medical Product Authority and ethics board. We expect to open this study in Stockholm soon after receiving all necessary regulatory approvals, provided COVID-19 restrictions permit patient recruitment. No assurance can be given that reduction in MBD is an approvable indication or that the regulators will approve opening the study in Sweden.
Endoxifen for Window of Opportunity. Once a woman is diagnosed with breast cancer, it can take several weeks for surgery to be scheduled so that the tumor can be removed through lumpectomy or mastectomy. During this time, without treatment the cancer typically continues to grow. We believe there is a compelling need for therapy with our Endoxifen in this neo-adjuvant or “window of opportunity” setting.
We recently completed a Phase 2 study in Australia in the window of opportunity which enrolled 7 newly-diagnosed patients with ER+ and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 negative ("HER2-") stage 1 or 2 invasive breast cancer, requiring mastectomy or lumpectomy. In February 2021, we concluded that the study produced substantially positive results and that continuing enrollment in the study would not be useful in advancing the program. We have therefore discontinued the study based in part on results from the first six patients which showed a statistically significant (p=0.031) reduction of about 74% in tumor cell proliferation with a reduction below 25% in all participants, as measured by Ki-67 (a recognized standard measurement of breast cancer cell proliferation). We now plan to seek guidance from the FDA on conducting a study in the United States. No assurance can be given that reduction in Ki-67 or any other biomarker in the window of opportunity is an approvable indication.
Compassionate Use of Endoxifen. We have supplied our oral Endoxifen to two patients under the FDA’s expanded access, or “compassionate use,” pathway. One patient has ER+ breast cancer and was not responding to tamoxifen. This patient has taken our Endoxifen, both in the window of opportunity and post-surgery for a total of more than 24 months. According to her physician, she has not had a recurrence of breast cancer, has not had treatment-related changes in periodic laboratory blood tests and the treatment has been well tolerated, including an absence of typically seen vasomotor symptoms (night sweats and hot flashes). The other patient has recurrent ovarian cancer. The patient underwent functional molecular genomic testing, using 3D tumor organoid cultures grown in the laboratory from the patient’s tumor. The organoid testing revealed that the combination of Endoxifen and alpelisib produced an exceptionally favorable tumor response. If the drug combination shows promise in this patient, we will consider conducting additional clinical studies in patients with ovarian cancer.
Under the FDA expanded access program, the use of our oral Endoxifen is restricted to the individual patient in the application. The expanded access studies are being conducted by others; our involvement is limited to supplying our Endoxifen. The results from single-patient expanded access programs does not imply success in a larger patient population.
AT-301. There are currently no FDA-approved drugs to treat COVID-19 at-home. AT-301 is our proprietary drug candidate intended for nasal administration in patients immediately following diagnosis of COVID-19 but who have not yet exhibited symptoms severe enough to require hospitalization. It is intended for at-home use to reduce symptoms of COVID-19 and to slow the infection rate so that a person’s immune system can more effectively fight COVID-19.
AT-301 is being developed with a nasal spray delivery mechanism because many COVID-19 patients are infected via the nasal passage. Our nasal spray formulation AT-301 is being designed to contain ingredients that can potentially block SARS-CoV-2 viral entry gene proteins in nasal epithelial cells by interfering with spike protein activation by host proteases, by masking receptor binding domains via electrostatic mechanisms, and by providing a generalized mucoadhesive epithelial barrier. In July 2020, we completed in vitro testing of AT-301 which showed that AT-301 inhibits SARS-CoV-2 infectivity of VERO cells in a laboratory culture.
In October 2020, we completed enrollment in a Phase 1 study of AT-301 which was a double-blinded, randomized, and placebo-controlled safety study of AT-301 nasal spray in 32 healthy adult subjects. An evaluation of the data indicated that there were no serious adverse events, no discontinuations, and only one of the subjects in the study experienced adverse events that were considered moderate in severity. We concluded that our AT-301 nasal spray was safe and well tolerated in this study. These results support advancing this program into a Phase 2 study. We recently received input from the FDA on this program and based in part on that input, we are now preparing to conduct an additional pre-clinical study. Following that, we expect to apply to the FDA to commence a Phase 2 study in the United States.
We may also develop our AT-301 nasal spray to potentially help prevent COVID-19 infection - particularly for people in high-risk environments, such as people living with an infected patient, people living and working in healthcare facilities, emergency responders or teachers.
AT-H201. AT-H201 is a proprietary combination of two drugs previously approved by the FDA to treat other diseases. It is intended to improve compromised lung function for moderate to severely ill, hospitalized COVID-19 patients by inhalation. In May 2020, we completed in vitro testing of AT-H201 which showed that the components of AT-H201 inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infectivity of VERO cells, which is a standard cell type being used to study infectivity of the coronavirus. The AT-H201 components were found to be at least four times more potent than Remdesivir and at least 20 times more potent than Hydroxychloroquine. Potency was measured by microscopic examination of the cytopathic effect caused by SARS-CoV-2 in VERO cells. We received input from the FDA on potential pathways to develop AT-H201 and the FDA requested that we provide, among other things, additional pre-clinical and other information on AT-H201. We have also applied to the regulatory authorities to conduct the initial clinical study of AT-H201 in Australia.
Impact of the Novel Coronavirus
The continued spread of the COVID-19 pandemic is affecting the United States and global economies and may affect the Company’s operations and those of third parties on which the Company relies, including causing possible disruptions in the supply of the Company’s Endoxifen, AT-H201, AT-301 and the conduct of current and future clinical trials. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic may affect the operations of the U.S. FDA and other health authorities including similar entities/agencies in Sweden and Australia, which could result in delays in meetings, reviews and approvals. The evolving COVID-19 pandemic could also directly or indirectly impact the pace of enrollment in our clinical trials for at least the next several months and possibly longer as patients may avoid or may not be able to travel to healthcare facilities and physicians’ offices except for a health emergency. Such facilities and offices may also be required to focus limited resources on non-clinical trial activities, including treatment of COVID-19 patients, and may not be available, in whole or in part, for clinical trial activities related to the Company's products under development. Additionally, while the potential economic impact brought by, and the duration of, the COVID-19 pandemic is difficult to assess or predict, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global financial markets may reduce the Company’s ability to access capital, which could negatively impact the Company’s short-term and long-term liquidity. The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is highly uncertain and subject to change. We do not yet know the full extent of potential delays or impacts on our business, financing or clinical trial activities or on healthcare systems or the global economy as a whole. However, these effects could have a material adverse impact on the Company’s liquidity, capital resources, operations, financial position and business and those of the third parties on which we rely. We have not experienced any delay in drug supply for our ongoing and planned clinical studies, including studies of Endoxifen, AT-301 and AT-H201. We anticipate commencing the MBD Endoxifen trial soon after receiving all necessary regulatory approvals; subject to delays in enrollment due to COVID-19 disruptions, which could take several months or longer. We will continue to monitor future enrollment in studies for potential restrictions on site visits, mammograms or the impositions of new restrictions on trials as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Research and Development Phase
We are in the research and development phase and are not currently marketing any products. We do not anticipate generating revenue unless and until we develop and launch our pharmaceutical programs.
Commercial Lease Agreements
On November 1, 2018, the Company entered into an operating lease to pay $3,660 monthly rent for a term of 22 months with WW 107 Spring Street LLC to lease office space at 107 Spring Street, Seattle, Washington. In May 2020, we amended our office lease and extended the expiration from August 31, 2020 to February 28, 2021. In the first quarter of 2021, the Company entered into an operating lease to pay monthly rent of $750 for a term of 12 months.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and judgments, including those described below. We base our estimates on our historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results and experiences may differ materially from these estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid you in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results and affect the more significant judgments and estimates that we use in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Research and Development
Research and development ("R&D") costs are generally expensed as incurred. R&D expenses include, for example, manufacturing expenses for our drugs under development, expenses associated with clinical trials and associated salaries and benefits. R&D expenses also include an estimated allocation of the CEO's salary and related benefits including non-cash stock-based compensation expense based on time devoted to R&D.
Stock-Based Payments
We follow the provisions of ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation, which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all stock-based payment awards made to employees, non-employee directors, and consultants, including employee stock options. Stock compensation expense based on the grant date’s fair value was estimated in accordance with the provisions of ASC 718 and is recognized as an expense over the requisite service period with forfeitures recognized when they occur.
The fair value of each option grant is estimated using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires assumptions regarding the expected volatility of our stock options, the expected life of the options, an expectation regarding future dividends on our common stock, and estimation of an appropriate risk-free interest rate. Our expected common stock price volatility assumption is based upon the volatility of our stock price. The expected life assumption for stock option grants was based upon the simplified method provided for under ASC 718-10, which averages the contractual term of the options of ten years with the average vesting term of one to four years. The dividend yield assumption of zero is based upon the fact that we have never paid cash dividends and presently have no intention of paying cash dividends in the future. The risk-free interest rate used for each grant was based upon prevailing short-term interest rates over the expected life of the options.
Financial Instruments with Characteristics of Both Liabilities and Equity
During December 2020, we issued certain financial instruments, including warrants to purchase common stock, which have characteristics of both liability and equity. Financial instruments such as warrants that are classified as liabilities are fair valued upon issuance and are remeasured at fair value at subsequent reporting periods with the resulting change in fair value recorded in “change in fair value of common stock warrants”. The fair value of warrants is estimated using valuation models that require the input of subjective assumptions including stock price, strike price, stock price volatility, expected life, an expectation regarding future dividends on our common stock, and estimation of an appropriate risk-free interest rate.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue and Cost of Revenue:
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we have no source of sustainable revenue and no associated cost of revenue.
Operating Expenses: Total operating expenses were $14,607,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, which is a decrease of $2,658,000 or 15%, from the year ended December 31, 2019. Operating expenses for 2020 consisted of research and development ("R&D") expenses of $6,608,000 and general and administrative ("G&A") expenses of $7,999,000. Operating expenses for 2019 consisted of R&D expenses of $6,645,000, and G&A expenses of $10,620,000. The basis for the decreased operating expenses in 2020 is explained below.
Research and Development Expenses: R&D expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, were $6,608,000, a decrease of $37,000 or 1% from total R&D expenses in 2019 of $6,645,000. The decrease in R&D expense is attributed primarily to a decrease in stock-based compensation of approximately $2,214,000, which is a non-cash charge, offset by an increase in salaries of approximately $428,000, professional fees and clinical trials expenses of approximately $1,696,000, as compared to the same period in 2019. We expect our R&D expenses to increase into 2021 as we seek to commence a study of AT-H201, complete a preclinical and commence a Phase 1 study of AT-301, launch a Phase 2 clinical trial of Endoxifen in women with high breast density, and continue the development of other indications and therapeutics.
General and Administrative Expenses: G&A expenses were $7,999,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $2,621,000, or 25% from the total G&A expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019, of $10,620,000. The decrease in G&A expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, is mainly attributed to a decrease in stock-based compensation of approximately $3,610,000, which is a non-cash charge, offset by an increase in legal fees of approximately $507,000, professional fees of approximately $169,000 and insurance costs of approximately $268,000 compared to the same period in 2019. G&A expenses consist primarily of personnel and related benefit costs, facilities, professional services, insurance, and public company related expenses.
Warrant Financing Costs and Change in Fair Value of Common Stock Warrants: The December 11, 2020 financing including the overallotment on December 28, 2020, included the issuance of common stock liability warrants. The Company incurred financing costs associated with these common stock liability warrants of $938,794 upon issuance. The Company also recorded changes in the fair value of the liability warrants during the year ended December 31, 2020 of $2,332,567. There were no common stock liability warrants issued during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income taxes: We have incurred net operating losses from inception; we did not record an income tax benefit for our incurred losses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, due to uncertainty regarding utilization of our net operating carryforwards and due to our history of losses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company has incurred net losses and negative operating cash flows since inception. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a net loss of approximately $17.8 million and used approximately $11.6 million of cash in operating activities. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had approximately $39.6 million in cash and cash equivalents and working capital of approximately $27.1 million. From January 2021 through March 24, 2021, we have raised an additional $102.4 million in cash. We believe we have sufficient cash to fund our projected operating requirements into 2024 depending on the timing and extent of the Company’s clinical trials.
Cash Flows
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of $39.7 million.
Net Cash Flows from Operating Activities: Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $12,509,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $2,442,000, or 27%, compared to net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 of approximately $9,128,000. The increase in the 2020 period as compared to 2019 resulted primarily from a decrease in stock-based compensation of approximately $4,083,000, a decrease of approximately $1,742,000 of the fair value of the stock-based compensation liability, an increase in prepaid and other assets of approximately $1,235,000; offset by the change in the fair value of the common stock warrant liability of approximately $2,333,000, an increase in warrant financing expense of approximately $939,000, and increased spending on accounts payable of approximately $1,356,000.
Net Cash Flows from Investing Activities: Net cash used in investing activities was approximately $9,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 an increase of $1,000 or 13%, compared to net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 of approximately $8,000.
Net Cash Flows from Financing Activities: Net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $38,552,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of approximately $27,215,000, or 240%, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of approximately $11,337,000, for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company sold shares of common stock under ATMs for net proceeds of $4,665,000, issued common stock and warrants for net proceeds of $28,954,000 and issued of Series C convertible preferred stock and warrants for net proceeds of approximately $4,947,000. The 2019 financing activity of $11,337,000 was cash received from the exercise of approximately 2.8 million of the warrants issued in the May 2018 financing.
Funding Requirements
We expect to incur ongoing operating losses for the foreseeable future as we continue to develop our planned therapeutic programs including related clinical studies and other programs in the pipeline. We expect that our existing resources will be sufficient to fund our planned operations for the next four years from the date of this report.
If we are unable to raise additional capital when needed, however, we could be forced to curtail or cease operations. Our future capital uses and requirements will depend on the time and expenses needed to begin and continue clinical trials for our new drug developments. As mentioned earlier, the COVID-19 outbreak could adversely impact the timing and enrollment of our clinical trials.
Additional funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. The continued spread of COVID-19 and uncertain market conditions may limit our ability to access capital. In addition, the terms of any financing may adversely affect the holdings or the rights of our stockholders. For example, if we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities or by selling debt securities, if convertible, further dilution to our existing stockholders would result. To the extent our capital resources are insufficient to meet our future capital requirements, we will need to finance our future cash needs through public or private equity offerings, collaboration agreements, debt financings or licensing arrangements.
If adequate funds are not available, we may be required to terminate, significantly modify or delay our development programs, reduce our planned commercialization efforts, or obtain funds through collaborators that may require us to relinquish rights to our technologies or product candidates that we might otherwise seek to develop or commercialize independently. Further, we may elect to raise additional funds even before we need them if we believe the conditions for raising capital are favorable.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not currently have, nor have we ever had, any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. In addition, we do not engage in trading activities involving non-exchange traded contracts.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
On January 1, 2020, we adopted Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") No. 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework-Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement, to improve the effectiveness of disclosures. The amendments remove, modify, and add certain disclosure requirements in Topic 820, “Fair Value Measurement.” The amendments on changes in unrealized gains and losses, the range and weighted average of significant unobservable inputs used to develop Level 3 fair value measurements, and the narrative description of measurement uncertainty should be applied prospectively for only the most recent interim or annual period presented in the initial fiscal year of adoption. All other amendments should be applied retrospectively to all periods presented upon their effective date. The adoption had no impact our consolidated financial statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") issued ASU No. 2020-06, Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity's Own Equity Topic 815 which simplifies the accounting for certain financial instruments with characteristics of liabilities and equity, including convertible instruments and contracts on an entity’s own equity. The guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning on or after December 15, 2023, with early adoption permitted, but not earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. We plan to implement this ASU effective January 1, 2021 using the modified retrospective approach. Upon adoption we expect to record a cumulative adjustment to beginning stockholders' equity in the amount of $13,003,075 to reclassify the common stock warrant liability to Stockholders' Equity.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes, (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes, which amends the existing guidance relating to accounting for income taxes. This ASU is intended to simplify the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles of accounting for income taxes and to improve the consistent application of U.S. GAAP for other areas of accounting for income taxes by clarifying and amending existing guidance. This ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. We do not expect that the adoption of this new guidance will have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.