ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
(Dollar and share amounts referenced in this Item 7 are in thousands, except per share amounts.)
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes thereto contained in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” to provide an understanding of our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows. This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. The actual results may differ from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including but not limited to those set forth under Item 1A “Risk Factors,” the cautionary statement regarding forward-looking statements at the beginning of Part I and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 compared to December 31, 2018
For a comparison of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 24, 2020.
Overview
We are a leading innovator in treatments for atrial fibrillation (Afib) and left atrial appendage (LAA) management. We believe that we are currently the market leader in the surgical treatment of Afib. Our Isolator Synergy System is approved by FDA for the treatment of persistent and long-standing persistent Afib concomitant to other open-heart surgical procedures. All of our other ablation devices are cleared for sale in the United States under FDA 510(k) clearances, including our other radio frequency (RF) and cryoablation products, which are indicated for the ablation of cardiac tissue and/or the treatment of cardiac arrhythmias. In addition, certain of our cryoablation probes are cleared for managing pain by temporarily ablating peripheral nerves. Our AtriClip products are 510(k)-cleared with an indication for the exclusion of the LAA, performed under direct visualization and in conjunction with other cardiac surgical procedures. The LARIAT® system is cleared for soft tissue ligation. Several of our products are currently being studied to expand labeling claims or to support indications specifically for the treatment of Afib. Many of our products bear the CE mark and may be commercially distributed throughout the member states of the European Union and other countries that comply with or mirror the Medical Device Directive. Certain products are also available in select Asia-Pacific countries. We anticipate that substantially all of our revenue for the foreseeable future will relate to products we currently sell, or are in the process of developing.
We sell our products to medical centers through our direct sales force in the United States and in certain international markets, such as Germany, France, the United Kingdom and the Benelux region. We also sell our products to distributors who in turn sell our products to medical centers in other international markets. Our business is primarily transacted in U.S. Dollars with the exception of transactions with our European customers, which are transacted primarily in the Euro or the British Pound.
The challenging environment resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic adversely impacted our 2020 results of operations and financial condition. We experienced a significant decrease in demand for our products as non-emergent procedures are being indeterminately deferred in order to preserve resources for COVID-19 patients and caregivers and to protect patients from potential exposure to COVID-19. In the second half of 2020, we began to see some hospitals resuming elective procedures although do not believe that most hospitals were operating at the same levels as they had historically. We continue to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and believe the effect on the Company’s business differs by geography and procedure type.
We adjusted our operating plan and expect to continuously evaluate and as may be necessary, amend our operating plan as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We have elected to delay certain capital investments, and implemented other expense-reduction measures, including ceasing non-essential travel and conference activity, and suspending work on certain research and development projects. Adjustments to the operating plan did not include temporary or permanent reductions in headcount or to non-executive employee compensation. However, we are unable to ensure the operating plan adjustments we have made will be sufficient or sustained due to the inherent uncertainty of the unprecedented and rapidly evolving situation. We strengthened our liquidity position through a public offering and sale of our common stock. In May 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 4,574 shares of common stock and received net proceeds of $188,958.
Despite the challenging environment of the COVID-19 pandemic, we continued to build on our strategic initiatives of product innovation, investing in clinical science and providing training and education. Throughout 2020, we conducted several meetings with FDA as they review our PMA submission for the EPi-Sense system, and we continue to actively work with FDA to complete the regulatory process. In November 2020, we submitted our responses to FDA, seeking PMA approval of the EPi-Sense system for an indication for treatment of symptomatic, drug-refractory, long-standing persistent atrial fibrillation, when augmented with an endocardial ablation catheter. AtriCure is currently waiting for feedback from FDA. We also made meaningful progress on the aMAZE IDE trial, continuing twelve-month post treatment follow-up with patients. We have not yet experienced a significant delay in patient follow-up. In addition to the progress in clinical science initiatives, we are also progressing towards 510(k) clearance of the
new ENCOMPASS® clamp and preparing for subsequent market launch. Our professional education and marketing teams have adapted to the pandemic by offering online and mobile trainings for physicians.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 we reported annual revenues of $206,531, a decrease of 10.5% when compared to our prior year. Our net loss for fiscal year 2020 was $48,155 as compared to $35,194 for fiscal year 2019, primarily as a result of our decrease in revenues as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. See the “Results of Operations” section below for additional analysis of our 2020 results.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, our results of operations expressed as dollar amounts and as percentages of total revenue:
Revenue. Total revenue decreased 10.5% (10.7% on a constant currency basis) due to the deferral of non-emergent procedures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Revenue from customers in the United States decreased $16,585, or 8.9%, and revenue from international customers decreased $7,691, or 17.1% (18.3% on a constant currency basis). Sales in the United States declined across all product categories. Open ablation sales decreased $4,806, or 6.0% minimally invasive (MIS) ablation sales decreased $9,195, or 26.4% and appendage management sales decreased $1,185, or 1.7%. The more severe decline in MIS ablation sales reflects the typically non-emergent nature of these procedures. However, both the AtriClip Flex·V® LAA Exclusion System (included in appendage management sales) and cryoSPHERE probe (included in open ablation sales) continued to grow in volume in 2020 despite the continued pressure of the COVID-19 pandemic. International revenue declined in both open ablation and MIS ablation products throughout our major European and Asia markets as a result of the global pandemic, offset by increases in the appendage management product line driven from increased volume of the AtriClip line.
Revenue reported on a constant currency basis is a non-GAAP measure and is calculated by applying previous period foreign currency (Euro) exchange rates, which are determined by the average daily Euro to Dollar exchange rate, to each of the comparable periods. Revenue is analyzed on a constant currency basis to better measure the comparability of results between periods. Because changes in foreign currency exchange rates have a non-operating impact on revenue, we believe that evaluating growth in revenue on a constant currency basis provides an additional and meaningful assessment of revenue to both management and investors.
Cost of revenue and gross margin. Cost of revenue decreased $3,250 driven primarily by reductions in sales. Partially offsetting the decline in cost of revenue from reduced sales are charges during the second quarter as a result of production volumes below normal operating levels and continued absorption of SentreHEART operations acquired in August 2019.
Research and development expenses. Research and development expenses increased $1,840, or 4.5%. The increase in research and development expenses is a result of $1,156 increase in share-based compensation and $777 increase in clinical activity primarily driven by the aMAZE IDE clinical trial. Increases in product development project costs offset declines in regulatory submissions and filing fees.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $11,755, or 7.2%. Personnel costs decreased $14,726 due to a decline in variable compensation and travel as a result of decreased sales and travel restrictions. Trade show, marketing and meeting costs decreased $4,384 as activities moved to remote platforms. Other decreases in
expenses included $3,840 of acquisition-related expenses, $1,179 of professional services fees, $533 in bad debt expense and $322 of recruiting fees. These decreases were offset by $6,000 expense recorded for the accrual of the value of the legal settlement with the former nContact stockholders, increase of $3,001 in share-based compensation and $4,559 fluctuation in the contingent consideration liability adjustment. See Note 12 - Commitments and Contingencies in the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of the nContact legal settlement. See Note 3 - Fair Value in the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of contingent consideration liabilities.
Other income and expense. Other income and expense consists primarily of net interest expense and foreign currency transaction gains and losses. Net interest expense was $3,784 for 2020 and $1,713 for 2019. Interest expense relates to our term loan and finance lease obligations, as well as the amortization of financing costs. Interest income reflects returns on our investments, including gains and losses on investments sold during the period. The increase in net interest expense was driven by $1,297 lower interest income from lower investment yields and $774 increase in interest expense reflecting higher borrowings on the term loan due to the August 2019 amendment for the SentreHEART acquisition.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments of $258,396. All cash equivalents and investments and most of our operating cash are held in United States financial institutions. A minor portion of our cash is held in foreign banks for the operation of our international subsidiaries. Our outstanding debt was $60,000 and we had unused borrowing capacity of $8,750 under our revolving credit facility. We had net working capital of $257,600 and an accumulated deficit of $330,352 as of December 31, 2020.
Cash flows used in operating activities. We used $19,869 of net cash in operating activities during 2020, reflecting our net loss of $48,155 offset by $34,925 of non-cash expenses and a net decrease in cash used related to changes in operating assets and liabilities of $6,639. Non-cash expenses primarily included $22,642 in share-based compensation and $9,548 of depreciation and amortization. The net decrease in cash used related to changes in operating assets and liabilities was driven by the impact of COVID-19, including lower customer receivables from reduced sales volumes; increased investment in inventories to protect against potential future production disruptions; and lower payables and accrued liabilities from lower variable compensation and reduced operating activities.
Cash flows used in investing activities. We used $156,198 of net cash in investing activities during 2020, reflecting $151,739 investment activity in available-for-sale securities largely stemming from the proceeds of our May 2020 equity offering and investment of $5,259 in property and equipment to support our new product introductions and maintenance and expansion of our existing manufacturing and distribution facilities.
Cash flows provided by financing activities. We generated $189,392 of net cash from financing activities during 2020. This was primarily a result of the $188,958 net proceeds from the May 2020 public stock offering. Equity compensation plan activity included $10,835 proceeds from stock option exercises and $3,330 proceeds for the issuance of common stock under our employee stock purchase plan, offset by $13,029 shares repurchased for payment of taxes on stock awards.
Credit facility. Our Loan and Security Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank (SVB), as amended, (Loan Agreement), provides for a $60,000 term loan and a $20,000 revolving line of credit. The term loan and revolving credit facility both mature or expire, as applicable, on August 1, 2024. Principal payments on the term loan are to be made ratably commencing March 1, 2021 through the loan’s maturity date. If the Company meets certain conditions, as specified in the Loan Agreement, the commencement of the term loan principal payments may be deferred by an additional six months. Our term loan accrues interest at the greater of the Prime Rate or 5.00%, plus 0.75% and is subject to an additional 3.00% fee on the $60,000 term loan principal amount, payable at maturity or upon acceleration or prepayment of the term loan. Our borrowing availability under the revolving credit facility is based on the lesser of $20,000 or a borrowing base calculation as defined by the Loan Agreement. Borrowing availability under the revolving credit facility is further limited by a cap on total debt outstanding under the Loan Agreement, including outstanding letters of credit, of $70,000. As of December 31, 2020, we had no borrowings under the revolving credit facility, and we had borrowing availability of $8,750. The Loan Agreement also provides for certain prepayment and early termination fees only if the term loan is repaid before August 2024 and establishes a minimum liquidity ratio and dividend restrictions, along with other customary terms and conditions. Specified assets have been pledged as collateral. We are in compliance with the covenants of the Loan Agreement as of December 31, 2020.
On February 8, 2021, the Company and SVB entered into an amendment to the Loan Agreement which modified conditions which allow the Company to request to defer the term loan principal payments an additional six months, commencing in September 2021, if such conditions are so satisfied. Subsequent to the amendment, the conditions were satisfied by the Company and the Company requested such deferral. As a result, borrowings outstanding under the existing term loan agreement have been classified to reflect the deferral of principal payments in the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020.
Our corporate headquarters lease agreement requires a $1,250 letter of credit which renews annually and remains outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
Uses of liquidity and capital resources. Our future capital requirements depend on a number of factors, including market acceptance of our current and future products; the resources we devote to developing and supporting our products; future expenses to expand and support our sales and marketing efforts; costs relating to changes in regulatory policies or laws that affect our operations and cost of filings; costs associated with clinical trials and securing regulatory approval for new products; costs associated with acquiring and integrating businesses; costs associated with prosecuting, defending and enforcing our intellectual property rights; and possible acquisitions and joint ventures. Global economic turmoil, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, has evolved rapidly over the past year and may continue to adversely impact our revenue, thus having an adverse impact on our operating results and financial condition. We continue to evaluate additional measures to maintain financial flexibility, and we will continue to closely monitor our liquidity and capital resources through the disruption caused by COVID-19.
We have on file with the SEC a shelf registration statement which allows us to sell any combination of senior or subordinated debt securities, common stock, preferred stock, warrants, depository shares and units in one or more offerings should we choose to do so in the future. We expect to maintain the effectiveness of this shelf registration statement for the foreseeable future. In May 2020, we completed a public offering of 4,574 shares of our common stock, and received net proceeds of $188,958 after underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs.
We believe that our current cash, cash equivalents and investments, along with the cash we expect to generate or use for operations or access via our term loan and revolving line of credit, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for working capital and capital expenditures for at least the next twelve months. The SentreHEART acquisition provides for contingent consideration to be paid upon PMA approval before December 2023 and CPT reimbursement before December 2026. Subject to the terms and conditions of the SentreHEART merger agreement, such contingent consideration will be paid in AtriCure common stock and cash, up to a specified maximum number of shares. Over the next twelve months, we do not expect our cash requirements to include significant payments of contingent consideration based on terms of the acquisition agreement and progress towards achievement of the related milestones.
If our sources of cash are insufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements, we may seek to sell additional equity or debt securities or obtain a revised or additional credit facility. The sale of additional equity or convertible debt securities could result in dilution to our stockholders. If additional funds are raised through the issuance of debt securities, these securities could have rights senior to those associated with our common stock and could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. Finally, our term loan agreement and revolving line of credit require compliance with certain financial and other covenants. If we are unable to maintain these financing arrangements, we may be required to reduce the scope of our planned research and development, clinical activities and selling, training, education and marketing efforts.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table sets forth our approximate aggregate obligations at December 31, 2020 for future payments under contracts and other contingent commitments:
_________________________
(1)Long-term debt represents principal repayments related to our term loan. See Note 10 - Indebtedness regarding applicable interest and fee payments.
(2)Finance leases consist of principal and interest payments related to our Mason, Ohio headquarters and computer equipment. See Note 11 - Leases.
(3)Represents lease commitments under various operating leases, primarily for office and warehouse space. See Note 11 - Leases.
(4)Represents obligations for royalty agreements ranging from 3% to 5% of specified product sales estimated using 2020 sales. Royalty obligations beyond one year have not been included as payments are based on specified product sales and not estimable at this time. See Note 12 - Commitments and Contingencies to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
We have contractual obligations for contingent consideration payments related to the SentreHEART acquisition. Subject to the terms and conditions of the SentreHEART merger agreement, such contingent consideration will be paid in AtriCure common stock and cash, up to a specified maximum number of shares. The SentreHEART milestones expire on December 31, 2023 and December 31, 2026. See Note 3 - Fair Value.
Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangements
We are not a party to any off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, sales or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Inflation
Inflation has not had a significant impact on our historical operations, and we do not expect it to have a significant impact on our results of operations or financial condition in the foreseeable future.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses, and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. On a periodic basis, we evaluate our estimates, using authoritative pronouncements, historical experience and other assumptions as the basis for making estimates. Actual results could differ from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have described our significant accounting policies in Note 1 - Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K.
We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition- Revenue is generated primarily from the sale of medical devices. We recognize revenue in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those devices when control of promised devices is transferred to customers. At contract inception, we assess the products promised in contracts with customers and identify a performance obligation for each promise to transfer to the customer a product that is distinct. Our devices are distinct and represent performance obligations. These performance obligations are satisfied and revenue is recognized at a point in time upon shipment or delivery of products. Sales of devices are categorized as follows: open ablation, minimally invasive ablation, appendage management and valve tools. Shipping and handling activities performed after control over products transfers to customers are considered activities to fulfill
the promise to transfer the products rather than as separate promises to customers. Products are sold primarily through our direct sales force and through distributors in certain international markets. Terms of sale are generally consistent for both end-users and distributors, except that payment terms are generally net 30 days for end-users and net 60 days for distributors, with limited exceptions. We do not maintain any post-shipping obligations to customers. No installation, calibration or testing of products is performed by the Company subsequent to shipment in order to render products operational.
We account for revenue in accordance with FASB ASC 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers”. Significant judgments and estimates involved in the Company’s recognition of revenue include the estimation of a provision for returns. We estimate the provision for sales returns and allowances using the expected value method based on historical experience and other factors that we believe could impact our expected returns, including defective or damaged products and invoice adjustments. In the normal course of business, we generally do not accept product returns unless a product is defective as manufactured, and we do not provide customers with the right to a refund.
Allowance for Credit Losses on Accounts Receivable-We evaluate the expected credit losses of accounts receivable, considering historical credit losses, current customer-specific information and other relevant factors when determining the allowance. An increase to the allowance for credit losses results in a corresponding increase in selling, general and administrative expenses. We charge off uncollectible receivables against the allowance when all attempts to collect the receivable have failed. Our history of write-offs has not been significant.
Inventories-Our inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value based on the first-in, first-out cost method (FIFO) and consist of raw materials, work in process and finished goods. Our industry is characterized by rapid product development and frequent new product introductions. Uncertain timing of product approvals, variability in product launch strategies and variation in product use all impact inventory reserves for excess, obsolete and expired products. An increase to inventory reserves results in a corresponding increase in cost of revenue. Inventories are written off against the reserve when they are physically disposed.
Property and Equipment-We state property and equipment at cost less accumulated depreciation. Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method and applied over the estimated useful lives of the assets. Included in property and equipment are generators and other capital equipment (such as our RF and cryo generators) that are placed with direct customers that use our disposable products. These generators and other capital equipment are depreciated over a period of one to three years, which approximates their useful lives, and such depreciation is included in cost of revenue. We estimate the useful lives of this equipment based on anticipated usage by our customers and the timing and impact of our expected new technology rollouts. To the extent we experience changes in the usage of this equipment or the introductions of new technologies, the estimated useful lives of this equipment may change in a future period.
IPR&D Intangible Asset-In Process Research and Development (IPR&D) represents the value of acquired technology which has not yet reached technological feasibility. The primary basis for determining the technological feasibility is obtaining specific regulatory approvals. IPR&D is accounted for as an indefinite-lived intangible asset until completion or abandonment of the IPR&D project. Upon completion of the development project, the IPR&D will be amortized over its estimated useful life. The IPR&D asset represents an estimate of the fair value of the PMA that may result from the CONVERGE IDE and aMAZE IDE clinical trials. We review intangible assets for impairment annually on October 1, or more often if impairment indicators are present, using our best estimates based on reasonable and supportable assumptions and projections of expected future cash flows. If the IPR&D project is abandoned or regulatory approvals are not obtained, we may have a full or partial impairment charge related to the IPR&D, calculated as the excess carrying value of the IPR&D assets over the estimated fair value.
Goodwill- Goodwill represents the excess of purchase price over the fair value of the net assets acquired in business combinations. Our goodwill is accounted for in a single reporting unit representing the Company as a whole. We test goodwill for impairment annually on October 1 or more often if impairment indicators are present. The impairment test requires a comparison of the estimated fair value of the reporting unit to the carrying value of the assets and liabilities of that reporting unit. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit, the carrying value of the reporting unit’s goodwill is reduced to its fair value through an impairment charge to adjust the goodwill balance. The estimates of fair value and the determination of reporting units requires management judgment.
Share-Based Employee Compensation-We account for share-based compensation for all share-based payment awards, including stock options, restricted stock awards, restricted stock units, performance share awards, and stock purchases related to an employee stock purchase plan, based on their estimated fair values. We estimate the fair value of time-based options on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model (Black-Scholes model). Our determination of fair value of share-based payment awards is affected by our stock price, as well as assumptions regarding a number of subjective variables. These variables include but are not limited to our expected stock price volatility over the term of the awards and actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviors. The value of the portion of the awards that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as expense over the requisite service periods in our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss.
We estimate the fair value of restricted stock awards, restricted stock units and performance share awards based upon the grant date closing market price of our common stock. The estimated fair value of the performance share awards may be adjusted over the performance period based on estimates of performance target achievement.
We also have an employee stock purchase plan (ESPP) which is available to all eligible employees as defined by the plan document. Under the ESPP, shares of our common stock may be purchased at a discount. We estimate the number of shares to be purchased under the ESPP at the beginning of the purchase period and calculate estimated compensation expense using the Black-Scholes model based upon the fair value of the stock at the beginning of the purchase period. Compensation expense is recognized over each purchase period, and expense is adjusted at the time of stock purchase.
Contingent Consideration-Contingent consideration arrangements obligate the Company to pay former shareholders of acquired companies certain amounts if specified future events occur or conditions are met, such as the achievement of certain regulatory milestones or reimbursement milestones. We measure such liabilities using unobservable inputs by applying the probability-weighted scenario method. Various key assumptions, such as the probability and timing of achievement of the agreed milestones, are used in the determination of fair value of contingent consideration arrangements and are not observable in the market. Subsequent revisions to key assumptions, which impact the estimated fair value of contingent consideration liabilities, are reflected in selling, general and administrative expenses.
Income Taxes-Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. We measure deferred income tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred income tax assets and liabilities from changes in tax rates is recognized in the period that includes the enactment date.
Our estimate of the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets requires us to make significant estimates and judgments about our future operating results. Deferred income tax assets are reduced by valuation allowances if, based on the consideration of all available evidence, it is more-likely-than-not that some portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. Significant weight is given to evidence that can be objectively verified. We evaluate deferred income tax assets on an annual basis to determine if valuation allowances are required by considering all available evidence. Deferred income tax assets are realized by having sufficient future taxable income to allow the related tax benefits to reduce taxes otherwise payable. The sources of taxable income that may be available to realize the benefit of deferred tax assets are future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, future taxable income, exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards and tax planning strategies that are both prudent and feasible. In evaluating whether to record a valuation allowance, the applicable accounting standards deem that the existence of cumulative losses in recent years is a significant piece of objectively verifiable negative evidence that must be overcome by objectively verifiable positive evidence to avoid the need to record a valuation allowance. We have recorded a valuation allowance against substantially all net deferred income tax assets as it is more-likely-than-not that the benefit of such deferred income tax assets will not be recognized in future periods.
We believe our critical accounting policies regarding revenue recognition, allowance for credit losses on accounts receivable, inventories, property and equipment, IPR&D intangible asset, goodwill, share-based employee compensation, contingent consideration and income taxes affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. We base our judgments and estimates on historical experience, current conditions and other reasonable factors.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 - Recent Accounting Pronouncements to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
‎