ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Overview
We develop and manufacture products primarily for medical applications. We market components to other equipment manufacturers for incorporation in their products and sell finished devices to physicians, hospitals, clinics and other treatment centers. Our medical products primarily serve the fluid delivery, cardiovascular and ophthalmology markets. Our other medical and non-medical products include valves and inflation devices used in marine and aviation safety products. In 2020, approximately 42 percent of our sales were outside the United States.
Our products are used in a wide variety of applications by numerous customers. We encounter competition in all of our markets and compete primarily on the basis of product quality, price, engineering, customer service and delivery time.
Our business strategy is to provide hospitals, physicians and other healthcare providers with the tools they need to improve the lives of the patients they serve. To do so, we provide a broad selection of products in the areas of our expertise. We have diverse product lines serving primarily the fluid delivery, cardiovascular and ophthalmic markets, and this diversity has served us well as we encounter changing market conditions. R&D efforts are focused on improving current products and developing highly-engineered products that meet customer needs and serve niche markets with meaningful sales potential. Proposed new products may be subject to regulatory clearance or approval prior to commercialization and the time period for introducing a new product to the marketplace can be unpredictable. We also focus on controlling costs by investing in modern manufacturing technologies and controlling purchasing processes. We have been successful in consistently generating cash from operations and have used that cash to reduce or eliminate indebtedness, to fund capital expenditures, to make investments, to repurchase stock and to pay dividends.
Our strategic objective is to further enhance our position in our served markets by:
·
Focusing on customer needs;
·
Expanding existing product lines and developing new products;
·
Maintaining a culture of controlling cost; and
·
Preserving and fostering a collaborative, entrepreneurial management structure.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we reported revenues of $147.6 million, operating income of $35.7 million and net income of $32.1 million.
Results of Operations
Our net income was $32.1 million, or $17.49 per basic and $17.44 per diluted share, in 2020 compared to $36.8 million, or $19.82 per basic and $19.73 per diluted share in 2019. Revenues were $147.6 million in 2020 compared with $155.1 million in 2019.
Annual revenues by product lines were as follows (in thousands):
Consolidated revenues of $147.6 million in 2020 were 5 percent lower than revenues in 2019. The decrease was primarily related to lower volumes in 2020. Healthcare facilities prepared for the COVID-19 pandemic surge and postponed selective surgeries that impacted our products. We anticipate sales will increase in 2021 assuming the pandemic eases and at least the level of elective surgeries performed in the first month of 2021 is maintained. Our cost of goods sold was $81.4 million in 2020 compared with $84.4 million in 2019. Decreased sales volumes and favorable product sales mix partially offset by increased manufacturing overhead expenses were the primary contributors to the decrease in cost of goods sold in 2020 compared to 2019.
Gross profit in 2020 was $66.2 million compared with $70.7 million in 2019. Our gross profit was 45 percent of revenues in 2020 compared with 46 percent of revenues in 2019. The decrease in gross profit percentage in 2020 from 2019 was primarily related to an increase in manufacturing overhead expenses coupled with lower sales volumes, partially offset by a favorable sales mix.
Operating expenses were $30.5 million in 2020 and $30.2 million in 2019. R&D expenses increased $607,000 in 2020 as compared with 2019. Outside services for testing and compensation expense were the main contributors to this increase. R&D expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related expenses of our R&D personnel as well as costs associated with regulatory matters. In 2020, selling expenses decreased $1,293,000 compared with 2019 primarily as a result of travel restrictions and cancelled events and outside services related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Selling expenses consist primarily of salaries, commissions and other related expenses for sales and marketing personnel, marketing, advertising and promotional expenses. General and Administrative, or G&A, expenses increased $1,022,000 in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily as a result of increased salaries and higher computer hardware and software costs. G&A expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related expenses of administrative, executive and financial personnel and outside professional fees.
Our operating income for 2020 was $35.7 million compared with $40.5 million in 2019. Operating income was 24 percent of revenues in 2020 and 26 percent of revenues in 2019. A decrease in 2020 gross profit primarily attributed to a decrease in sales and increased manufacturing overhead costs adversely affected operating income for 2020 as compared to the previous year.
Interest and Dividend income for 2020 was $1.4 million compared with $2.5 million in 2019. The decline in interest and dividend income was largely due to lower interest rates in the 2020 period as compared to the 2019 period.
Other Investment Income was $1.4 million in 2020 compared to $0.2 million in 2019. The improvement from 2019 to 2020 was primarily related to unrealized gains on equity investments as a result of an increase in the market value on the investments.
Income tax expense in 2020 totaled $6.35 million compared with $6.4 million in 2019. The effective tax rates were 16.5 percent in 2020 and 14.8 percent in 2019. The higher effective tax rate in 2020 was primarily related to decreased tax benefits booked for sales outside the United States under the FDII deduction and from lower stock compensation deductions. We expect our effective tax rate for 2021 to be approximately 18.0 percent.
For information on the Company’s results of operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018 and a comparison of that information to that for the year ended December 31, 2019, see Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission on February 26, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had a $75.0 million revolving credit facility with a money-center bank pursuant to which the lender is obligated to make advances until February 28, 2022. On February 12, 2021 this credit facility was amended to, among other things, extend the date for advances to February 28, 2024. The credit facility is secured by substantially all of our inventories, equipment and accounts receivable. Interest under the credit facility is assessed at 30-day, 60-day or 90-day LIBOR, as selected by us, plus 0.875 percent (1.035 percent at December 31, 2020) and is payable monthly. We had no outstanding borrowings under the credit facility at December 31, 2020 or December 31, 2019. Our ability to borrow funds under the credit facility from time to time is contingent on meeting certain covenants in the loan agreement, the most restrictive of which is the ratio of total debt to earnings before interest, income tax, depreciation and amortization. At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all of these covenants.
At December 31, 2020, we had a total of $87.9 million in cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments and long-term investments, a decrease of $12.7 million from December 31, 2019. The principal contributor to this decrease was purchases of our stock in the open market totaling $18.8 million in 2020.
Cash flows provided by operations of $39.2 million in 2020 were primarily comprised of net income plus the net effect of non-cash expenses. At December 31, 2020, we had working capital of $98.7 million, including $22.5 million in cash and cash equivalents and $19.3 million in short-term investments. The $22.4 million decrease in working capital during 2020 was primarily related to a decrease in cash and cash equivalents partially offset by an increase in inventory. The increase in inventories was primarily related to inventory build for a new product launch. Working capital items consisted primarily of cash, accounts receivable, short-term investments, inventories and other current assets minus accounts payable and other current liabilities.
Capital expenditures for property, plant and equipment totaled $21.9 million in 2020, compared with $20.4 million in 2019. These expenditures were primarily for machinery and equipment. Purchases of investments totaled $45.8 million in 2020, compared to $83.7 million in 2019. Proceeds from maturities of investments totaled $35.9 million in 2020 and $59.3 million in 2019. We expect 2021 capital expenditures for machinery and equipment to be consistent with total average capital expenditure amounts expended during each of the past two years. In addition, we expect to commence an expansion of one of our facilities in 2021 that is expected to cost $23.0 million over a 15-month period.
We paid cash dividends totaling $12.1 million and $10.8 million during 2020 and 2019, respectively. We expect to fund future dividend payments with cash flows from operations. Treasury stock totaling $18.8 million was purchased during 2020. No treasury stock was purchased in 2019.
Our current contractual obligations are normal due to our line of business and mainly consist of purchase orders for raw materials. These obligations will be funded through funds generated through operations and require no additional funding. We have initiated plans to expand one of our facilities. The expansion will require funds in an amount estimated at $23.0 million. We believe this expansion is required to support our anticipated increases in capacity in the coming years. We believe our cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments and long-term investments, cash flows from operations and available borrowings of up to $75.0 million under our credit facility will be sufficient to fund our cash requirements for at least the foreseeable future. We believe our strong financial position would allow us to access equity or debt financing should that be necessary.
The table below summarizes debt, lease and other contractual obligations outstanding at December 31, 2020:
COVID-19 Impact
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in travel and other restrictions to reduce the spread of the disease, including governmental orders across the globe, which, among other things, direct individuals to shelter at their places of residence, direct businesses and governmental agencies to cease non-essential operations at physical locations, prohibit certain non-essential gatherings, maintain social distancing, and order cessation of non-essential travel. As a result of these developments, we have implemented work-from-home policies for certain of our employees. In addition, many of our customers implemented and are continuing similar measures in their facilities, which have delayed, and may continue to delay, the timing of some orders and deliveries. The effects of shelter-in-place and social distancing orders, government-imposed quarantines, and work-from-home policies may further negatively impact productivity, disrupt our business, and delay our development timelines beyond the delays we have already experienced and disclosed, the magnitude of which will depend, in part, on the length and severity of the restrictions and other limitations on our ability to conduct our business in the ordinary course. Such restrictions and limitations may also further negatively impact our access to regulatory authorities (which are affected, among other things, by applicable travel restrictions and may be delayed in responding to inquiries, reviewing filings, and conducting inspections); our ability to perform regularly scheduled quality checks and maintenance; and our ability to obtain services from third-party specialty vendors and other providers or to access their expertise as fully and timely as needed. The COVID-19 pandemic may also result in the loss of some of our key personnel, either temporarily or permanently. In addition, our sales and marketing efforts have been negatively impacted and may be further negatively impacted by postponement or cancellation of face-to-face meetings and restrictions on access by non-essential personnel to hospitals or clinics to the extent such measures slow down adoption or further commercialization of our marketed products. The demand for our products may also be adversely impacted by the restrictions and limitations adopted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly to the extent they affect the patients’ ability or willingness to undergo elective surgeries. As a result, some of our inventory may become obsolete and may need to be written off, impacting our operating results. These and similar, and perhaps more severe, disruptions in our operations may materially adversely impact our business, operating results, and financial condition.
The global COVID-19 pandemic continues to rapidly evolve. The ultimate impact of this pandemic is highly uncertain and subject to change. We do not yet know the full extent of potential delays or impacts on our business, healthcare systems, or the global economy as a whole. These effects could have a material impact on our operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet financing arrangements.
Impact of Inflation
We experience the effects of inflation primarily in the prices we pay for labor, materials and services. Over the last three years, we have experienced the effects of moderate inflation in these costs. At times, we have been able to offset a portion of these increased costs by increasing the sales prices of our products. However, competitive pressures have not allowed for full recovery of these cost increases.
New Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which amends the impairment model by requiring entities to use a forward-looking approach based on expected losses rather than incurred losses to estimate credit losses on certain types of financial instruments, including trade receivables. The ASU introduced a new credit loss methodology, Current Expected Credit Losses (CECL), which requires earlier recognition of credit losses, while also providing additional transparency about credit risk. Since its original issuance in 2016, the FASB has issued several updates to the original ASU.
The CECL methodology utilizes a lifetime “expected credit loss” measurement objective for the recognition of credit losses for loans, held-to-maturity securities and trade and other receivables at the time the financial asset is originated or acquired. The expected credit losses are adjusted each period for changes in expected lifetime credit losses. The methodology replaces the multiple existing impairment methods in prior GAAP, which generally require that a loss be incurred before it is recognized.
On January 1, 2020, we adopted the guidance prospectively with a cumulative adjustment to retained earnings. Atrion has not restated comparative information for 2019 and, therefore, the comparative information for 2019 is reported under the old model and is not comparable to the information presented for 2020.
At adoption, we recognized an incremental allowance for credit losses on our allowance for credit losses related to our held-to-maturity debt securities of approximately $42,000 and our trade accounts receivable of approximately $4,000. Additionally, we recorded an approximately $36,000 decrease in retained earnings associated with the increased estimated credit losses on our trade accounts receivable and investments. The impact on our operating results for 2020 from our adoption of this pronouncement was not material.
From time to time new accounting pronouncements applicable to us are issued by the FASB, or other standards setting bodies, which we will adopt as of the specified effective date. Unless otherwise discussed, we believe the impact of recently issued standards that are not yet effective will not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements upon adoption.
Significant Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. In the preparation of these financial statements, we make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We believe the following discussion addresses our most significant accounting policies and estimates, which are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results and require management’s most difficult, subjective and complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
From time to time we accrue legal costs associated with certain litigation. In making determinations of likely outcomes of litigation matters, we consider the evaluation of legal counsel knowledgeable about each matter, case law and other case-specific issues. We believe these accruals are adequate to cover the legal fees and expenses associated with litigating these matters. However, the time and cost required to litigate these matters as well as the outcomes of the proceedings may vary significantly from what we have projected.
We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts to reflect estimated losses resulting from the failure of customers to make required payments. On an ongoing basis, the collectability of accounts receivable is assessed based upon historical collection trends, current economic factors and the assessment of the collectability of specific accounts. We evaluate the collectability of specific accounts and determine when to grant credit to our customers using a combination of factors, including the age of the outstanding balances, evaluation of customers’ current and past financial condition, recent payment history, current economic environment, and discussions with our personnel and with the customers directly. Accounts are written off when we determine the receivable will not be collected. If circumstances change, our estimates of the collectability of amounts could be changed by a material amount.
We are required to estimate our provision for income taxes and uncertain tax positions in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. This process involves estimating our actual current tax exposure, including assessing the risks associated with tax audits, together with assessing temporary differences resulting from the different treatment of items for tax and accounting purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included within the balance sheet. We assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income and, to the extent we believe that recovery is more likely than not, do not establish a valuation allowance. In the event that actual results differ from these estimates, the provision for income taxes could be materially impacted.
We assess the impairment of our long-lived identifiable assets, excluding goodwill which is tested for impairment as explained below, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. This review is based upon projections of anticipated future cash flows. Although we believe that our estimates of future cash flows are reasonable, different assumptions regarding such cash flows or changes in our business plan could materially affect our evaluations. No such changes are anticipated at this time.
We assess goodwill for impairment pursuant to Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other, which requires that goodwill be assessed on an annual basis, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable, by applying a qualitative assessment on goodwill impairment to determine whether it is necessary to perform the two-step goodwill impairment test.
We assess the total carrying value for each of our investments on a quarterly basis for changes in circumstances or the occurrence of events that suggest our investment may not be recoverable. If an investment is considered impaired, we must determine whether the impairment is other than temporary. If it is determined to be other than temporary, the impairment must be recognized in our financial statements.
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out method) or net realizable value. Inventories are carried as standard cost, which approximates actual cost, and includes material, labor and allocated overhead. Standard costs are reviewed at least quarterly by management, or more often in the event circumstances indicate a change in cost has occurred. Adjustments to the cost basis of our inventory are made for excess and obsolete items based on usage, orders and technological obsolescence.
During 2020, 2019 and 2018, none of our significant accounting estimates required material adjustments. We did not note any material events or changes in circumstances indicating that the carrying value of long-lived assets were not recoverable.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risks
Foreign Exchange Risk
We are not exposed to material fluctuations in currency exchange rates that would result in realized gains or losses being reflected in the consolidated statements of income because the payments from our international customers are received primarily in United States dollars.
However, fluctuations in exchange rates may affect the prices that our international customers are willing to pay and may put us at a price disadvantage compared to other competitors. Increases in the value of the United States dollar relative to foreign currencies could make our products less competitive or less affordable and therefore adversely affect our sales in international markets.
Market Risk and Credit Risk
Our cash deposits are held in accounts with financial institutions that we believe are creditworthy. Certain of these accounts at times may exceed federally-insured limits. We have not experienced any credit losses in such accounts and do not believe we are exposed to any significant credit risk on these funds.
We have investments in money market funds, bonds and commercial paper. As a result, we are exposed to potential loss from market risks that may occur as a result of changes in interest rates, changes in credit quality of the issuer and otherwise. These securities have a higher degree of, and a greater exposure to, credit or default risk and may be less liquid in times of economic weakness or market disruptions as compared with cash deposits. We have also invested a portion of our available funds in equity securities and mutual funds. The value of these securities fluctuates due to changes in the equity and credit markets along with other factors. In times of economic weakness, the market value and liquidity of these assets may decline and may negatively impact our financial condition.
Forward-looking Statements
Statements in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis and elsewhere in this Form 10-K that are forward looking are based upon current expectations, and actual results or future events may differ materially. Therefore, the inclusion of such forward-looking information should not be regarded as a representation by us that our objectives or plans will be achieved. Such statements include, but are not limited to, our R&D program in 2021, our effective tax rate for 2021, our 2021 capital expenditures, the expansion of one of our facilities, funding future dividend payments with cash flows from operations, availability of equity and debt financing, our ability to meet our cash requirements for the foreseeable future, the impact on our consolidated financial statement of recently issued accounting standards when we adopt those standards, and the effect that the COVID-19 pandemic may have on our business and operations, as well as those of many of our key customers, suppliers, and other counterparties. Words such as “expects,” “believes,” “anticipates,” “intends,” “should,” “plans,” and variations of such words and similar expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements contained herein involve numerous risks and uncertainties, and there are a number of factors that could cause actual results or future events to differ materially, including, but not limited to, the following: the risk that the COVID-19 pandemic continues to lead to material delays and cancellations of, or reduced demand for, procedures in which our products are utilized; curtailed or delayed capital spending by hospitals and other healthcare providers; disruption to our supply chain; closures of our facilities; delays in training; delays in gathering clinical evidence; diversion of management and other resources to respond to the COVID-19 outbreak; the impact of global and regional economic and credit market conditions on healthcare spending; the risk that the COVID-19 virus continues to disrupt local economies and causes economies in our key markets to enter prolonged recessions; changing economic, market and business conditions; acts of war or terrorism; the effects of governmental regulation; the impact of competition and new technologies; slower-than-anticipated introduction of new products or implementation of marketing strategies; implementation of new manufacturing processes or implementation of new information systems; our ability to protect our intellectual property; changes in the prices of raw materials; changes in product mix; intellectual property and product liability claims and product recalls; the ability to attract and retain qualified personnel; and the loss of, or any material reduction in sales to any significant customers. In addition, assumptions relating to budgeting, marketing, product development and other management decisions are subjective in many respects and thus susceptible to interpretations and periodic review which may cause us to alter our marketing, capital expenditures or other budgets, which in turn may affect our results of operations and financial condition. The forward-looking statements in this Form 10-K are made as of the date hereof, and we do not undertake any obligation, and disclaim any duty, to supplement, update or revise such statements, whether as a result of subsequent events, changed expectations or otherwise, except as required by applicable law.