Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Business Overview
Activision Blizzard, Inc. is a leading global developer and publisher of interactive entertainment content and services. We develop and distribute content and services on video game consoles, PCs, and mobile devices. We also operate esports leagues and offer digital advertising within some of our content. The terms “Activision Blizzard,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” and “our” are used to refer collectively to Activision Blizzard, Inc. and its subsidiaries.
Our Segments
Based upon our organizational structure, we conduct our business through three reportable segments, each of which is a leading global developer and publisher of interactive entertainment content and services based primarily on our internally developed intellectual properties.
(i) Activision
Activision delivers content through both premium and free-to-play offerings and primarily generates revenue from full-game and in-game sales, as well as by licensing software to third-party or related-party companies that distribute Activision products. Activision also includes the activities of the Call of Duty League, a global professional esports league with city-based teams.
(ii) Blizzard
Blizzard delivers content through both premium and free-to-play offerings and primarily generates revenue from full-game and in-game sales, subscriptions, and by licensing software to third-party or related-party companies that distribute Blizzard products. Blizzard also maintains a proprietary online gaming service, Blizzard Battle.net, which facilitates digital distribution of Blizzard content and selected Activision content, online social connectivity, and the creation of user-generated content. Blizzard also includes the activities of the Overwatch League, a global professional esports league with city-based teams.
(iii) King
King delivers content primarily through free-to-play offerings and primarily generates revenue from in-game sales and in-game advertising on the mobile platform.
Other
We also engage in other businesses that do not represent reportable segments, including the Distribution business, which consists of operations in Europe that provide warehousing, logistics, and sales distribution services to third-party publishers of interactive entertainment software, our own publishing operations, and manufacturers of interactive entertainment hardware.
Business Results and Highlights
Financial Results
2020 financial highlights included:
•consolidated net revenues increased 25% to $8.1 billion and consolidated operating income increased 70% to $2.7 billion, as compared to consolidated net revenues of $6.5 billion and consolidated operating income of $1.6 billion in 2019;
•diluted earnings per common share increased to $2.82, as compared to $1.95 in 2019; and
•cash flows from operating activities were approximately $2.25 billion, an increase of 23%, as compared to $1.83 billion in 2019.
Since certain of our games are hosted online or include significant online functionality that represents a separate performance obligation, we defer the transaction price allocable to the online functionality from the sale of these games and recognize the attributable revenues over the relevant estimated service periods, which are generally less than a year. Net revenues and operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020, include a net effect of $333 million and $238 million, respectively, from the deferral of net revenues and related cost of revenues.
Additionally, for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, 16% and 18% of total net revenues recognized were from revenue sources that were recognized at a “point-in-time,” respectively, while “over-time and other” revenues were 84% and 82%, of total net revenues, respectively. Revenue recognized at a “point-in-time” is primarily comprised of the portion of revenue from software products that is recognized when the customer takes control of the product (i.e., upon delivery of the software product) and revenues from our Distribution business. “Over-time and other revenue” is primarily comprised of revenue associated with the online functionality of our games, in-game purchases, and subscriptions.
Content Release and Event Highlights
Throughout the year we regularly release new content through seasonal and live services updates within our franchises, including Call of Duty, Candy Crush, and Hearthstone. In addition to these updates, notable game releases during 2020, included:
•Activision’s Call of Duty: Warzone, a free-to-play experience on console and PC platforms;
•Activision’s Tony Hawk’sTM Pro SkaterTM 1 and 2;
•Activision’s CrashTM Bandicoot 4: It’s About TimeTM;
•Activision’s Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War; and
•Blizzard’s World of Warcraft: Shadowlands.
International Sales
International sales are a fundamental part of our business. An important element of our international strategy is to develop content that is specifically directed toward local cultures and customs. Net revenues from international sales accounted for approximately 52%, 54%, and 54% of our total consolidated net revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The majority of our net revenues from foreign countries are generated by consumers in Australia, Canada, China, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, and the U.K. Our international business is subject to risks typical of an international business, including, but not limited to, foreign currency exchange rate volatility and changes in local economies. Accordingly, our future results could be materially and adversely affected by changes in foreign currency exchange rates and changes in local economies.
Operating Metrics
The following operating metrics are key performance indicators that we use to evaluate our business. The key drivers of changes in our operating metrics are presented in the order of significance.
Net bookings and In-game net bookings
We monitor net bookings and in-game net bookings as key operating metrics in evaluating the performance of our business because they enable an analysis of performance based on the timing of actual transactions with our customers and provide a more timely indication of trends in our operating results. Net bookings is the net amount of products and services sold digitally or sold-in physically in the period, and includes license fees, merchandise, and publisher incentives, among others. Net bookings is equal to net revenues excluding the impact from deferrals. In-game net bookings primarily includes the net amount of microtransactions and downloadable content sold during the period, and is equal to in-game net revenues excluding the impact from deferrals.
Net bookings and in-game net bookings were as follows (amounts in millions):
Net bookings
The increase in net bookings for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to:
•a $1.7 billion increase in Activision net bookings driven by higher net bookings from (1) Call of Duty: Modern Warfare (which was released in October 2019, and when referred to herein, is inclusive of Call of Duty: Warzone, from its release in March 2020 through December 16, 2020, the launch date of Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War Season 1 content; after December 16, 2020, Call of Duty: Warzone revenues are associated with Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War content and included within that title’s revenue), as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops 4, which was released in October 2018, (2) Call of Duty: Mobile, which was released in October 2019, and (3) the Call of Duty franchise catalog titles, partially offset by lower net bookings from SekiroTM: Shadows Die Twice, which was released in March 2019;
•a $186 million increase in Blizzard net bookings driven by higher net bookings from World of Warcraft, which includes the release of World of Warcraft: Shadowlands in November 2020, partially offset by lower net bookings from Overwatch;
•a $133 million increase in King net bookings driven by higher net bookings from advertising and in-game player purchases, primarily in the Candy Crush franchise; and
•a $116 million increase in net bookings from our Distribution business.
In-game net bookings
The increase in in-game net bookings for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to:
•a $1.4 billion increase in Activision in-game net bookings, driven by higher in-game net bookings from (1) Call of Duty: Modern Warfare, as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops 4 and (2) Call of Duty: Mobile; and
•a $75 million increase in Blizzard in-game net bookings, driven by World of Warcraft.
Monthly Active Users
We monitor monthly active users (“MAUs”) as a key measure of the overall size of our user base. MAUs are the number of individuals who accessed a particular game in a given month. We calculate average MAUs in a period by adding the total number of MAUs in each of the months in a given period and dividing that total by the number of months in the period. An individual who accesses two of our games would be counted as two users. In addition, due to technical limitations, for Activision and King, an individual who accesses the same game on two platforms or devices in the relevant period would be counted as two users. For Blizzard, an individual who accesses the same game on two platforms or devices in the relevant period would generally be counted as a single user. In certain instances, we rely on third parties to publish our games. In these instances, MAU data is based on information provided to us by those third parties, or, if final data is not available, reasonable estimates of MAUs for these third-party published games.
The number of MAUs for a given period can be significantly impacted by the timing of new content releases, since new releases may cause a temporary surge in MAUs. Accordingly, although we believe that overall trending in the number of MAUs can be a meaningful performance metric, period-to-period fluctuations may not be indicative of longer-term trends. The following table details our average MAUs on a sequential quarterly basis for each of our reportable segments (amounts in millions):
Average MAUs increased by 7 million, or 2%, for the three months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the three months ended September 30, 2020, primarily due to an increase in average MAUs for Activision driven by the Call of Duty franchise due to (1) the November 2020 launch of Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War, and (2) the December 2020 launch of Call of Duty: Mobile in China. The increase was partially offset by lower average MAUs across various franchises at King.
Average MAUs decreased by 12 million, or 3%, for the three months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the three months ended December 31, 2019. The year-over-year decrease in average MAUs is due to:
•lower average MAUs across King’s various franchises, primarily from non-Candy Crush franchises; and
•lower average MAUs across Blizzard, primarily from Overwatch.
Management’s Overview of Business Trends
Impacts of the Global COVID-19 Pandemic
Refer to the “Impacts of the Global COVID-19 Pandemic” section under Part I, Item 1 “Business” for discussion on the impacts of COVID-19 on our business.
Interactive Entertainment Growth
Our business participates in the global interactive entertainment industry. Games have become an increasingly popular form of entertainment, and we estimate, based on consumer spending, that the total industry has grown, on average, 17% annually from 2017 to 2020. The industry continues to benefit from additional players entering the market as interactive entertainment becomes more commonplace across age groups and as more developing regions gain access to this form of entertainment.
Mobile Gaming and Free-to-Play Games
Wide adoption of smartphones globally and the free-to-play business model on mobile platforms have increased the total addressable audience for gaming significantly by introducing gaming to new age groups and new regions and allowing gaming to occur more widely outside the home. Mobile gaming is estimated to be larger than console and PC gaming, and continues to grow at a significant rate. King is a leading developer of mobile and free-to-play games, and our other business units have mobile efforts underway that present the opportunity for us to expand the reach of, and drive additional player investment in, our franchises. The 2019 launch of Call of Duty: Mobile is an example of these efforts.
In addition, the free-to-play business model, which allows players to try a new game with no upfront cost, has begun to receive broader acceptance on PC and console platforms. This provides opportunities for us to increase the reach of our franchises through free-to-play offerings, which, in turn, provides opportunities to further drive player investment, as was seen with our recent Call of Duty: Warzone release.
Concentration of Sales Among the Most Popular Franchises
The top titles in the industry are also becoming more consistent as players and revenues concentrate more heavily in established franchises. Of the top 10 gaming franchises in the U.S. in 2020, all 10 were established prior to 2020.
A significant portion of our revenues historically has been derived from video games based on a few popular franchises, and these video games have also been responsible for a disproportionately higher percentage of our profits. For example, in 2020, the Call of Duty, Candy Crush, and World of Warcraft franchises, collectively, accounted for 76% of our consolidated net revenues-and a significantly higher percentage of our operating income.
In addition to investing in new content for our top franchises, with the aim of releasing such content more frequently, we are continually exploring additional ways to expand those franchises, such as our recent release of Activision’s Call of Duty: Warzone. Additionally, we have been increasing our development efforts to focus on expanding our franchises to the mobile platform, as demonstrated by the release of Call of Duty: Mobile, as well as our plans for Diablo Immortal™ and Crash Bandicoot: On the Run!™, which are both currently in development.
Overall, we expect that a limited number of popular franchises will continue to produce a disproportionately high percentage of our, and the industry’s, revenues and profits in the near future. Accordingly, our ability to maintain our top franchises and our ability to successfully compete against our competitors’ top franchises can significantly impact our performance.
Recurring Revenue Business Models
Increased consumer online connectivity has allowed us to offer players new investment opportunities and to shift our business further towards a more consistently recurring and year-round model. While our business does continue to experience some periods of “seasonality” driven primarily by the timing of our releases of new premium full games, our in-game content and free-to-play offerings allow our players to access and invest in new content throughout the year. This incremental content not only provides additional high-margin revenues, but it can also increase player engagement.
Opportunities to Expand Franchises Outside of Games
Our fans spend significant time engaging in our franchises and investing through purchases of our game content, including full games and in-game content. Given the passion our players have for our franchises, we believe there are emerging opportunities to drive additional engagement and investment in our franchises outside of games, such as with our Overwatch and Call of Duty leagues. Our efforts to build these adjacent opportunities are still relatively nascent.
Upcoming Content Release Highlights
In the second half of 2021, we plan to release the next premium title in our Call of Duty franchise. In addition, throughout the year we expect to deliver ongoing content for our various franchises, including continued in-game content for Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War, which includes seasonal content updates for Call of Duty: Warzone, seasonal content updates for Call of Duty: Mobile, content updates for World of Warcraft, expansion packs and content updates for Hearthstone, and continued releases of content, features, and services across King’s portfolio with an ongoing focus on the Candy Crush franchise. We will also continue to invest in opportunities that we think have the potential to drive our growth over the long-term, including continuing to build on our advertising initiatives and investments in mobile titles, some of which we anticipate will launch in 2021, including Crash Bandicoot: On the Run and Diablo Immortal.
Consolidated Statements of Operations Data
The following table sets forth consolidated statements of operations data for the periods indicated (amounts in millions) and as a percentage of total net revenues, except for cost of revenues, which are presented as a percentage of associated revenues:
(1) Represents the loss on extinguishment of debt we recognized in connection with our debt financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020. Refer to Note 13 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further disclosures regarding our debt obligations.
Consolidated Net Revenues
The key drivers of changes in our consolidated results, operating segment results, and sources of liquidity are presented in the order of significance.
The following table summarizes our consolidated net revenues and in-game net revenues (amounts in millions):
(1) In-game net revenues primarily includes the net amount of revenue recognized for microtransactions and downloadable content during the period.
Consolidated net revenues
The increase in consolidated net revenues for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily driven by an increase in revenues of $1.9 billion due to higher revenues from:
•Call of Duty: Modern Warfare, which was released in October 2019, as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops 4, which was released in October 2018;
•Call of Duty: Mobile, which was released in October 2019;
•World of Warcraft, which includes the release of World of Warcraft: Shadowlands in November 2020;
•our Distribution business;
•the Candy Crush franchise; and
•the Call of Duty franchise catalog titles.
The increase was partially offset by a decrease in revenues of $339 million due to lower revenues from:
•Overwatch;
•Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War, which was released in November 2020, as compared to Call of Duty: Modern Warfare; and
•Sekiro: Shadows Die Twice, which was released in March 2019.
In-game net revenues
The increase in in-game net revenues for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily driven by an increase in in-game net revenues of $1.2 billion due to higher in-game net revenues from:
•Call of Duty: Modern Warfare, as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops 4; and
•Call of Duty: Mobile.
Operating Segment Results
We have three reportable segments-Activision, Blizzard, and King. Our operating segments are consistent with the manner in which our operations are reviewed and managed by our Chief Executive Officer, who is our chief operating decision maker (“CODM”). The CODM reviews segment performance exclusive of: the impact of the change in deferred revenues and related cost of revenues with respect to certain of our online-enabled games; share-based compensation expense; amortization of intangible assets as a result of purchase price accounting; fees and other expenses (including legal fees, expenses, and accruals) related to acquisitions, associated integration activities, and financings; certain restructuring and related costs; and certain other non-cash charges. The CODM does not review any information regarding total assets on an operating segment basis, and accordingly, no disclosure is made with respect thereto.
Our operating segments are also consistent with our internal organizational structure, the way we assess operating performance and allocate resources, and the availability of separate financial information. We do not aggregate operating segments.
Information on the reportable segment net revenues and segment operating income are presented below (amounts in millions):
(1)Intersegment revenues reflect licensing and service fees charged between segments.
Reconciliations of total segment net revenues and total segment operating income to consolidated net revenues and consolidated income before income tax expense are presented in the table below (amounts in millions):
(1)Includes other income and expenses from operating segments managed outside the reportable segments, including our Distribution business. Also includes unallocated corporate income and expenses.
(2)Since certain of our games are hosted online or include significant online functionality that represents a separate performance obligation, we defer the transaction price allocable to the online functionality from the sale of these games and then recognize the attributable revenues over the relevant estimated service periods, which are generally less than a year. The related cost of revenues is deferred and recognized as an expense as the related revenues are recognized. This table reflects the net effect from the deferrals of revenues and recognition of deferred revenues, along with the related cost of revenues, on certain of our online enabled products.
(3)Intersegment revenues reflect licensing and service fees charged between segments.
(4)Reflects the impact of other unusual or unique tax-related items and activities.
Segment Net Revenues
Activision
The increase in Activision’s segment net revenues for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to higher revenues from:
•Call of Duty: Modern Warfare, which was released in October 2019, as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops 4, which was released in October 2018;
•Call of Duty: Mobile, which was released in October 2019; and
•the Call of Duty franchise catalog titles.
The increase was partially offset by lower revenues from Sekiro: Shadows Die Twice, which was released in March 2019.
Blizzard
The increase in Blizzard’s segment net revenues for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to higher revenues from World of Warcraft, which includes the release of World of Warcraft: Shadowlands in November 2020. The increase was partially offset by lower revenues from Overwatch.
King
The increase in King’s net revenues for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to higher revenues from advertising and in-game player purchases, primarily in the Candy Crush franchise.
Segment Income from Operations
Activision
The increase in Activision’s operating income for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to higher segment net revenues.
The increase was partially offset by:
•higher cost of revenues and marketing costs for the Call of Duty franchise; and
•higher product development costs driven by higher personnel bonuses as a result of strong business performance.
Blizzard
The increase in Blizzard’s operating income for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to:
•higher segment net revenues;
•lower product development costs, despite an increase in personnel costs, driven by higher capitalization of software development costs from the timing of game development cycles; and
•lower general and administrative costs.
The increase was partially offset by higher cost of revenues, primarily from higher software amortization and higher marketing costs related to the launch of World of Warcraft: Shadowlands.
King
The increase in King’s operating income for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to:
•higher segment net revenues; and
•lower general and administrative costs.
The increase was partially offset by higher marketing costs, driven by the Candy Crush franchise.
Foreign Exchange Impact
Changes in foreign exchange rates had a positive impact of $61 million and a negative impact of $126 million on reportable segment net revenues for 2020 and 2019, respectively, as compared to the same periods in the previous year. The changes are primarily due to changes in the value of the U.S. dollar relative to the euro and British pound.
Consolidated Results
Net Revenues by Distribution Channel
The following table details our consolidated net revenues by distribution channel (amounts in millions):
(1)Net revenues from “Digital online channels” include revenues from digitally-distributed downloadable content, microtransactions, subscriptions, and products, as well as licensing royalties.
(2)Net revenues from “Other” primarily includes revenues from our Distribution business, the Overwatch League, and the Call of Duty League.
Digital Online Channel Net Revenues
The increase in net revenues from digital online channels for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to higher revenues from:
•Call of Duty: Modern Warfare, which was released in October 2019, as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops 4, which was released in October 2018;
•Call of Duty: Mobile, which was released in October 2019;
•World of Warcraft, which includes the release of World of Warcraft: Shadowlands in November 2020;
•the Call of Duty franchise catalog titles; and
•the Candy Crush franchise, driven by higher revenues from advertising and in-game player purchases.
This increase was partially offset by lower revenues from Overwatch.
Retail Channel Net Revenues
The decrease in net revenues from retail channels for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to lower revenues from:
•Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War, which was released in November 2020, as compared to Call of Duty: Modern Warfare; and
•Sekiro: Shadows Die Twice, which was released in March 2019.
The decrease was partially offset by higher revenues from:
•Crash Bandicoot 4: It’s About Time; which was released in October 2020; and
•Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater 1 and 2, which was released in September 2020.
Net Revenues by Platform
The following tables detail our net revenues by platform (amounts in millions):
(1)Net revenues from “Mobile and ancillary” include revenues from mobile devices, as well as non-platform-specific game-related revenues, such as standalone sales of toys and accessories.
(2)Net revenues from “Other” primarily includes revenues from our Distribution business, the Overwatch League, and the Call of Duty League.
Console
The increase in net revenues from the console platform for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to higher revenues from Call of Duty: Modern Warfare, which was released in October 2019, as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops 4, which was released in October 2018. The increase was partially offset by lower revenues from Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War, which was released in November 2020, as compared to Call of Duty: Modern Warfare.
PC
The increase in net revenues from the PC platform for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to higher revenues from:
•Call of Duty: Modern Warfare, as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops 4; and
•World of Warcraft, which includes the release of World of Warcraft: Shadowlands in November 2020.
The increase was partially offset by lower revenues from Overwatch.
Mobile and Ancillary
The increase in net revenues from mobile and ancillary for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to higher revenues from:
•Call of Duty: Mobile, which was released in October 2019; and
•the Candy Crush franchise, driven by higher revenues from advertising and in-game player purchases.
Costs and Expenses
Cost of Revenues
The following tables detail the components of cost of revenues in dollars (amounts in millions) and as a percentage of associated net revenues:
Cost of Revenues-Product Sales:
The increase in product costs for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to an increase in product costs for our Distribution business as a result of higher revenues.
The increase in software royalties, amortization, and intellectual property licenses related to product sales for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to a $32 million increase in software amortization and royalties from Activision, driven by software amortization and royalties from the 2020 releases of (1) Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater 1 and 2, (2) Crash Bandicoot 4: It’s About Time, and (3) Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2 Campaign Remastered; partially offset by lower software amortization and royalties from:
•Sekiro: Shadows Die Twice, which was released in March 2019; and
•Call of Duty: Modern Warfare, which was released in October 2019, as compared to Call of Duty: Black Ops 4, which was released in October 2018.
Cost of Revenues-In-game, Subscription, and Other Revenues:
The increase in game operations and distribution costs for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to (1) an increase of $114 million in service provider fees such as digital storefront fees (e.g., fees retained by Apple and Google for our sales on their platforms), payment processor fees, and server bandwidth fees, as a result of higher revenues, and (2) an increase of $64 million associated with our professional esports leagues, which includes event and production costs associated with the inaugural season of the Call of Duty League in 2020.
The decrease in software royalties, amortization, and intellectual property licenses related to in-game, subscription, and other revenues for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to a decrease of $128 million in amortization of internally-developed franchise intangible assets acquired as part of our 2016 acquisition of King. The decrease was partially offset by an increase in software amortization and royalties from Activision of $46 million, driven by Call of Duty: Mobile, which was released in October 2019.
Product Development (amounts in millions)
The increase in product development costs for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to higher development costs of $261 million, driven by higher personnel bonuses as a result of strong business performance. The increase was partially offset by a $108 million increase in capitalization of development costs, driven by the timing of Blizzard’s game development cycles.
Sales and Marketing (amounts in millions)
The increase in sales and marketing expenses for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to an increase of $159 million in marketing spending, driven by the Call of Duty, World of Warcraft, and Candy Crush franchises.
General and Administrative (amounts in millions)
The increase in general and administrative expenses for 2020 as compared to 2019, was primarily due to a $48 million increase in personnel costs as a result of higher share-based compensation.
Restructuring and related costs (amounts in millions)
During 2019, we began implementing a plan aimed at refocusing our resources on our largest opportunities and to remove unnecessary levels of complexity and duplication from certain parts of our business. Since then, we have been, and will continue focusing on these goals as we continue to execute against our plan. The restructuring and related costs incurred during 2020 relate primarily to severance costs. We do not expect to realize significant net savings in our total operating expenses as a result of our plan, as cost reductions in our selling, general and administrative activities is expected to be offset by increased investment in product development. Refer to Note 17 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion.
Interest and Other Expense (Income), Net (amounts in millions)
The increase in interest and other expense (income), net, for 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to:
•a $58 million decrease in interest income driven by lower returns on our investment portfolio as a result of interest rate cuts, reflecting actions by central banks around the world;
•a $38 million gain recognized in the prior-year period as a result of adjusting a cost-method equity investment to fair value, as compared to a $3 million gain recorded in the current year; and
•a $7 million gain recognized in the prior-year period from the settlement of available for sale securities, as compared to a $4 million loss recorded in the current year.
Income Tax Expense (amounts in millions)
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company’s income before income tax expense was $2.6 billion and $1.6 billion, respectively, and our income tax expense was $419 million (or a 16% effective tax rate) and $130 million (or an 8% effective tax rate), respectively. Our full year 2020 effective tax rate of 16% is lower than the U.S. statutory rate of 21% primarily due to a U.S. tax benefit from foreign-derived intangible income, a one-time benefit from deferred tax asset remeasurement, and excess tax benefits from share-based payments.
The effective tax rate in 2020 was higher than in 2019, primarily due to one-time tax benefits reported in the prior year related to the intra-entity transfer of certain intellectual property rights, partially offset by changes in the Company's liability for uncertain tax positions and audit settlements.
The overall effective income tax rate in future periods will depend on a variety of factors, such as changes in pre-tax income or loss by jurisdiction, applicable accounting rules, applicable tax laws and regulations, and rulings and interpretations thereof, developments in tax audits and other matters, and variations in the estimated and actual level of annual pre-tax income or loss.
Further analysis of the differences between the U.S. federal statutory rate and the consolidated effective tax rate, as well as other information about our income taxes, is provided in Note 19 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Foreign Exchange Impact
Changes in foreign exchange rates had a positive impact of $62 million and a negative impact of $150 million on our consolidated net revenues in 2020 and 2019, respectively, as compared to the same periods in the previous year.
Changes in foreign exchange rates had a positive impact of $35 million and a negative impact of $71 million on our consolidated operating income in 2020 and 2019, respectively, as compared to the same periods in the previous year.
Comparison of 2019 to 2018
For the comparison of 2019 to 2018, refer to Part II, Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We believe our ability to generate cash flows from operating activities is one of our fundamental financial strengths. Despite the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy, in the near term, we expect our business and financial condition to remain strong and to continue to generate significant operating cash flows, which, we believe, in combination with our existing balance of cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments of $8.8 billion, our access to capital, and the availability of our $1.5 billion revolving credit facility, will be sufficient to finance our operational and financing requirements for the next 12 months. Our primary sources of liquidity, which are available to us to fund cash outflows such as potential dividend payments or share repurchases, and scheduled debt maturities (the next of which is in 2026), include our cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, and cash flows provided by operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, the amount of cash and cash equivalents held outside of the U.S. by our foreign subsidiaries was $2.5 billion, as compared to $2.8 billion as of December 31, 2019. These cash balances are generally available for use in the U.S., subject in some cases to certain restrictions.
Our cash provided from operating activities is somewhat impacted by seasonality. Working capital needs are impacted by weekly sales, which are generally highest in the fourth quarter due to seasonal and holiday-related sales patterns. We consider, on a continuing basis, various transactions to increase shareholder value and enhance our business results, including acquisitions, divestitures, joint ventures, share repurchases, and other structural changes. These transactions may result in future cash proceeds or payments.
Sources of Liquidity (amounts in millions)
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
The primary driver of net cash flows associated with our operating activities is the income generated from the sale of our products and services. These are typically partially offset by: working capital requirements used in the development, sale, and support of our products; payments for interest on our debt; payments for tax liabilities; and payments to our workforce.
Net cash provided by operating activities for 2020 was $2.25 billion, as compared to $1.83 billion for 2019. The increase was primarily due to higher net income, partially offset by higher tax payments and changes in our working capital resulting from the timing of collections and payments.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
The primary drivers of net cash flows associated with investing activities typically include capital expenditures, purchases and sales of investments, changes in restricted cash balances, and cash used for acquisitions.
Net cash used in investing activities for 2020 was $178 million, as compared to $22 million for 2019. The increase in cash used in investing activities was primarily due to the net purchases of available-for-sale investments of $100 million in 2020, as compared to net proceeds from maturities of available-for-sale investments of $88 million in 2019. This was partially offset by capital expenditures of $78 million in 2020, which were lower than the capital expenditures of $116 million in 2019.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities
The primary drivers of net cash flows associated with financing activities typically include the proceeds from, and repayments of, our long-term debt and transactions involving our common stock, including the issuance of shares of common stock to employees upon the exercise of stock options, as well as the payment of dividends.
Net cash provided by financing activities for 2020 was $711 million, as compared to net cash used in financing activities of $237 million for 2019. The change was primarily attributed to:
•our debt financing activities-for 2020 we had net debt proceeds of approximately $896 million resulting from the issuance of an aggregate principal amount of $2.0 billion of new notes and the early redemption of $1.05 billion of our previously outstanding notes, with no comparable activity for 2019 (refer to Note 13 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion); and
•higher proceeds from issuances of common stock to employees of $170 million in 2020 as compared to $105 million in 2019.
The cash flows provided by the activities above were partially offset by higher dividends paid, with $316 million of dividend payments in 2020, as compared to $283 million for 2019.
Effect of Foreign Exchange Rate Changes
Changes in foreign exchange rates had a positive impact of $69 million and a negative impact of $3 million on our cash and cash equivalents for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The change is primarily due to changes in the value of the U.S. dollar relative to the euro and British pound.
Debt
At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, our total outstanding debt was $3.6 billion and $2.7 billion, respectively, bearing interest at a weighted average rate of 2.87% and 3.18%, respectively.
A summary of our outstanding debt is as follows (amounts in millions):
Refer to Note 13 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further disclosures regarding our debt obligations.
Dividends
On February 4, 2021, our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend of $0.47 per common share, payable on May 6, 2021, to shareholders of record at the close of business on April 15, 2021.
On February 6, 2020, our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend of $0.41 per common share. On May 6, 2020, we made an aggregate cash dividend payment of $316 million to shareholders of record at the close of business on April 15, 2020.
Capital Expenditures
We made capital expenditures of $78 million in 2020, as compared to $116 million in 2019. In 2021, we anticipate total capital expenditures of approximately $100 million, primarily for computer hardware, leasehold improvements, and software purchases.
Commitments
Refer to Note 22 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for disclosures regarding our commitments, including a table showing contractual obligations.
Comparison of 2019 to 2018
For the comparison of 2019 to 2018, refer to Part II, Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, under the subheading “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, Activision Blizzard had no significant relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial parties, often referred to as “structured finance” or “special purpose” entities, established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes, that have or are reasonably likely to have a material current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates and assumptions. The impact and any associated risks related to these policies on our business operations are discussed throughout Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations where such policies affect our reported and expected financial results. The policies, estimates, and assumptions discussed below are considered by management to be critical because they are both important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and because their application places the most significant demands on management’s judgment, with financial reporting results relying on estimates and assumptions about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Specific risks for these critical accounting policies, estimates, and assumptions are described in the following paragraphs.
Revenue Recognition
In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued new accounting guidance related to revenue recognition. On January 1, 2018, we adopted the new accounting standard and related amendments.
We generate revenue primarily through the sale of our interactive entertainment content and services, principally for the console, PC, and mobile platforms, as well as through the licensing of our intellectual property. Our products span various genres, including first- and third-person action/adventure, role-playing, strategy, and “match three.” We primarily offer the following products and services:
•premium full games, which typically provide access to main game content after purchase;
•free-to-play offerings, which allow players to download the game and engage with the associated content for free;
•in-game content for purchase to enhance gameplay (i.e.microtransactions and downloadable content) available within both our full-game and free-to-play offerings; and
•subscriptions to players in our World of Warcraft franchise, which provide ongoing access to the game content.
When control of the promised products and services is transferred to our customers, we recognize revenue in the amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for these products and services.
We determine revenue recognition by:
•identifying the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
•identifying the performance obligations in each contract;
•determining the transaction price;
•allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations in each contract; and
•recognizing revenue when, or as, we satisfy performance obligations by transferring the promised goods or services.
Certain products are sold to customers with a “street date” (which is the earliest date these products may be sold by retailers). For these products, we recognize revenues on the later of the street date and the date the product is sold to our customer. For digital full-game downloads sold to customers, we recognize revenue when it is available for download or is activated for gameplay. Revenues are recorded net of taxes assessed by governmental authorities that are imposed at the time of the specific revenue-producing transaction between us and our customer, such as sales and value-added taxes.
Payment terms and conditions vary by contract type, although terms generally include a requirement of payment immediately upon purchase or within 30 to 90 days. In instances where the timing of revenue recognition differs from the timing of invoicing, we do not adjust the promised amount of consideration for the effects of a significant financing component when we expect, at contract inception, that the period between our transfer of a promised product or service to our customer and payment for that product or service will be one year or less.
Product Sales
Product sales consist of sales of our games, including digital full-game downloads and physical products. We recognize revenues from the sale of our products after both (1) control of the products has been transferred to our customers and (2) the underlying performance obligations have been satisfied. Such revenues, which include our software products with significant online functionality and our online hosted software arrangements, are recognized in "Product sales" on our consolidated statement of operations.
Revenues from product sales are recognized after deducting the estimated allowance for returns and price protection, which are accounted for as variable consideration when estimating the amount of revenue to recognize. Returns and price protection are estimated at contract inception and updated at the end of each reporting period as additional information becomes available.
Sales incentives and other consideration given by us to our customers, such as rebates and product placement fees, are considered adjustments of the transaction price of our products and are reflected as reductions to revenues. Sales incentives and other consideration that represent costs incurred by us for distinct goods or services received, such as the appearance of our products in a customer’s national circular advertisement, are recorded as “Sales and marketing” expense when the benefit from the sales incentive is separable from sales to the same customer and we can reasonably estimate the fair value of the good or service.
Products with Online Functionality
For our software products that include both offline functionality (i.e., do not require an Internet connection to access) and significant online functionality, such as for most of our titles from the Call of Duty franchise, we evaluate whether the license of our intellectual property and the online functionality each represent separate and distinct performance obligations. In such instances, we typically have two performance obligations: (1) a license to the game software that is accessible without an Internet connection (predominantly the offline single player campaign or game mode) and (2) ongoing activities associated with the online components of the game, such as content updates, hosting of online content and gameplay, and online matchmaking (the “online functionality”). The online functionality generally operates to support the additional features and functionalities of the game that are only available online, not the offline license. This evaluation is performed for each software product or product add-on, including downloadable content. When we determine that our software products contain a license of intellectual property (i.e., the offline software license) that is separate and distinct from the online functionality, we consider market conditions and other observable inputs to estimate the standalone selling price for the performance obligations, since we do not generally sell the software license on a standalone basis. These products may be sold in a bundle with other products and services, which often results in the recognition of additional performance obligations.
For arrangements that include both a license to the game software that is accessible offline and separate online functionality, we recognize revenue when control of the license transfers to our customers for the portion of the transaction price allocable to the offline software license and ratably over the estimated service period for the portion of the transaction price allocable to the online functionality. Similarly, we defer a portion of the cost of revenues on these arrangements and recognize the costs as the related revenues are recognized. The cost of revenues that are deferred include product costs, distribution costs, and software royalties, amortization, and intellectual property licenses, and excludes intangible asset amortization.
Online Hosted Software Arrangements
For our online hosted software arrangements, such as titles for the Overwatch, World of Warcraft, and Candy Crush franchises, substantially all gameplay and functionality are obtained through our continuous hosting of the game content for the player. In these instances, we typically have a single performance obligation related to our ongoing activities in the hosted arrangement, including content updates, hosting of the gameplay, online matchmaking, and access to the game content. Similar to our software products with online functionality, these arrangements may include other products and services, which often results in the recognition of additional performance obligations. Revenues related to online hosted software arrangements are generally recognized ratably over the estimated service period.
In-game, Subscription, and Other Revenues
In-game Revenues
In-game revenues primarily includes revenue from microtransactions and downloadable content. Microtransaction revenues are derived from the sale of virtual currencies and goods to our players to enhance their gameplay experience. Proceeds from these sales of virtual currencies and goods are initially recorded in deferred revenue. Proceeds from the sales of virtual currencies are recognized as revenues when a player uses the virtual goods purchased with a virtual currency. Proceeds from the direct sales of virtual goods are similarly recognized as revenues when a player uses the virtual goods. We categorize our virtual goods as either “consumable” or “durable.” Consumable virtual goods represent goods that can be consumed by a specific player action; accordingly, we recognize revenues from the sale of consumable virtual goods as the goods are consumed and our performance obligation is satisfied. Durable virtual goods represent goods that are accessible to the player over an extended period of time; accordingly, we recognize revenues from the sale of durable virtual goods ratably over the period of time the goods are available to the player and our performance obligation is satisfied, which is generally the estimated service period.
Subscription Revenues
Subscription revenue arrangements are mostly derived from World of Warcraft, which is only playable online and is generally sold on a subscription-only basis. Revenues associated with the sales of subscriptions are deferred until the subscription service is activated by the consumer and are then recognized ratably over the subscription period as the performance obligations are satisfied.
Revenues attributable to the purchase of World of Warcraft software by our customers, including expansion packs, are classified as “Product sales,” whereas revenues attributable to subscriptions and other in-game revenues are classified as “In-game, subscription, and other revenues.”
Other Revenues
Other revenues primarily include revenues from software licensing and licensing of intellectual property other than software. These revenues are recognized in "In-game, subscription, and other revenues" on our consolidated statement of operations.
In certain countries we have software licensing arrangements where we utilize third-party licensees to distribute and host our games in accordance with license agreements, for which the licensees typically pay us a fixed minimum guarantee and sales-based royalties. These arrangements typically include multiple performance obligations, such as an upfront license of intellectual property and rights to specified or unspecified future updates. Our estimate of the selling price is comprised of several factors including, but not limited to, prior selling prices, prices charged separately by other third-party vendors for similar service offerings, and a cost-plus-margin approach. Based on the allocated transaction price, we recognize revenue associated with the minimum guarantee (1) when we transfer control of the upfront license of intellectual property, (2) upon transfer of control of future specified updates, and/or (3) ratably over the contractual term in which we provide the customer with unspecified future updates. Royalty payments in excess of the minimum guarantee are generally recognized when the licensed product is sold by the licensee.
Revenues from the licensing of intellectual property other than software primarily include the licensing of our (1) brand, logo, or franchise to customers and (2) media content. Fixed fee payments from customers for the license of our brand or franchise are generally recognized over the license term. Fixed fee payments from customers for the license of our media content are generally recognized when control has transferred to the customer, which may be upfront or over time.
Significant Judgment around Revenue Arrangements with Multiple Deliverables
Our contracts with customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may require significant judgment. Certain of our games, such as titles in the Call of Duty franchise, may contain a license of our intellectual property to play the game offline, but may also depend on a significant level of integration and interdependency with the online functionality. In these cases, significant judgment is required to determine whether this license of our intellectual property should be considered distinct and accounted for separately, or not distinct and accounted for together with the online functionality provided and recognized over time. Generally, for titles in which the software license is functional without the online functionality and a significant component of gameplay is available offline, we believe we have separate performance obligations for the license of the intellectual property and the online functionality.
Significant judgment is also required to determine the standalone selling price for each distinct performance obligation and to determine whether there is a discount that needs to be allocated based on the relative standalone selling price of the various products and services. To estimate the standalone selling price we generally consider market data, including our pricing strategies for the product being evaluated and other similar products we may offer, competitor pricing to the extent data is available, and the replayability design of both the offline and online components of our games. In limited instances, we may also utilize an expected cost approach to determine whether the estimated selling price yields an appropriate profit margin.
Estimated Service Period
We consider a variety of data points when determining the estimated service period for players of our games, including the weighted average number of days between players’ first and last days played online, the average total hours played, the average number of days in which player activity stabilizes, and the weighted-average number of days between players’ first purchase date and last date played online. We also consider known online trends, the service periods of our previously released games, and, to the extent publicly available, the service periods of our competitors’ games that are similar in nature to ours. We believe this provides a reasonable depiction of the transfer of services to our customers, as it is the best representation of the time period during which our customers play our games. Determining the estimated service period is subjective and requires management’s judgment. Future usage patterns may differ from historical usage patterns, and therefore the estimated service period may change in the future. The estimated service periods for players of our current games are less than 12 months.
Principal Agent Considerations
We evaluate sales of our products and content via third-party digital storefronts, such as Microsoft’s Xbox Games Store, Sony’s PSN, the Apple App Store, and the Google Play Store, to determine whether our revenues should be reported gross or net of fees retained by the storefront. Key indicators that we evaluate in determining whether we are the principal in the sale (gross reporting) or an agent (net reporting) include, but are not limited to:
•which party is primarily responsible for fulfilling the promise to provide the specified good or service; and
•which party has discretion in establishing the price for the specified good or service.
Based on our evaluation of the above indicators, we report revenues on a gross basis for sales arrangements via the Apple App Store and the Google Play Store, and we report revenues on a net basis (i.e., net of fees retained by the digital storefront) for sales arrangements via Microsoft’s Xbox Games Store and Sony’s PSN.
Income Taxes
We record a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations. In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification Topic 740, the provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities due to a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. We evaluate deferred tax assets each period for recoverability. For those assets that do not meet the threshold of “more likely than not” that they will be realized in the future, a valuation allowance is recorded.
Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with the tax effects of the deferred tax liabilities, will be sufficient to fully recover the remaining deferred tax assets. In the event that all or part of the net deferred tax assets are determined not to be realizable in the future, an adjustment to the valuation allowance would be charged to tax expense in the period such determination is made.
The calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of ASC Topic 740 and complex tax laws. The accounting guidance for uncertainty in income taxes applies to all income tax positions, including the potential recovery of previously paid taxes. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on our business and results of operations in an interim period in which the uncertainties are ultimately resolved.
Significant judgment is required in evaluating our uncertain tax positions and determining our provision for income taxes. Although we believe our reserves are reasonable, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be different from that which is reflected in our historical income tax provisions and accruals. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will impact the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made. The provision for income taxes includes the impact of reserve provisions and changes to reserves that are considered appropriate, as well as the related net interest and penalties.
We are also subject to the continuous examination of our income tax returns by the IRS and are regularly subject to audit by other tax authorities. We regularly assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes. There can be no assurance that the outcomes from these continuous examinations will not have an adverse impact on our operating results and financial condition.
On December 22, 2017, the U.S. enacted the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act which also created a new minimum tax that applies to certain foreign earnings (“GILTI”). We have elected to recognize deferred taxes for temporary basis differences expected to reverse as GILTI in future years.
Software Development Costs
Software development costs include direct costs incurred for internally developed products, as well as payments made to independent software developers under development agreements. Software development costs are capitalized once the technological feasibility of a product is established and such costs are determined to be recoverable. Technological feasibility of a product requires both technical design documentation and game design documentation, or the completed and tested product design and a working model. For products where proven technology exists, this may occur early in the development cycle. Software development costs related to online hosted revenue arrangements are capitalized after the preliminary project phase is complete and it is probable that the project will be completed and the software will be used to perform the function intended. Significant management judgments and estimates are applied in assessing when capitalization commences for software development costs and the evaluation is performed on a product-by-product basis. Prior to a product’s release, if and when we believe capitalized costs are not recoverable, we expense the amounts as part of “Cost of revenues-software royalties, amortization, and intellectual property licenses.” Capitalized costs for products that are canceled or are expected to be abandoned are charged to “Product development” in the period of cancellation. Amounts related to software development which are not capitalized are charged immediately to “Product development.”
Commencing upon a product’s release, capitalized software development costs are amortized to “Cost of revenues-software royalties, amortization, and intellectual property licenses” based on the ratio of current revenues to total projected revenues for the specific product, generally resulting in an amortization period of six months to approximately two years.
We evaluate the future recoverability of capitalized software development costs on a quarterly basis. For products that have been released, the primary evaluation criterion is the actual performance of the title to which the costs relate. For products that are scheduled to be released in future periods, recoverability is evaluated based on the expected performance of the specific products to which the costs relate or in which the licensed trademark or copyright is to be used. Additionally, criteria used to evaluate expected product performance may include, as appropriate: historical performance of comparable products developed with comparable technology; market performance of comparable titles; orders for the product prior to its release; general market conditions; and, for any sequel product, estimated performance based on the performance of the product on which the sequel is based.
Significant management judgments and estimates are utilized in assessing the recoverability of capitalized costs. In evaluating the recoverability of capitalized costs, the assessment of expected product performance utilizes forecasted sales amounts and estimates of additional costs to be incurred. If revised forecasted or actual product sales are less than the originally forecasted amounts utilized in the initial recoverability analysis, the net realizable value may be lower than originally estimated in any given quarter, which could result in an impairment charge. Material differences may result in the amount and timing of expenses for any period if matters resolve in a manner that is inconsistent with management’s expectations.
For a detailed discussion of the application of these and other accounting policies, see Note 2 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For a detailed discussion regarding the accounting adoption and impacts, see Note 2 and Note 3 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.