Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of the Results of Operations
Forward-Looking Statements
Statements in the following discussion and throughout this report that are not historical in nature are “forward-looking statements.” You can identify forward-looking statements by the use of words such as “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “intend,” “believe,” and similar expressions. Although we believe the expectations reflected in these forward-looking statements are reasonable, such statements are inherently subject to risk and we can give no assurances that our expectations will prove to be correct. Actual results could differ from those described in this report because of numerous factors, many of which are beyond our control. These factors include, without limitation, those described under Item 1A “Risk Factors.” We undertake no obligation to update these forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this report or to reflect actual outcomes. Please see “Forward-Looking Statements” at the beginning of this Form 10-K.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes thereto and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. We undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements in the discussion of our financial condition and results of operations to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this report or to reflect actual outcomes.
Overview
We are a specialty pharmaceutical company that seeks to develop and commercialize our product principally for use in the acute/intensive care hospital setting. Our current product candidate is intravenous (IV) Tramadol, for the treatment of post-operative acute pain. Under the terms of certain agreements described herein, we have an exclusive license to develop and commercialize IV Tramadol in the United States. In 2016, we completed a pharmacokinetic (PK) study for IV Tramadol in healthy volunteers as well as an end of phase 2 (EOP2) meeting with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). In the third quarter of 2017, we initiated a Phase 3 development program of IV Tramadol for the management of post-operative pain. In December 2019, we submitted a New Drug Application (NDA) for IV Tramadol and received a Complete Response Letter (CRL) from the FDA in October 2020. In February 2021, we resubmitted the NDA for IV Tramadol. The FDA assigned a Prescription Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA) goal date of April 12, 2021 for the resubmitted NDA for IV Tramadol. To date, we have not received approval for the sale of our product candidate in any market and, therefore, have not generated any sales revenue from our product candidate.
Recent Developments
On November 12, 2018, we entered into a Stock Purchase and Merger Agreement (SPMA) with InvaGen Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (InvaGen), and Madison Pharmaceuticals Inc. (Merger Sub), pursuant to which we agreed to the sale of the Company in a two-stage transaction, the details of which are summarized below. Recently, InvaGen has communicated to us that it believes two Material Adverse Effects (as defined in the SPMA) have occurred, which raise substantial doubt as to whether or not the merger will be consummated.
In October 2020, InvaGen communicated to us that it believes a Material Adverse Effect (as defined in the SPMA) has occurred due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on potential commercialization and projected sales of IV Tramadol. Additionally, in connection with the resubmission of our NDA in February 2021 (details of which are below), InvaGen communicated to us that it believes the proposed label for IV Tramadol would also constitute a Material Adverse Effect on the purported basis that the proposed label under certain circumstances would make the product commercially unviable, and in addition that the indication that the FDA approves may fail to satisfy a condition precedent to InvaGen’s obligation to consummate the second stage closing of the SPMA. While we disagree with InvaGen’s assertions, it is possible InvaGen could attempt to avoid its obligation to consummate the merger, terminate the SPMA, and/or pursue monetary claims against us.
Over the past several months, we have communicated with InvaGen relating to its assertions that Material Adverse Effects have occurred. Nevertheless, InvaGen has communicated to us its desire to consider all options on the proposed merger, including the option to not consummate the merger. As a result, the possible timing and likelihood of the completion of the merger are uncertain, and, accordingly, there can be no assurance that such transaction will be completed on the expected terms, anticipated schedule, or at all.
Background
On June 26, 2017, we completed an initial public offering (IPO) of our common stock, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $34.2 million after deducting underwriting discounts, and other offering costs.
We used the proceeds from our IPO to initiate our first Phase 3 trial of IV Tramadol in patients with moderate-to-severe pain following bunionectomy, which had its first patient dosed in September 2017. In May 2018, we announced the study met its primary endpoint and all key secondary endpoints.
In December 2018, we initiated the second Phase 3 trial in patients with moderate-to-severe pain following abdominoplasty upon successful completion of the bunionectomy study. In June 2019, we announced the study met its primary endpoint and all key secondary endpoints.
In December 2017, we initiated an open-label safety study, which was completed during the second quarter of 2019. The results showed that IV Tramadol is well-tolerated with a side effect profile consistent with known pharmacology.
In December 2019, we submitted an NDA pursuant to Section 505(b)(2) of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (FDCA). In February 2020, the FDA accepted our NDA submission and set a PDUFA goal date of October 10, 2020. On October 12, 2020, we announced that we had received a CRL from the FDA regarding our NDA. In November 2020, we had a Type A Meeting with the FDA to discuss issues raised in the CRL. On February 12, 2021, we resubmitted the NDA to the FDA for IV Tramadol. The NDA resubmission follows the receipt of official minutes from a Type A meeting with the FDA, which was conducted following receipt of the CRL. The NDA resubmission included revised language relating to the proposed product label and a report relating to terminal sterilization validation. The FDA assigned a PDUFA goal date of April 12, 2021 for the resubmitted NDA for IV Tramadol.
On November 12, 2018, we entered into the SPMA with InvaGen pursuant to which InvaGen agreed to purchase, for $35 million, common shares representing 33.3% of the fully diluted capitalization of the Company (the Stock Purchase Transaction) and subsequently acquire the remaining issued and outstanding capital stock of the Company for $180 million, subject to certain reductions, in a reverse subsidiary merger transaction (the Merger Transaction). Pursuant to the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the SPMA, InvaGen will, at second closing, hold 100% of the issued and outstanding equity interests of the Company. Consummation of the Merger Transaction is conditioned upon, among other things, FDA approval of IV Tramadol by April 30, 2021, its labeling and scheduling and the absence of any Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy restrictions in effect with respect to IV Tramadol, as well as the filing and expiration of any waiting period applicable to the acquisition under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976, as amended, which filing both parties completed on March 12, 2021.
The aggregate consideration to be paid by InvaGen under the SPMA is $215 million in cash (a portion of which was already paid in connection with the Stock Purchase Transaction as described below), subject to certain potential reductions, which InvaGen intends to have sufficient immediately available funds to pay. In addition, we are subject to certain lock-up restrictions and agreed not to (subject to customary exceptions), during the period commencing at the signing of the SPMA until the Merger Transaction, issue, buy, sell, or otherwise subject to a security interest, pledge, hypothecation, mortgage or lien, any securities of the Company.
The SPMA was approved by a majority of our stockholders, including a majority of our non-affiliated stockholders, at our special shareholder meeting on February 6, 2019. On February 8, 2019, the Company and InvaGen consummated the Stock Purchase Transaction whereby InvaGen acquired 5,833,333 shares of our common stock at $6.00 per share for total gross consideration of $35.0 million, representing a 33.3% stake in our capital stock on a fully diluted basis.
As described above, in October 2020, InvaGen communicated to us that it believes a Material Adverse Effect (as defined in the SPMA) has occurred due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on potential commercialization and projected sales of IV Tramadol, which means it is possible InvaGen could attempt to avoid its obligation to consummate the second stage closing under the SPMA, terminate the SPMA, and/or pursue monetary claims against us. We disagree with InvaGen’s assertion that a Material Adverse Effect has occurred and we have advised InvaGen of our position. Additionally, in connection with the resubmission of our NDA in February 2021, InvaGen communicated to us that it believes the proposed label for IV Tramadol under certain circumstances would constitute a Material Adverse Effect (as defined in the SPMA) on the purported basis that the proposed label under certain circumstances would make the product commercially unviable, and in addition that the indication that the FDA approves may fail to satisfy a condition precedent to InvaGen’s obligation to consummate the second stage closing of the SPMA. We have notified InvaGen that we disagree with InvaGen’s assertions. Nevertheless, InvaGen may seek to avoid its obligation to consummate the second stage closing under the SPMA, terminate the SPMA, and/or pursue monetary claims against us.
Over the past several months, we communicated with InvaGen relating to its assertions that Material Adverse Effects have occurred. Nevertheless, InvaGen has communicated to us its desire to consider all options on the proposed merger, including the option to not consummate the merger. This indicates that InvaGen may attempt to avoid its obligations under the SPMA to consummate the merger, terminate the SPMA, and/or pursue monetary claims against Avenue. As a result, the possible timing and likelihood of the completion of the merger are uncertain, and, accordingly, there can be no assurance that such transaction will be completed on the expected terms, anticipated schedule, or at all. During the pendency of any dispute regarding these matters, we may be, and so long as the SPMA remains in place we will be, prohibited from engaging in a change-of-control transaction, selling our rights to IV Tramadol, or effecting an equity or debt financing, in each case without the prior written consent of InvaGen.
In the event that we do not receive FDA approval for IV Tramadol by April 30, 2021, InvaGen will have the right to terminate the SPMA and will have no further obligations to consummate the second stage closing under the SPMA. In the event that InvaGen does not exercise its right to terminate the SPMA, certain restrictions relating to financings and strategic alternatives could exist through October 31, 2021, the time at which we can terminate the SPMA. In the event of termination of the SPMA, InvaGen will retain certain rights pursuant to the Stockholder’s Agreement between us and InvaGen. These rights exist as long as InvaGen maintains at least 75% of the common shares acquired in the first stage closing. Certain actions relating to equity issuances and changes to capital stock are restricted without the prior written consent of InvaGen during this time.
Our net loss for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was approximately $5.2 million and $25.9 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $73.3 million. Substantially all our net losses resulted from costs incurred in connection with our research and development program of IV Tramadol and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations.
We expect to continue to incur research and development costs and increased general and administration related costs and incur operating losses for at least the next several years as we develop and seek regulatory approval for IV Tramadol in the U.S.
We may need to obtain additional capital through the sale of debt or equity financings or other arrangements to fund our operations, research and development activity or regulatory approval activity; however, there can be no assurance that we will be able to raise needed capital under acceptable terms, if at all. The sale of additional equity may dilute existing stockholders and newly issued shares may contain senior rights and preferences compared to currently outstanding shares of common stock. Issued debt securities may contain covenants and limit our ability to pay dividends or make other distributions to stockholders. If we are unable to obtain such additional financing, future operations would need to be scaled back or discontinued.
We are a majority controlled subsidiary of Fortress. For related party transactions, see Note 4.
Avenue Therapeutics, Inc. was incorporated in Delaware on February 9, 2015. Our executive offices are located at 1140 Avenue of the Americas, Floor 9, New York, NY 10036. Our telephone number is (781) 652-4500, and our email address is info@avenuetx.com.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (U.S. GAAP). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to accrued expenses and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Research and Development
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities are expensed when the activity has been performed or when the goods have been received rather than when the payment is made. Upfront and milestone payments due to third parties that perform research and development services on our behalf will be expensed as services are rendered or when the milestone is achieved. Costs incurred in obtaining technology licenses are charged to research and development expense if the technology licensed has not reached technological feasibility and has no alternative future use.
Research and development costs primarily consist of personnel related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel, and other related expenses, stock-based compensation, payments made to third parties for license and milestone costs related to in-licensed products and technology, payments made to third party contract research organizations for preclinical and clinical studies, investigative sites for clinical trials, consultants, the cost of acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial materials, costs associated with regulatory filings and patents, laboratory costs and other supplies.
Costs incurred in obtaining technology licenses are charged to research and development expense if the technology licensed has not reached commercial feasibility and has no alternative future use. The licenses purchased by us require substantial completion of research and development, regulatory and marketing approval efforts in order to reach commercial feasibility and has no alternative future use. Accordingly, the total purchase price for the licenses acquired are reflected as research and development - licenses acquired on our Statement of Operations.
Stock-Based Compensation
We expense stock-based compensation to employees, consultants and board members over the requisite service period based on the estimated grant-date fair value of the awards. Stock-based awards with graded-vesting schedules are recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period for each separately vesting portion of the award.
The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based awards represent management’s best estimates and involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment.
Income Taxes
No income tax expense or benefit was recognized in the accompanying financial statements. Our deferred tax assets are comprised primarily of net operating loss carryforwards. We maintain a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets since we have not yet achieved sustained profitable operations. As a result, we have not recorded any income tax benefit since our inception.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Research and Development Expenses
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, research and development expenses were $2.9 million and $22.2 million, respectively. The $19.3 million decrease primarily reflects decreases of $13.4 million in clinical trial costs associated with the completion of the abdominoplasty study in June 2019, $1.3 million in clinical trial costs associated with the completion of the safety study during the second quarter of 2019 and $3.4 million associated with the submission of our NDA in December 2019. There were also decreases of $0.6 million in personnel costs, $0.3 million in non-cash stock compensation and $0.2 million in consulting costs.
We expect our research and development activities to continue as we develop our existing product candidate, reflecting costs associated with the following:
• employee-related expenses;
• license fees and milestone payments related to in-licensed product and technology;
• expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, investigative sites and consultants that conduct our clinical trials;
• the cost of acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial materials; and
• costs associated with non-clinical activities, and regulatory approvals.
Research and Development Expenses - Licenses Acquired
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, research and development expenses - licenses acquired were $0 and $1.0 million, respectively. The $1.0 million expense in 2019 represents the milestone payment due to our licensor upon submission of our NDA.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of professional fees for legal and consulting services, market research, personnel-related costs, public reporting company related costs and other general operating expenses not otherwise included in research and development expenses. We expect our general and administrative costs to continue as we seek potential regulatory approval and potential commercialization of our product candidate.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, general and administrative expenses were $2.4 million and $3.1 million, respectively. The $0.7 million decrease primarily reflects decreases of $0.8 million for non-cash stock compensation, $0.1 million in personnel costs and $0.1 million for commercial marketing preparation costs. These decreases were partially offset by an increase of $0.3 million for legal costs.
Interest Income
Interest income was $62,000 and $0.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in interest income was due to the cash used in operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred substantial operating losses since our inception and expect to continue to incur significant operating losses for the foreseeable future and may never become profitable. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $73.3 million. We have used the funds from our IPO and from the InvaGen share purchase to finance our operations and will continue to use the funds primarily for general corporate purposes, which may include financing our growth and developing our product candidate.
In the event that IV Tramadol is approved by the FDA, this triggers $5.0 million in milestone payments, to which the Company currently does not have sufficient funding. In the event that IV Tramadol is not approved by the FDA, the Company believes that its cash and cash equivalents should be sufficient to fund its operating expenses through the end of the third quarter of 2021. We will need to secure additional funds through equity or debt offerings, or other potential sources. We cannot be certain that additional funding will be available on acceptable terms, or at all. These factors individually and collectively raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
In addition to the foregoing, based on current assessments, we do not expect any material impact on our development timeline and our liquidity due to the worldwide spread of the COVID-19 virus (except as may be implicated by the alleged Material Adverse Effect claimed by InvaGen). However, we are continuing to assess the effect on our operations by monitoring the spread of COVID-19 and the actions implemented to combat the virus throughout the world. We will also continue to assess the alleged Material Adverse Effect claimed by InvaGen.
Cash Flows for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily comprised of our $5.2 million net loss and decrease in operating assets and liabilities of $0.2 million, partially offset by $0.7 million in share based compensation.
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $26.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily comprised of our $25.9 million net loss and decrease in operating assets and liabilities of $2.2 million, partially offset by $1.8 million in share based compensation.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.0 million and consisted of the milestone payment paid to our licensor pursuant to our NDA submission.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $0. We purchased $5.0 million six months certificates of deposits in May 2019 and it matured in November 2019.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $32.3 million which was from the proceeds of our issuance of shares to InvaGen in connection with the SPMA.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
See Note 2 to the financial statements for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements including the respective expected dates of adoption and expected effects on results of operations and financial condition.