Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on the discovery, development and commercialization of novel therapeutics. Our mission is to bring hope with life-changing therapies to patients and families that are affected by rare diseases. Our lead product candidate is QLS-215, a potential best-in-class monoclonal antibody inhibitor of plasma kallikrein in preclinical development for the treatment of hereditary angioedema, or HAE, a rare, debilitating and potentially life-threatening disease.
In January 2021, as further described below, we acquired Quellis Biosciences, Inc., or Quellis, including the QLS-215 program, and announced a private placement that, upon closing in February 2021, resulted in gross proceeds to us of approximately $110.0 million before deducting placement agent and other offering expenses. In November 2020, after we stopped the development of our edasalonexent program as a potential treatment for Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy, or DMD, we decided to explore and evaluate strategic options and engaged Ladenburg Thalmann & Co., Inc. as our strategic financial advisor. The acquisition of Quellis was the result of our evaluation of strategic options and we believe that the acquisition represents an opportunity to create substantial value for our stockholders.
HAE is a rare, debilitating and potentially life-threatening disease. The treatment options for patients with HAE have improved, however there is remaining unmet medical need and the global market for HAE therapy is strong and growing. The vision for our lead program, QLS-215, is to develop a best-in-class monoclonal antibody inhibitor of plasma kallikrein for HAE prophylaxis that is able to treat HAE by achieving sustained blood levels of QLS-215 with infrequent dosing. Plasma kallikrein is a critical component of HAE that causes pathologic vascular permeability, vasodilation and ultimately excessive tissue swelling. QLS-215 is a humanized monoclonal antibody targeting plasma kallikrein that has shown in preclinical studies that it may potentially enable patients to dose less frequently and potentially be more effective than existing HAE treatments. QLS-215 is currently in preclinical development and we expect to submit an Investigational New Drug application, or IND, for QLS-215 in the first half of 2022 and plan to initiate a Phase 1a clinical trial with initial results anticipated by the end of 2022. Subsequently, assuming positive data from the Phase 1a clinical trial, we plan to initiate a Phase 1b/2 trial in patients with HAE in 2023 with initial results anticipated by the end of 2023. We believe that these clinical trials have the opportunity to establish proof of concept for the differentiated profile of QLS-215.
Previously, our lead program was edasalonexent, which was in Phase 3 clinical development for the treatment of DMD. In October 2020, we announced that the Phase 3 PolarisDMD trial of edasalonexent did not meet its primary endpoint, which was a change from baseline in the North Star Ambulatory Assessment over one year of treatment with edasalonexent compared to placebo. In addition, we announced that the secondary endpoint timed function tests (time to stand, 10-meter walk/run and 4-stair climb) did not show statistically significant improvements. Based on these results, we stopped activities related to the development of edasalonexent, including the GalaxyDMD open-label extension trial. The Phase 3 Polaris DMD trial was a one-year placebo-controlled trial designed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of edasalonexent in boys ages 4-7 (up to 8th birthday) with DMD. The trial enrolled 131 boys across eight countries, with any mutation type, who were not on steroids. Edasalonexent was well-tolerated, consistent with the safety profile seen to date. The majority of adverse events were mild in nature and the most common treatment-related adverse events were diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal pain and rash. There were no treatment-related serious adverse events and no dose reductions. Data from the Phase 3 PolarisDMD trial will be further analyzed and we expect to publish these data.
January 2021 Quellis Acquisition and February 2021 Financing
In January 2021, we acquired Quellis pursuant to an Agreement and Plan of Merger, or the Merger Agreement, by and among us, Cabo Merger Sub I, Inc., a Delaware corporation and our wholly owned subsidiary, or the First Merger Sub, Cabo Merger Sub II, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and our wholly owned subsidiary, or the Second Merger Sub, and Quellis. Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, the First Merger Sub merged with and into Quellis, pursuant to which Quellis was the surviving entity and became a wholly owned subsidiary of Catabasis, or the First Merger. Immediately following the First Merger, Quellis merged with and into the Second Merger Sub, pursuant to which the Second Merger Sub was the surviving entity, or the Second Merger and, together with the First Merger, the Merger. Under the terms of the Merger Agreement, at the closing of the Merger, we issued to the Quellis stockholders 3,332,669 shares of our common stock, and 50,504 shares of newly designated Series X Preferred Stock (as described below). In addition, we assumed outstanding Quellis stock options, which became options for our common stock, and assumed a warrant exercisable for Quellis common stock, which became a warrant to purchase 2,805 shares of Series X Preferred Stock at an exercise price of $341.70 per share, and a warrant to purchase 185,136 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $0.35 per share.
In January 2021, we also entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement, or the Purchase Agreement, with certain institutional and accredited investors, or the Investors, pursuant to which, we sold an aggregate of 35,573 shares of Series X Preferred Stock for an aggregate purchase price of $110.0 million, or the February 2021 Financing. Subject to stockholder approval, each share of Series X Preferred Stock issued in the Merger and pursuant to the Purchase Agreement is convertible into 1,000 shares of common stock. Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, we have agreed to hold a stockholders’ meeting to submit the following matters to our stockholders for their consideration: (i) the approval of the conversion of the Series X Preferred Stock into shares of common stock in accordance with Nasdaq Listing Rule 5635(a), or the Conversion Proposal and (ii) if necessary or appropriate, the approval of an amendment to our certificate of incorporation to authorize sufficient shares of common stock after the conversion of the Series X Preferred Stock issued pursuant to the Merger Agreement and the Purchase Agreement and/or to effectuate a reverse stock split, or the Charter Amendment Proposal. Assuming stockholder approval of the Conversion Proposal, on the fourth business day after such approval, each share of Series X Preferred Stock then outstanding would automatically convert into 1,000 shares of common stock, subject to certain beneficial ownership limitations, including that a holder of Series X Preferred Stock is prohibited from converting shares of Series X Preferred Stock into shares of common stock if, as a result of such conversion, such holder, together with its affiliates, would beneficially own more than a specified percentage (to be initially set at 9.99% and thereafter adjustable by the holder to a number between 4.99% and 19.99%) of the total number of shares of common stock issued and outstanding immediately after giving effect to such conversion. Shares of Series X Preferred Stock not converted automatically are thereafter subject to conversion at the option of the holder.
Financial Overview
Revenue
As of December 31, 2020, we have not generated any revenue from product sales.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our drug discovery efforts, and the development of our product candidates, which include:
•
employee-related expenses including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense;
•
expenses incurred under agreements with third parties, including contract research organizations that conduct clinical trials and research and development and preclinical activities on our behalf;
•
the cost of consultants;
•
the cost of lab supplies and acquiring, developing and manufacturing study materials; and
•
facilities and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance and other supplies.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are deferred and capitalized. The capitalized amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
We typically use our employee, consultant and infrastructure resources across our development programs. We track outsourced development costs by product candidate or development program, but we do not allocate personnel costs, other internal costs or external consultant costs to specific product candidates or development programs. We record our research and development expenses net of any research and development tax incentives we are entitled to receive from government authorities.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by program (in thousands). All of the programs with respect to which we incurred research and development expenses during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 have been discontinued.
Since inception of the edasalonexent and the CAT-5571 programs, total direct expenses to support the programs have been $66.8 million and $4.2 million, respectively.
Based on the results of the Phase 3 PolarisDMD trial of edasalonexent for the treatment of DMD, we stopped all activities related to the development of edasalonexent, including the ongoing GalaxyDMD open-label extension trial.
We expect to incur significant research and development expenses in the year ending December 31, 2021 and in future periods in connection with the preclinical and clinical activities related to the development of QLS-215. Because of this, we expect that our research and development expenses will be fairly consistent over the next several quarters as compared to the prior year periods. Development of QLS-215 and any future product candidates is highly uncertain and we cannot reasonably estimate at this time the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that would be necessary to complete the development of any such product candidates. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, material net cash inflows would commence from any such product candidates. This is due to the fact that we would need to raise substantial additional capital to fund the clinical development of any such product candidates and the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing product candidates, including the uncertainties of:
•
establishing an appropriate safety profile with IND-enabling toxicology studies;
•
successful enrollment in, and completion of clinical trials;
•
receipt of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•
establishing commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers;
•
obtaining and maintaining patent and trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity;
•
launching commercial sales, if and when we are able to obtain marketing approval, whether alone or in collaboration with others; and
•
a continued acceptable safety profile following approval.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of QLS-215 or any future product candidate would significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance, accounting, commercial, business development, legal and human resources functions. Other significant costs include facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters, and fees for accounting and consulting services.
We anticipate that in the near term our general and administrative expenses will remain relatively consistent with their current levels, although as we continue to develop QLS-215 and potentially expand our pipeline to include other product candidates, our general and administrative expenses may increase.
Reduction in Workforce
In December 2020, following the decision to stop development of edasalonexent, we announced that we were reducing our workforce during the quarter ended December 31, 2020. Charges for employee severance and employee benefits of $0.4 million were recorded in the year ended December 31, 2020, all of which will be paid in 2021. Substantially all of these costs were recorded in the research and development section of the accompanying consolidated statement of operations.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense), net consists of interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments and net amortization expense on short-term investments, and gains and losses related to foreign currency fluctuations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles. We believe that several accounting policies are important to understanding our historical and future performance. We refer to these policies as critical because these specific areas generally require us to make judgments and estimates about matters that are uncertain at the time we make the estimate, and different estimates-which also would have been reasonable-could have been used. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those described in greater detail below. We base our estimates on historical experience and other market-specific or other relevant assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policy is the most critical to aid you in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses. This process involves reviewing contracts, identifying services that have been performed on our
behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses include the costs incurred for services performed by contract research organizations, or CROs, in connection with research and development activities for which we have not yet been invoiced.
We base our expenses related to CROs on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with CROs that conduct research and development on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our CROs will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the research and development expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting expense amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, together with the dollar change in those items (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $7.3 million to $25.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $18.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of 40%. The increase in research and development expenses was attributable to activities associated with conducting the Phase 3 PolarisDMD clinical trial, the GalaxyDMD open label extension, and regulatory and manufacturing preparations for advancing the edasalonexent program prior to receiving the Phase 3 results. The $7.3 million increase consisted of a $5.4 million increase in direct program costs to support our edasalonexent program, a $1.1 million increase in employee expenses, a $0.5 million increase in consulting and professional services, a $0.2 million increase in the research and development portion of facilities expense and a $0.1 million increase in the research and development portion of other miscellaneous office expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $3.1 million to $11.9 million for year ended December 31, 2020 from $8.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of 35%. The
increase in general and administrative expenses was attributable to a $1.8 million increase in consulting and professional services primarily related to an increase in preparations for potential commercialization of edasalonexent, a $0.6 million increase in employee expenses, a $0.3 million increase in insurance expense, a $0.2 million increase in the general and administrative portion of facilities expense, and a $0.2 million increase in other miscellaneous office expenses.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net decreased by $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, which was attributable to a decrease in interest and investment income due to lower interest rates.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
From our inception through December 31, 2020, we raised an aggregate of $316.0 million, through various private placements of preferred stock, our initial public offering, as well as various other registered equity offerings, including underwritten public offerings, at-the-market programs, and stock option and warrant exercises. As of December 31, 2020, we had $44.9 million in cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, we raised an additional $110.0 million in gross proceeds from the February 2021 Financing.
We have not generated any revenue from product sales to date. We have incurred significant annual net operating losses in every year since our inception and expect to incur net operating losses in 2021 and for the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $260.9 million. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year. Although our expenses will decrease in conjunction with our restructuring and the decision to stop activities related to edasalonexent, we expect such decrease in costs to be offset, in part, by increased costs to initiate research, preclinical and clinical development efforts for QLS-215 and any other future product candidates; maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio; establish a commercial infrastructure to support the marketing and sale of QLS-215 and any other future product candidates; hire additional personnel, such as clinical, regulatory, quality control and scientific personnel; and operate as a public company.
At-the-Market Offerings
We have entered into various sales agreements with Cowen and Company LLC, or Cowen, pursuant to which we could issue and sell shares of our common stock under at-the-market, or ATM, programs. Cowen was not required to sell any specific amount but acted as our sales agent using commercially reasonable efforts consistent with its normal trading and sales practices. Shares sold pursuant to these sales agreements were sold pursuant to shelf registration statements, one of which became effective on July 19, 2016, and which was replaced by a new shelf registration statement which became effective May 22, 2019. We have paid Cowen 3% of the gross proceeds from the common stock sold through these sales agreements.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold an aggregate of 2,353,737 shares of common stock pursuant to our ATM programs, at an average offering price of $7.13 per share, for gross proceeds of $16.8 million, resulting in net proceeds of $16.3 million after deducting sales commissions and offering expenses. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we sold an aggregate of 1,282,904 shares of common stock pursuant to our ATM programs, at an average offering price of $5.81 per share, for gross proceeds of $7.5 million, resulting in net proceeds of $7.0 million after deducting sales commissions and offering expenses.
January 2020 Financing
On January 30, 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement with Oppenheimer & Co. Inc. relating to an underwritten public offering of an aggregate of 5,290,000 shares of our common stock, at a price to the public of $5.00 per share, including 690,000 shares issued upon the exercise in full by Oppenheimer & Co. Inc. of its overallotment option. This resulted in gross proceeds of $26.5 million, and net proceeds of $24.6 million.
February 2019 Financing
On February 6, 2019, we entered into an underwriting agreement with Oppenheimer & Co. Inc. relating to an underwritten public offering of 4,000,000 shares of our common stock and accompanying warrants to purchase up to 2,000,000 shares of common stock, at a combined price to the public of $5.00 per unit, for gross proceeds of $20.0 million, and net proceeds of $18.5 million. The warrants were immediately exercisable at an exercise price of $6.25 per share and will expire five years from the date of issuance.
Funding Requirements
Our primary uses of capital are for compensation and related expenses, manufacturing costs for pre-clinical and clinical materials, third party pre-clinical research and development services, legal and other regulatory expenses and general overhead.
As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $260.9 million. We have been primarily involved with research and development activities and have incurred operating losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception.
As of December 31, 2020, we had available cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $44.9 million. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, we raised an additional $110.0 million in gross proceeds from the February 2021 Financing. We expect that our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, including the $110.0 million in gross proceeds from the February 2021 Financing, are sufficient to support our operating expenses through 2023, assuming our stockholders approve the conversion of the Series X Preferred Stock into common stock as discussed further below.
Our estimate as to how long we expect our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments to be able to fund our operations is based on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Further, changing circumstances, some of which may be beyond our control, could cause us to consume capital significantly faster than we currently anticipate, and we may need to seek additional funds sooner than planned. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
our ability to integrate QLS-215 into our operations and meet our overall timing expectations for the program;
•
the progress, timing, costs and results of clinical trials of, and research and preclinical development efforts for, QLS-215 any future product candidates, including potential future clinical trials;
•
our ability to enter into and the terms and timing of any additional collaborations, licensing or other arrangements that we may establish;
•
the number and characteristics of future product candidates that we pursue and their development requirements;
•
the outcome, timing and costs of seeking regulatory approvals;
•
the costs of commercialization activities for any of our product candidates that receive marketing approval to the extent such costs are not the responsibility of any future collaborators, including the costs and timing of establishing product sales, marketing, market access, distribution, supply chain and manufacturing capabilities, and scaling up the manufacturing of drug substance and drug product to clinical and commercial scale, securing all raw materials necessary to conduct such scale-up and successfully completing all other activities related thereto;
•
subject to receipt of marketing approval, revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates;
•
if we obtain marketing approval of any of our products, our ability to successfully compete against other approved products that are approved or used as treatments for the indications for which our products are approved, including with respect to QLS-215 in HAE;
•
our headcount growth and associated costs;
•
the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and protecting our intellectual property rights and defending against intellectual property related claims;
•
the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations, business and prospects; and the costs of operating as a public company.
In connection with our acquisition of Quellis, we issued Series X Preferred Stock to Quellis stockholders in the Merger and to the Investors in the February 2021 Financing. We are obligated under the Merger Agreement to seek stockholder approval for the conversion of the Series X Preferred Stock into common stock. In the event that we fail to timely hold the stockholder meeting or fail to obtain stockholder approval, then the holders of the Series X Preferred Stock would be entitled to require us to redeem, in cash, the shares of common stock underlying their Series X Preferred Stock at a price per share equal to the fair value of the common stock. If we are forced to redeem a significant amount of shares underlying the Series X Preferred Stock, it could, among other things, materially affect our results of operations and cash usage forecasts, require us to slow down or stop the development of QLS-215 and any other future product candidates, require us to raise additional capital and impact our ability to raise additional capital. Also, while we cannot predict the amount with any level of certainty, there is a level of cash settlement at which, if it is exceeded, could require us to make redemption payments in excess of our current liquidity. Based on precedent transactions and the terms of the Series X Preferred Stock, we believe that our stockholders who are entitled to vote on the conversion proposal at our 2021 Annual Meeting of Stockholders, which is scheduled for June 2, 2021, will vote to approve the proposal. However, as the vote of our stockholders is outside of our control, there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year from the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Identifying potential product candidates and conducting preclinical testing and clinical trials is a time-consuming, expensive and uncertain process that takes years to complete, and we may never generate the necessary data or results required to obtain marketing approval and achieve product sales. In addition, QLS-215 or any future product candidates, if approved, may not achieve commercial success. Our commercial revenues, if any, will be derived from sales of medicines that we do not expect to be commercially available for years, if at all. Accordingly, we will need to continue to rely on additional financing to achieve our business objectives. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. We do not have any committed external source of funds. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, our stockholders’ ownership interests will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our stockholders’ rights. Debt financing, if available, would result in periodic payment obligations and may involve agreements that include restrictive covenants that limit our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends, that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business.
If we raise funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Cash Flows
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $32.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $37.3 million adjusted for non-cash items of $1.4 million, and a net decrease in operating assets of $3.4 million, which resulted primarily from a decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $1.3 million and a decrease in the right of use asset of $0.2 million as well as increases in accrued expenses and accounts payable of $1.9 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was $26.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $26.3 million adjusted for non-cash items of $1.6 million, and a net increase in operating assets of $1.9 million, which resulted primarily from an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $1.3 million, an increase in the right of use asset of $0.1 million as well as decreases in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities of $0.5 million.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted of proceeds from maturities of short-term investments of $69.1 million, which were partially offset by purchases of short-term investments of $62.8 million. Net cash used in investing activities was $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and consisted primarily of purchases of short-term investments of $155.2 million partially offset by proceeds from maturities of short-term investments of $151.1 million.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $40.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily attributable to net proceeds of $24.6 million from our January 2020 financing and net proceeds of $16.3 million from our ATM programs. Net cash provided by financing activities was $25.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, which was primarily attributable to net proceeds of $18.5 million from our February 2019 financing and net proceeds of $7.1 million from our ATM programs.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under applicable SEC rules.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations as of payment due date by period at December 31, 2020:
(1)
Represents future minimum lease payments under our non-cancelable operating lease. The minimum lease payments above do not include any related common area maintenance charges or real estate taxes.
We enter into agreements in the normal course of business with vendors for preclinical research studies and other services and products for operating purposes. We have not included these payments in the table of contractual obligations above since the contracts are cancelable at any time by us, generally upon 60 days’ prior written notice, and therefore we believe that our non-cancelable obligations under these agreements are not material.