ITEM 7. - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis provides information about the major components of the results of operations and financial condition, liquidity, and capital resources of the Company and its subsidiaries. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the “Consolidated Financial Statements” and the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” presented in Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” contained in this Form 10-K.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
General
The accounting and reporting policies of the Company are in accordance with U.S. GAAP and conform to general practices within the banking industry. The Company’s financial position and results of operations are affected by management’s application of accounting policies, including estimates, assumptions, and judgments made to arrive at the carrying value of assets and liabilities and amounts reported for revenues, expenses, and related disclosures. Different assumptions in the application of these policies could result in material changes in the Company’s consolidated financial position and/or results of operations. The Company evaluates its critical accounting estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis and updates them as needed. Management has discussed the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors of the Company.
The critical accounting and reporting policies include the Company’s accounting for the allowance for loan and lease losses, acquired loans, business combinations and divestitures, and goodwill and intangible assets. The Company’s accounting policies are fundamental to understanding the Company’s consolidated financial position and consolidated results of operations. Accordingly, the Company’s significant accounting policies are discussed in detail in Note 1 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K.
The following is a summary of the Company’s critical accounting policies that are highly dependent on estimates, assumptions, and judgments. The below accounting policies related to the ALLL were updated following the Company’s adoption of ASC 326 on January 1, 2020.
Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses - The provision for loan losses is an amount sufficient to bring the ALLL to an estimated balance that management considers adequate to absorb expected losses in the portfolio. The ALLL is a valuation account that is deducted from the loans' amortized cost basis to present the net amount expected to be collected on the loans. Loans are charged off against the ALLL when management believes the loan balance is no longer collectible. Subsequent recoveries of previously charged off amounts are recorded as increases to the ALLL; however, expected recoveries do not exceed the aggregate of amounts previously charged-off.
Management’s determination of the adequacy of the ALLL is based on an evaluation of the composition of the loan portfolio, the value and adequacy of collateral, current economic conditions, historical loan loss experience, reasonable and supportable forecasts, and other risk factors. The ALLL is estimated using a loan-level PD/LGD method for all loans with the exception of its auto and third party consumer lending portfolios. For auto and third party consumer lending portfolios, the Company has elected to pool those loans based on similar risk characteristics to determine the ALLL using vintage and loss rate methods.
While management uses available information to estimate expected losses on loans, future changes in the ALLL may be necessary based on changes in portfolio composition, portfolio credit quality, and/or economic conditions.
Determining the Contractual Term
Expected credit losses are estimated over the contractual term of the loans, adjusted for expected prepayments when appropriate. The contractual term excludes expected extensions, renewals, and modifications unless either of the following applies: management has a reasonable expectation at the reporting date that a troubled debt restructuring will be executed with an individual borrower or the extensions or renewal options are included in the original or modified contract at the reporting date and are not unconditionally legally cancelable by the Company.
The Company’s ALLL measures the expected lifetime loss using pooled assumptions and loan-level details for financial assets that share common risk characteristics and evaluates an individual reserve in instances where the financial assets do not share the same risk characteristics.
Collectively Assessed Reserve Consideration
Loans that share common risk characteristics are considered collectively assessed. Loss estimates within the collectively assessed population are based on a combination of pooled assumptions and loan-level characteristics.
Quantitative loss estimation models have been developed based largely on internal historical data at the loan and portfolio levels from 2005 through the current period and the economic conditions during the same time period. Expected losses for the Company’s collectively assessed loan segments are estimated using a number of quantitative methods including PD/LGD, Vintage, and Loss Rate.
As part of its qualitative framework, the Company evaluates its current underwriting standards, geographic footprint, national and international current and forecasted economic conditions, expected government stimulus, and other factors to estimate the impact that changes in these factors may have on expected loan losses.
The Company’s ALLL for the current period is based on a two-year reasonable and supportable forecast period with a straight-line reversion over the next two years to long-term average loss factors.
Individually Assessed Reserve Consideration
Loans that do not share risk characteristics are evaluated on an individual basis. The individual reserve component relates to loans that have shown substantial credit deterioration as measured by risk rating and/or delinquency status. In addition, the Company has elected the practical expedient that would include loans for individual assessment consideration if the repayment of the loan is expected substantially through the operation or sale of collateral because the borrower is experiencing financial difficulty. Where the source of repayment is the sale of collateral, the ALLL is based on the fair value of the underlying collateral, less selling costs, compared to the amortized cost basis of the loan. If the ALLL is based on the operation of the collateral, the reserve is calculated based on the fair value of the collateral calculated as the present value of expected cash flows from the operation of the collateral, compared to the amortized cost basis. If the Company determines that the value of a collateral dependent loan is less than the recorded investment in the loan, the Company charges off the deficiency if it is determined that such amount is deemed uncollectible. Typically, a loss is confirmed when the Company is moving toward foreclosure or final disposition.
The Company obtains appraisals from a pre-approved list of independent, third party appraisers located in the market in which the collateral is located. The Company’s approved appraiser list is continuously maintained by the Company’s REVG to ensure the list only includes such appraisers that have the experience, reputation, character, and knowledge of the respective real estate market. At a minimum, it is ascertained that the appraiser is currently licensed in the state in which the property is located, experienced in the appraisal of properties similar to the property being appraised, has knowledge of current real estate market conditions and financing trends, and is reputable. The Company’s internal REVG, which reports to the Enterprise Risk Management group, performs either a technical or administrative review of all appraisals obtained in accordance with the Company’s Appraisal Policy. The Appraisal Policy mirrors the Federal regulations governing appraisals, specifically the Interagency Appraisal and Evaluation Guidelines and FIRREA. A technical review will ensure the overall quality of the appraisal, while an administrative review ensures that all of the required components of an appraisal are present. Independent appraisals or valuations are obtained on all individually assessed loans, as well as updated every twelve months for all individually assessed loans. Adjustments to real estate appraised values are only permitted to be made by the REVG. The individually assessed analysis is reviewed and approved by senior Credit Administration officers and the Special Assets Loan Committee. External valuation sources are the primary source to value collateral dependent loans; however, the Company may also utilize values obtained through other valuation sources. These alternative sources of value are used only if deemed to be more representative of value based on updated information regarding collateral resolution. The ALLL on loans individually assessed is updated, reviewed, and approved on a quarterly basis at or near the end of each reporting period.
The Company performs regular credit reviews of the loan portfolio to review the credit quality and adherence to its underwriting standards. The credit reviews include annual commercial loan reviews performed by the Company’s commercial bankers in accordance with CLP, relationship reviews that accompany annual loan renewals, and independent reviews by its Loan Review Group. Upon origination, each commercial loan is assigned a risk rating ranging from one to nine, with loans closer to one having less risk. This risk rating scale is the Company’s primary credit quality indicator. Consumer loans are not risk rated unless past due status, bankruptcy, or other event results in the assignment of a Substandard or worse risk rating in accordance with the consumer loan policy.
Governance
The Company’s Allowance Committee, which reports to the Audit Committee and contains representatives from both the Company’s finance and risk teams, is responsible for approving the Company’s estimate of expected credit losses and resulting ALLL. The Allowance Committee considers the quantitative model results and qualitative factors when approving the final ALLL. The Company’s ALLL model is subject to the Company’s models risk management program which is overseen by the Model Risk Management Committee, which reports to the Company’s Board Risk Committee.
Acquired Loans -The Company has purchased loans, some of which have experienced more than insignificant credit deterioration since origination. Acquired loans are recorded at their fair value at acquisition date without carryover of the acquiree’s previously established ALLL, as credit discounts are included in the determination of fair value. The fair value of the loans is determined using market participant assumptions in estimating the amount and timing of both principal and interest cash flows expected to be collected on the loans and then applying a market-based discount rate to those cash flows. During evaluation upon acquisition, acquired loans are also classified as either PCD or acquired performing. The acquired loans are subject to the Company’s ALLL Policy upon acquisition.
Acquired performing loans are accounted for under ASC 310-20, Receivables - Nonrefundable Fees and Other Costs. The difference between the fair value and unpaid principal balance of the loan at acquisition date (premium or discount) is amortized or accreted into interest income over the life of the loans. If the acquired performing loan has revolving privileges, it is accounted for using the straight-line method; otherwise, the effective interest method is used.
PCD loans reflect loans that have experienced more-than-insignificant credit deterioration since origination, as it is probable at acquisition that the Company will not be able to collect all contractually required payments. These PCD loans are accounted for under ASC 326. The PCD loans are segregated into pools based on loan type and credit risk. Loan type is determined based on collateral type, purpose, and lien position. Credit risk characteristics include risk rating groups, nonaccrual status, and past due status. For valuation purposes, these pools are further disaggregated by maturity, pricing characteristics, and re-payment structure.
PCD loans are recorded at the amount paid. An ALLL is determined using the same methodology as other loans held for investment. The initial ALLL is determined on a collective basis and is allocated to individual loans. The sum of the loan's purchase price and ALLL becomes its initial amortized cost basis. The difference between the initial amortized cost basis and the par value of the loan is a noncredit discount or premium, which is amortized into interest income over the life of the loan. Subsequent changes to the ALLL are recorded through provision expense.
Business Combinations and Divestitures - Business combinations are accounted for under ASC 805, using the acquisition method of accounting. The acquisition method of accounting requires an acquirer to recognize the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed at the acquisition date measured at their fair values as of that date. To determine the fair values, the Company utilizes third party valuations, appraisals, and internal valuations based on discounted cash flow analysis or other valuation techniques. Under the acquisition method of accounting, the Company will identify the acquiree and the closing date and apply applicable recognition principles and conditions. If they are necessary to implement its plan to exit an activity of an acquiree, costs that the Company expects, but is not obligated, to incur in the future are not liabilities at the acquisition date, nor are costs to terminate the employment or relocate an acquiree’s employees. The Company does not recognize these costs as part of applying the acquisition method. Instead, the Company recognizes these costs as expenses in its post-combination financial statements in accordance with other applicable GAAP.
Merger-related costs are costs the Company incurs to effect a business combination. Those costs include advisory, legal, accounting, valuation, and other professional or consulting fees. Some other examples of costs to the Company include systems conversions, integration planning consultants, contract terminations, and advertising costs. The Company will account for merger-related costs as expenses in the periods in which the costs are incurred and the services are received. Except for the costs to issue debt or equity securities in connection with a merger, which will be recognized in accordance with other applicable accounting guidance. These merger-related costs are included on the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Income classified within the noninterest expense caption.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets - The Company follows ASC 350, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, which prescribes the accounting for goodwill and intangible assets subsequent to initial recognition. Goodwill is generally determined as the excess of the fair value of the consideration transferred, plus the fair value of any noncontrolling interests in the acquiree, over the fair value of the net assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of the acquisition date.
Goodwill and intangible assets acquired in a purchase business combination and determined to have an indefinite useful life are not amortized, but tested for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events and circumstances exists that indicate that a goodwill impairment test should be performed. The Company has selected April 30th as the date to perform the annual impairment test. Intangible assets with definite useful lives are amortized over their estimated useful lives, which range from 4 to 10 years, to their estimated residual values. Goodwill is the only intangible asset with an indefinite life on the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Long-lived assets, including purchased intangible assets subject to amortization, such as the core deposit intangible asset, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized in the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. Assets to be disposed of would be separately presented in the balance sheet and reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell and are no longer depreciated. Management concluded that no circumstances indicating an impairment of these assets existed as of the balance sheet date.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS (ISSUED BUT NOT ADOPTED)
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, “Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes.” This guidance was issued to simplify accounting for income taxes by removing specific technical exceptions that often produce information investors have a hard time understanding. The amendments also improve consistent application of and simplify GAAP for other areas of Topic 740 by clarifying and amending existing guidance. The amendments are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted. The Company does not expect a material financial statement impact from the adoption of this standard.
In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-04, “Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848): Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting.” This guidance provides temporary, optional guidance to ease the potential burden in accounting for reference rate reform associated with the LIBOR transition. LIBOR and other interbank offered rates are widely used benchmark or reference rates that have been used in the valuation of loans, derivatives, and other financial contracts. Global capital markets are going to be required to move away from LIBOR and other interbank offered rates and toward rates that are more observable or transaction based and less susceptible to manipulation. Topic 848 provides optional expedients and exceptions for applying GAAP to contract modifications and hedging relationships, subject to meeting certain criteria, that reference LIBOR or another reference rate expected to be discontinued. The ASU is intended to help stakeholders during the global market-wide reference rate transition period. The amendments are effective as of March 12, 2020 through December 31, 2022. The Company is planning to adopt Topic 848; however, does not expect these amendments to have a material impact on the financial statements.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity.” This guidance was issued to improve financial reporting associated with accounting for convertible instruments and contracts in an entity’s own equity. The amendments are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those years. The Company evaluated the impacts from this standard and does not expect a material financial statement impact.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Executive Overview
On February 1, 2019, the Company completed the acquisition of Access, a bank holding company based in Reston, Virginia. The Company’s results for the first quarter of 2019 include two months of financial results of Access.
On May 20, 2019, the Company re-branded to Atlantic Union Bankshares Corporation and successfully completed the integration of Access National Bank branches and operations into Atlantic Union Bank. Rebranding-related costs amounted to $6.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. There were no rebranding costs for the year ended December 31, 2020.
On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted ASC 326, which resulted in an increase of $51.7 million in the ACL on January 1, 2020. The impact of the overall worsening economic forecast related to COVID-19 throughout 2020 and subsequent to the adoption of ASC 326 has led to a further net increase to the ACL. At December 31, 2020 the ACL was $170.5 million, which included an ALLL of $160.5 million and an RUC of $10.0 million.
On June 9, 2020, the Company announced the closing of an offering of 6,900,000 depositary shares, each representing a 1/400th ownership interest in a share of its Series A preferred stock with a liquidation preference of $10,000 per share of Series A preferred stock (equivalent to $25 per depositary share), including 900,000 depositary shares pursuant to the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase additional depositary shares. The total net proceeds to the Company were approximately $166.4 million, after deducting the underwriting discount and other offering expenses payable by the Company. The Company is using the net proceeds of the offering for general corporate purposes in the ordinary course of its business, such as the repayment of debt, loan funding, acquisitions, additions to working capital, capital expenditures and investments in the Company’s subsidiaries.
During 2020, the Company launched several initiatives to reduce expenses in light of the current and expected operating environment, including the consolidation of certain branch locations. The Company completed the consolidation of 15 branches in 2020, and five branches were consolidated in February 2021. These actions resulted in expenses of approximately $6.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to lease termination costs, severance costs and real estate write-downs.
Net Income & Performance Metrics
● Net income available to common shareholders was $152.6 million and EPS was $1.93 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net income of $193.5 million and EPS of $2.41 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
● Pre-tax pre-provision operating earnings(1) totaled $294.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to pre-tax pre-provision operating earnings(1) of $295.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Balance Sheet
● Loans held for investment (net of deferred fees and costs) were $14.0 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.4 billion from December 31, 2019. Excluding the effects of the PPP(1), loans held for investment (net of deferred fees and costs) at December 31, 2020 increased $230.9 million from the prior year. This increase was primarily a result of organic loan growth.
● Total deposits at December 31, 2020 were $15.7 billion, an increase of $2.4 billion from December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to the impact of PPP loan related deposits and government stimulus.
(1) For a reconciliation of these non-GAAP measures, including the non-GAAP operating measures that exclude merger-related costs and nonrecurring tax expenses unrelated to the Company’s normal operations, refer to section "Non-GAAP Measures" included within this Item 7.
Recent Developments
COVID-19 Pandemic. The Company’s financial performance generally, and in particular the ability of its borrowers to repay their loans, the value of collateral securing those loans, as well as demand for loans and other products and services the Company offers, is highly dependent on the business environment in its primary markets where it operates and in the United States as a whole.
On March 13, 2020, the President of the United States issued a proclamation declaring a national state of emergency in response to COVID-19. During the final two weeks of March 2020, the governors of multiple U.S. states, including Virginia, where the Company has its principal place of business, issued stay-at-home orders that directed the closing of non-essential businesses and restricted public gatherings. Beginning in the second quarter of 2020, businesses began to re-open in many areas of the United States under government social distancing and other restrictions. However, recently many states, including Virginia, have issued additional restrictions due to a resurgence of COVID-19 cases and the threat of new COVID-19 variants. The COVID-19 pandemic will likely continue to be a significant health concern in the Company’s areas of operation, the United States and across the globe.
The pandemic is having a wide range of economic impacts, involving the possibility of an extended economic recession. The pandemic has severely disrupted supply chains and adversely affected production, demand, sales, and employee productivity across a range of industries. It has dramatically increased unemployment in the Company’s areas of operation and nationally. The national economy and economies in the Company’s areas of operations continued to be affected through fiscal year 2020, despite the fact that many businesses have re-opened to one degree or another. In addition, the pandemic may have social and other impacts that are not yet known but may affect the Company’s customers, employees, and vendors. These events have adversely affected the Company’s business, financial condition, and results of operations during the fiscal year 2020. The duration, nature, and severity of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration, spread, and severity of the outbreak, the efficacy of vaccine and treatment developments, the uncertainty regarding new variants of COVID-19 that have emerged, the pandemic’s impact on its customers, employees, and vendors and the nature and effect of past and future federal and state governmental and private sector responses to the pandemic, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. New information may emerge concerning the severity of the outbreak and the recent actions taken to contain COVID-19 infections.
Future developments with respect to COVID-19 remain highly uncertain and cannot be predicted and new information may emerge concerning the nature and severity of the outbreak, short- and long-term health impacts, the actions to contain the outbreak or treat its impact, and unforeseen effects of the pandemic, among others. Other national health concerns, including the outbreak of other contagious diseases or pandemics, may adversely affect the Company in the future.
During 2020 and into 2021, the Company has taken and is continuing to take precautions to protect the safety and well-being of the Bank’s employees and customers during the COVID-19 pandemic. The Bank closed corporate offices and encouraged employees to work from home where possible. Branches remained and continue to remain open for lobby or drive-thru service where possible to serve customer needs; however, the Bank has and will likely continue to intermittently close bank branches in response to potential COVID-19 exposures or confirmed COVID-19 infection in accordance with applicable health and safety guidance and legal requirements, and to help reduce transmission of COVID-19. The Bank has implemented additional safety policies and procedures and follows guidance issued by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, state health authorities, and state and local executive orders where our branches and corporate offices are located. The Bank remains very focused on the safety and well-being of its employees and customers during the COVID-19 pandemic, and is committed to safely and responsibly operating its branch network and maintaining appropriate staffing in each branch.
The Bank has been participating in the SBA PPP under the CARES Act, which was intended to provide economic relief to small businesses that have been adversely impacted by COVID-19. The Bank secured funding through the SBA PPP for more than 11,000 loans, totaling approximately $1.7 billion. As of December 31, 2020, the recorded investment of these loans was approximately $1.2 billion and unamortized deferred fees were $17.6 million.
Loans under the PPP generally have a two-year term, earn interest at 1.00%, and are forgivable to the extent that the proceeds are used for payroll costs and other qualifying expenses in accordance with the terms of the program. Lenders participating in the program are scheduled to receive loan processing fees from the SBA ranging from 1.00% to 5.00% of the initial principal amount of the loan. Beginning in the third quarter of 2020, the Bank began working with these borrowers and the SBA to achieve forgiveness and repayment of these loans. In addition to an insignificant amount of PPP loan pay offs, the Company processed the first forgiven loan during the fourth quarter of 2020 and subsequently processed approximately $429.3 million of loan forgiveness on approximately 3,100 PPP loans during the fourth quarter of 2020. Certain provisions of the CARES Act, including additional PPP funding, were extended as a result of the CAA, which was signed into law on December 27, 2020. The Company began accepting applications on January 19, 2021 for additional PPP loans pursuant to the CAA.
The Bank has also implemented a short-term loan modification program that is intended to provide temporary relief for certain of our borrowers who expected to be or may have already been adversely affected by the outbreak of COVID-19 by providing short-term deferrals of loan payments on amortizing loans. The Bank initially offered a three-to six-month full payment deferral option or a three- to six-month interest-only payment option. In certain industries more heavily impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Bank has extended the aforementioned deferral options an additional three to six-months. Section 4013 of the CARES Act, as amended by the CAA, provides banks, savings associations, and credit unions with the ability to make loan modifications related to COVID-19 without categorizing the loans as a TDR. The Company’s short-term loan modifications have declined throughout the year from approximately $1.6 billion at June 30, 2020 to approximately $769.6 million at September 30, 2020 to approximately $146.1 million at December 31, 2020. The majority of the remaining modifications at December 31, 2020 are in the commercial real estate portfolio. Most loans that were modified under the Company’s short-term loan modification program and whose deferral agreements have expired remain current with only $7.6 million of former COVID-19 loan modifications at December 31, 2020 being more than 30 days past due.
The Bank did not register as a lender under the MSLP. All MSLP facilities expired on January 8, 2021.
Net Income
2020 compared to 2019
Net income available to common shareholders for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $41.0 million or 21.2% to $152.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and represented earnings per share of $1.93, compared to $193.5 million and $2.41 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the economic
disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Adjusted operating earnings available to common shareholders (non-GAAP) totaled $168.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $227.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, and diluted operating earnings per common share (non-GAAP) were $2.14 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.84 for the year ended December 31, 2019. For reconciliation of the non-GAAP measures, refer to section “Non-GAAP Measures” included within this Item 7. The reduction in net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 included an increase to the provision for credit losses of $66.0 million from $21.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $87.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to increases to the Company’s ACL estimates driven by the impact of the overall worsening economic forecast related to COVID-19 and its related forecast implications required as a result of the Company’s 2020 adoption of CECL. In addition, the Company incurred FHLB prepayment penalties of $31.1 million, expenses of approximately $6.8 million related to branch consolidation costs and other expense reduction actions, and approximately $2.1 million in costs related to the Company’s response to COVID-19 during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $555.3 million, which was an increase of $17.4 million from the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily the result of higher average loan balances, an increase in loan accretion recognized on PPP loans, and cost of funds declines, partially offset by a decline in overall loan and investment yields, and lower purchased loan discount accretion.
Noninterest income decreased $1.3 million from $132.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $131.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to a decline in service charges on deposit accounts, which were partially offset by an increases in mortgage banking income and loan related interest rate swap income, as well as benefit proceeds on bank owned life insurance.
Noninterest expense decreased $5.0 million or 1.2% from $418.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $413.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by the lack of rebranding and merger-related costs for the year ended December 31, 2020, partially offset by increases in debt extinguishment costs, as well as increases in salaries and benefit costs.
2019 compared to 2018
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $47.3 million or 32.3% from $146.2 million to $193.5 million and represented earnings per share of $2.41, compared to $2.22 for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to the acquisition of Access. Adjusted operating earnings (non-GAAP) totaled $227.8 million and adjusted operating earnings per common share (non-GAAP) were $2.84 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Included in net income for the year ended December 31, 2019 was a net loss from discontinued operations of $170,000 and approximately $1.0 million in after-tax expenses related to branch closure costs, compared to a net loss from discontinued operations of $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Refer to Note 19 "Segment Reporting & Discontinued Operations" in Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K for further discussion regarding discontinued operations.
Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $111.2 million from 2018, primarily due to higher average loan balances and the acquisition of Access. The provision for credit losses increased $7.4 million from $13.7 million in 2018 to $21.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to loan growth.
Noninterest income increased $28.6 million from $104.2 million in 2018 to $132.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, driven primarily by the acquisition of Access, a recovery of a Xenith-acquired loan charged off prior to being acquired, and proceeds from the sale of investment securities, which were partially offset by the net gain on Shore Premier sale recognized in the year ended December 31, 2018.
Noninterest expense increased $80.6 million or 23.9% from $337.8 million in 2018 to $418.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Excluding merger-related and rebranding costs, amortization of intangible assets, and losses on balance sheet repositioning, adjusted operating noninterest expense (non-GAAP) increased $63.9 million or 22.4% from $285.2 million in 2018 to $349.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily driven by the acquisition of Access.
For reconciliation of the non-GAAP measures, refer to section “Non-GAAP Measures” included within this Item 7.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income, which represents the principal source of revenue for the Company, is the amount by which interest income exceeds interest expense. The net interest margin is net interest income expressed as a percentage of average earning assets. Changes in the volume and mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, as well as their respective yields and rates, have a significant impact on the level of net interest income, the net interest margin, and net income.
The 2019 and 2018 information presented excludes discontinued operations. Refer to Note 19 "Segment Reporting & Discontinued Operations" in Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K for further discussion regarding discontinued operations.
The following tables show interest income on earning assets and related average yields, as well as interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities and related average rates paid for the periods indicated:
(1) Refer to the "Non-GAAP Measures" section within this Item 7 for more information about these measures, including a reconciliation of these measures to the most directly comparable financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP.
In the first quarter of 2020, the FRB reduced the upper bound target on the federal funds rate from 1.75% to 0.25%. As a result of the decrease in market rates, loans indexed to short-term market rates, primarily 1-month LIBOR, repriced lower leading to an overall decline in earning assets yield and compression of the Company’s net interest margin. The Company reduced the rates it pays on all customer deposits and has repriced most of its wholesale borrowings as a result of the lower interest rate environment.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net interest income was $555.3 million, an increase of $17.4 million from the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net interest income (FTE) (non-GAAP) was $566.8 million, an increase of $17.9 million from the prior year. The increases in both net interest income and net interest income (FTE) were primarily the result of a decline in cost of funds and loan accretion recognized on PPP loans, partially offset by a decline in overall loan and investment yields. For the year ended December 31, 2020, PPP loan accretion totaled $32.5 million. Net accretion related to acquisition accounting decreased $1.5 million from $25.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $23.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net interest margin decreased 35 bps and net interest margin (FTE) (non-GAAP) decreased 37 bps, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The net decline in net interest margin and net interest margin (FTE) measures were primarily driven by a decrease in the yield on interest-earning assets, partially offset by a decrease in cost of funds and an increase in loan accretion on PPP loans. The decline in the Company’s earning asset yields was primarily driven by declines in loan and investment securities yields, as a result of the decrease in market interest rates. The cost of funds decline was driven by lower deposit costs and wholesale borrowing costs driven by lower market
interest rates and a favorable funding mix. For reconciliation of the non-GAAP measures, refer to section “Non-GAAP Measures” included within this Item 7.
(1) Refer to the "Non-GAAP Measures" section within this Item 7 for more information about these measures, including a reconciliation of these measures to the most directly comparable financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net interest income was $537.9 million, an increase of $111.2 million from the year ended December 31, 2018. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net interest income (FTE) was $549.0 million, an increase of $114.1 million from the prior year. The increase in both net interest income and net interest income (FTE) were primarily the result of a $3.3 billion increase in average interest-earning assets and a $2.2 billion increase in average interest-bearing liabilities from the impact of the Access acquisition during the first quarter of 2019. Net accretion related to acquisition accounting increased $6.1 million from $19.2 million in 2018 to $25.3 million in 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net interest margin decreased 6 bps and net interest margin (FTE) decreased 5 bps compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The net decline in net interest margin and net interest margin (FTE) measures were primarily driven by an increase in the cost of funds, partially offset by a smaller increase in interest-earning asset yields. The increase in cost of funds was primarily attributable to the increase in short-term market interest rates and the composition of interest-bearing liabilities. The increase in interest-earning asset yields was primarily due to the increase in short-term market interest rates.
The following table shows interest income on earning assets and related average yields as well as interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities and related average rates paid for the years indicated (dollars in thousands):
AVERAGE BALANCES, INCOME AND EXPENSES, YIELDS AND RATES (TAXABLE EQUIVALENT BASIS)
(1) Income and yields are reported on a taxable equivalent basis using the statutory federal corporate tax rate of 21%.
(2) Rates and yields are annualized and calculated from actual, not rounded amounts in thousands, which appear above.
(3) Nonaccrual loans are included in average loans outstanding.
(4) Interest income on loans includes $24.3 million, $24.8 million, and $17.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, in accretion of the fair market value adjustments related to acquisitions.
(5) Interest expense on time deposits includes $132,000, $833,000, and $2.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, in accretion of the fair market value adjustments related to acquisitions.
(6) Interest expense on borrowings includes $633,000, $360,000, and $506,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 in amortization of the fair market value adjustments related to acquisitions.
The Volume Rate Analysis table below presents changes in interest income and interest expense and distinguishes between the changes related to increases or decreases in average outstanding balances of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities (volume), and the changes related to increases or decreases in average interest rates on such assets and liabilities (rate). Changes attributable to both volume and rate have been allocated proportionally. Results, on a taxable equivalent basis, are as follows in this Volume Rate Analysis table for the years ended December 31, (dollars in thousands):
(1) The rate-related change in interest income on loans includes the impact of lower accretion of the acquisition-related fair market value adjustments of $520,000 for the 2020 vs. 2019 change and higher accretion of $7.7 million for the 2019 vs. 2018 change.
(2) The rate-related change in interest expense on deposits includes the impact of lower accretion of the acquisition-related fair market value adjustments of $701,000 and $1.7 million for the 2020 vs. 2019 and 2019 vs 2018 change, respectively.
(3) The rate-related change in interest expense on other borrowings includes the impact of higher amortization of the acquisition-related fair market value adjustments of $273,000 for the 2020 vs. 2019 change and lower amortization of $146,000 for the 2019 vs. 2018 change.
The Company’s net interest margin (FTE) includes the impact of acquisition accounting fair value adjustments. The impact of net accretion for 2018, 2019, and 2020 are reflected in the following table (dollars in thousands):
Noninterest Income
The 2019 information in the following table excludes discontinued operations. Refer to Note 19 "Segment Reporting & Discontinued Operations" in Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K for further discussion regarding discontinued operations.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, noninterest income decreased $1.3 million or 1.0% to $131.5 million from $132.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Excluding gains on sales of securities and gains related to balance sheet repositioning, adjusted operating noninterest income (1) for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $4.2 million or 3.3%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by approximately $9.3 million in life insurance proceeds received during the third quarter of 2019 related to a Xenith-acquired loan that had been charged off prior to the Company’s acquisition of Xenith. In addition, there was a decline in service charges on deposit accounts of $5.0 million primarily due to lower NSF and overdraft fees, and a decline of $7.4 million in interchange fees primarily due to reduced debit card interchange transaction fees as a result of the Durbin Amendment which was effective for the Company on July 1, 2019. Partially offsetting these decreases was an increase of $1.2 million in loan related interest rate swap income and an increase in bank owned life insurance income of $1.2 million primarily related to death benefit proceeds received during the third quarter of 2020. In addition, mortgage banking income increased $15.6 million primarily due to increased mortgage loan origination volumes resulting from the current low interest rate environment.
(1) Refer to the “Non-GAAP Measures” section within this Item 7 for more information about this non-GAAP measure, including a reconciliation of these measures to the most directly comparable financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP.
The 2019 and 2018 information in the following table excludes discontinued operations. Refer to Note 19 "Segment Reporting & Discontinued Operations" in Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K for further discussion regarding discontinued operations.
NM - Not meaningful
For the year ended December 31, 2019, noninterest income increased $28.6 million or 27.4% to $132.8 million from $104.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Excluding gains on sales of securities, adjusted operating noninterest income (1) for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $21.3 million or 20.5%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily driven by approximately $9.3 million in life insurance proceeds received during the third quarter of 2019 related to a Xenith-acquired loan that had been charged off prior to the Company’s acquisition of Xenith, and an increase in loan related interest rate swap income of $10.6 million. Fiduciary and asset management fees increased $7.2 million and mortgage banking income increased $10.3 million, primarily related to the acquisition of Access. Partially offsetting these increases, in 2018 the Company recognized a net gain of $20.0 million related to the sale of Shore Premier, as well as had higher net interchange income of $4.2 million partially due to the fact that in 2019 the Company’s debit card interchange transaction fees were reduced as a result of the Durbin Amendment, which was effective for the Company on July 1, 2019.
(1) Refer to the “Non-GAAP Measures” section within this Item 7 for more information about this non-GAAP measure, including a reconciliation of these measures to the most directly comparable financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Noninterest Expense
The 2019 information in the following table excludes discontinued operations. Refer to Note 19 "Segment Reporting & Discontinued Operations" in Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K for further discussion regarding discontinued operations.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, noninterest expense decreased $5.0 million or 1.2% to $413.3 million from $418.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Excluding merger-related costs, amortization of intangible assets, rebranding-related costs, and losses related to balance sheet repositioning, adjusted operating noninterest expense (1) for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $16.5 million or 4.7%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by an increase of $11.3 million in salaries and benefits driven by the full year impact of the Access acquisition, annual merit adjustments, and increased costs of benefits. In addition, there was an increase in FDIC assessment premiums of $3.1 million, primarily due to $3.8 million in FDIC small bank assessment expense credits received during 2019. Noninterest expense also included approximately $6.8 million in costs related to the Company’s long-term expense reduction plans, including the closure of 15 branches in 2020 and five branches in February 2021, and approximately $2.1 million in costs related to the Company’s response to COVID-19 incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increases were partially offset by a decline in OREO and credit-related expenses of approximately $2.7 million due to lower OREO valuation adjustments and a decline in marketing and advertising expense of $1.7 million.
(1) Refer to the “Non-GAAP Measures” section within this Item 7 for more information about this non-GAAP measure, including a reconciliation of these measures to the most directly comparable financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP.
The 2019 and 2018 information in the following table excludes discontinued operations. Refer to Note 19 "Segment Reporting & Discontinued Operations" in Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K for further discussion regarding discontinued operations.
NM - Not meaningful
For the year ended December 31, 2019, noninterest expense increased $80.6 million or 23.9% to $418.3 million from $337.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Excluding merger-related and rebranding costs, amortization of intangible assets, and losses related to balance sheet repositioning, adjusted operating noninterest expense (1) for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $63.9 million, or 22.4% compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily driven by the acquisition of Access.
(1) Refer to the “Non-GAAP Measures” section within this Item 7 for more information about this non-GAAP measure, including a reconciliation of these measures to the most directly comparable financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes is based upon the results of operations, adjusted for the effect of certain tax-exempt income and non-deductible expenses. In addition, certain items of income and expense are reported in different periods for financial reporting and tax return purposes. The tax effects of these temporary differences are recognized currently in the deferred income tax provision or benefit. Deferred tax assets or liabilities are computed based on the difference between the financial statement and income tax bases of assets and liabilities using the applicable enacted marginal tax rate.
The effective tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 was 15.1%, 16.2% and 16.7%, respectively.
BALANCE SHEET
Assets
At December 31, 2020, total assets were $19.6 billion, an increase of $2.0 billion from $17.6 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase in assets was primarily a result of both organic and PPP loan growth.
Loans held for investment, net of deferred fees and costs, were $14.0 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.4 billion or 11.2% from December 31, 2019. Excluding the effects of the PPP (1), loans held for investment (net of deferred fees and costs) at December 31, 2020 increased $230.9 million or 1.8% from December 31, 2019. Average loan balances increased $1.8 billion in 2020 or 15.3%, from December 31, 2019. Excluding the effects of the PPP (1), average loan balances increased $736.4 million or 6.2% from December 31, 2019. The increases from prior year was primarily due to organic and PPP loan growth. For additional information on the Company’s loan activity, please refer to section “Loan Portfolio” included within this Item 7 and Note 4 “Loans and Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K.
Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity
At December 31, 2020, total liabilities were $16.9 billion, an increase of $1.9 billion from $15.0 billion at December 31, 2019.
Total deposits at December 31, 2020 were $15.7 billion, an increase of $2.4 billion or 18.2% when compared to $13.3 billion at December 31, 2019. Average deposits increased $2.4 billion or 19.5% from the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase from prior year was primarily due to the impact of PPP loan related deposits and government stimulus in response to COVID-19. For additional information on this topic, see section “Deposits” included within this Item 7.
Total borrowings at December 31, 2020 were $840.7 million, a decrease of $673.0 million or 44.5% when compared to $1.5 billion at December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by the repayment of FHLB advances and redemption of subordinated debt. For additional information on the Company’s borrowing activity, please refer to Note 9 “Borrowings” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K.
At December 31, 2020, stockholders’ equity was $2.7 billion, an increase of $195.4 million from December 31, 2019. The increase in stockholders’ equity was primarily related to the issuance and sale of Series A preferred stock that took place on June 9, 2020 and earnings retained by the Company during 2020. The Company’s capital ratios continue to exceed the minimum capital requirements and is considered “well-capitalized” for regulatory purposes. The following table summarizes the Company’s regulatory capital ratios for the periods ended December 31, (dollars in thousands):
(1) Refer to "Non-GAAP Measures" included within this Item 7.
On June 9, 2020, the Company issued and sold 6,900,000 depositary shares, each representing a 1/400th ownership interest in a share of the Company’s Series A preferred stock, par value $10.00 per share of Series A preferred stock with a liquidation preference of $10,000 per share of Series A preferred stock. The net proceeds received from the issuance of the Series A preferred stock was approximately $166.4 million after deducting the underwriting discount and other offering expenses payable by the Company. The Series A preferred stock is included in Tier 1 capital.
During 2020, the Company declared and paid cash dividends of $1.00 per common share, an increase of $0.04 per share or 4.2% over cash dividends paid in 2019. During 2020, the Company also declared and paid dividends on the outstanding shares of Series A preferred stock of $328.48 per share (equivalent to $0.82 per outstanding depositary share).
On July 10, 2019, the Company announced that its Board of Directors has authorized a share repurchase program to purchase up to $150 million of the Company’s common stock through June 30, 2021 in open market transactions or privately negotiated transactions. On March 20, 2020, the Company suspended its share repurchase program, which had $20 million remaining in the authorization when it was suspended. The Company repurchased an aggregate of approximately 3.7 million shares at an average price of $35.48 per share under the authorization prior to the suspension.
Securities
At December 31, 2020, the Company had total investments in the amount of $3.2 billion or 16.2% of total assets, as compared to $2.6 billion or 15.0% of total assets at December 31, 2019. The Company seeks to diversify its portfolio to minimize risk. It focuses on purchasing mortgage-backed securities for cash flow and reinvestment opportunities and securities issued by states and political subdivisions due to the tax benefits and the higher yield offered from these securities. The majority of the Company’s mortgage-backed securities are agency-backed securities, which have a government guarantee. The investment portfolio has a high percentage of municipal securities; therefore, the Company earns a higher taxable equivalent yield on its portfolio as compared to many of its peers. For information regarding the hedge transaction related to AFS securities, see Note 11 "Derivatives" in Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K.
The table below sets forth a summary of the AFS securities, HTM securities, and restricted stock as of the dates indicated (dollars in thousands):
The following table summarizes the contractual maturity of AFS securities at fair value and their weighted average yields as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
(1) Yields on tax-exempt securities have been computed on a tax-equivalent basis.
The following table summarizes the contractual maturity of HTM securities at carrying value and their weighted average yields as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
(1) Yields on tax-exempt securities have been computed on a tax-equivalent basis.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company maintained a diversified municipal bond portfolio with approximately 63% of its holdings in general obligation issues and the remainder primarily backed by revenue bonds. Issuances within the State of Texas represented 21%; no other state had a concentration above 10%. Substantially all municipal holdings are considered investment grade. When purchasing municipal securities, the Company focuses on strong underlying ratings for general obligation issuers or bonds backed by essential service revenues.
Loan Portfolio
Loans held for investment, net of deferred fees and costs, were $14.0 billion and $12.6 billion at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Commercial & industrial loans and commercial real estate-non-owner occupied loans represented the Company’s largest categories at December 31, 2020. Commercial & industrial loans included approximately $1.2 billion in loans from the PPP loan program.
The following table presents the Company’s composition of loans held for investment, net of deferred fees and costs, in dollar amounts and as a percentage of total gross loans as of December 31, (dollars in thousands):
The following table presents the remaining maturities, based on contractual maturity, by loan type and by rate type (variable or fixed), as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
The Company remains committed to originating soundly underwritten loans to qualifying borrowers within its markets. For its core loan portfolios, the Company is focused on providing community-based financial services and discourages the origination of portfolio loans outside of its principal trade areas. As reflected in the loan table, at December 31, 2020, the largest components of the Company’s loan portfolio consisted of commercial real estate, commercial & industrial, and construction and land development loans. The risks attributable to these concentrations are mitigated by the Company’s credit underwriting and monitoring processes, including oversight by a centralized credit administration function and credit policy and risk management committee, as well as seasoned bankers focusing their lending to borrowers with proven track records in markets with which the Company is familiar.
The majority of the Company’s loan portfolio is comprised of portfolios not disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Of those portfolios disrupted by COVID-19, the hospitality portfolio makes up the largest portion of the Company’s portfolio (less than 6% of total loans), followed by health care, retail trade, senior living, and restaurants. The Company has no significant exposure to the energy, cruise, or passenger aviation sectors.
Asset Quality
Overview
At December 31, 2020, the Company experienced increases of NPAs compared to December 31, 2019, primarily due to the Company’s adoption of ASC 326, which resulted in a change in the accounting and reporting related to PCI loans which are now defined as PCD and evaluated at the loan level instead of being evaluated in pools under PCI accounting. Past due loan levels as a percentage of total loans held for investment at December 31, 2020 were lower than past due loan levels at December 31, 2019.
Net charge-offs decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Total net charge-offs as a percentage of total average loans also decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the allowance for credit losses and the provision for loan losses increased from the year ended December 31, 2019 as a result of the adoption of ASC 326 as well as a worsening economic forecast due to the impact of COVID-19.
The Company believes that its continued proactive efforts to effectively manage its loan portfolio have contributed to the sustained historically low levels of NPAs. Efforts include identifying existing problem credits as well as generating new business relationships. Through early identification and diligent monitoring of specific problem credits where the uncertainty has been realized, or conversely, has been reduced or eliminated, the Company’s management has been able
to quantify the credit risk in its loan portfolio, adjust collateral dependent credits to appropriate reserve levels, and further identify those credits that are not recoverable. The Company continues to refrain from originating or purchasing loans from foreign entities. The Company selectively originates loans to higher risk borrowers. The Company’s loan portfolio generally does not include exposure to option adjustable rate mortgage products, high loan-to-value ratio mortgages, interest only mortgage loans, subprime mortgage loans or mortgage loans with initial teaser rates, which are all considered higher risk instruments.
As discussed within the “Recent Developments” section within this Item 7, the COVID-19 pandemic is having a wide range of economic impacts, including impacts in the Company’s area of operations and on the Company’s clients and borrowers. While the Company has not yet experienced deterioration in asset quality as compared to pre-pandemic performance, the Company does expect that at some point asset quality will be adversely affected to some degree due to pandemic-related bankruptcies, business closures, unemployment, and other effects. At this time, it is impossible for the Company to estimate either the timing or the magnitude of any such adverse changes in asset quality.
Loan Modifications for Borrowers Affected by COVID-19
The March 22 Joint Guidance encourages banks, savings associations, and credit unions to make loan modifications for borrowers affected by COVID-19 and, importantly, assures those financial institutions that they will not (i) receive supervisory criticism for such prudent loan modifications and (ii) be required by examiners to automatically categorize COVID-19-related loan modifications as TDRs. The federal banking regulators have confirmed with the FASB that short-term loan modifications made on a good faith basis in response to COVID-19 to borrowers who were current (i.e., less than 30 days past due on contractual payments) when the modification program was implemented are not considered TDRs.
In addition, Section 4013 of the CARES Act, as amended by the CAA, provides banks, savings associations, and credit unions with the ability to make loan modifications related to COVID-19 without categorizing the loan as a TDR or conducting the analysis to make the determination, which is intended to streamline the loan modification process. Any such suspension is effective for the term of the loan modification; however, the suspension is only permitted for loan modifications made during the effective period of Section 4013 and only for those loans that were not more than thirty days past due as of December 31, 2019. The relief afforded by Section 4013 of the CARES Act, as amended by the CAA, is available to loans modified between March 1, 2020 and the earlier of 60 days after the date of termination of the COVID-19 national emergency and January 1, 2022.
The Company has made certain loan modifications pursuant to the March 22 Joint Guidance and Section 4013 of the CARES Act (as amended by the CAA) and as of December 31, 2020 approximately $146.1 million, or approximately 1% of total loans, remain under their modified terms. The majority of the Company’s modifications as of December 31, 2020 were in the commercial real estate portfolios.
Nonperforming Assets
At December 31, 2020, NPAs totaled $45.2 million, an increase of $12.3 million or 37.3% from December 31, 2019. NPAs as a percentage of total outstanding loans at December 31, 2020 were 0.32%, an increase of 6 basis points from 0.26% at December 31, 2019. Excluding the impact of the PPP loans (1), NPAs as a percentage of total outstanding loans were 0.35%, an increase of 9 basis points from 0.26% at December 31, 2019. The Company’s adoption of ASC 326 resulted in a change in the accounting and reporting related to PCI loans which are now defined as PCD and evaluated at the loan level instead of being evaluated in pools under PCI accounting. All prior period nonaccrual and past due loan metrics discussed herein have not been restated for CECL accounting and exclude PCI-related loan balances.
(1) Refer to the “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” section within this Item 7 for more information about these non-GAAP financial measures, including a reconciliation of these measures to the most directly comparable financial measures in accordance with GAAP.
The following table shows a summary of asset quality balances and related ratios as of and for the years ended December 31, (dollars in thousands):
(1) Amounts are not directly comparable due to the Company’s adoption of ASC 326 on January 1, 2020. Prior to January 1, 2020, nonaccrual and past due loan information excluded PCI-related loan balances. These balances also reflect the impact of Section 4013 of the CARES Act and the March 22 Guidance.
(2) Refer to the “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” section within this Item 7 for more information about this non-GAAP financial measure, including a reconciliation of these measures to the most directly comparable financial measures in accordance with GAAP.
Nonperforming assets at December 31, 2020 included $42.4 million in nonaccrual loans, a net increase of $14.2 million or 50.4% from December 31, 2019. The following table shows the activity in nonaccrual loans for the years ended December 31, (dollars in thousands):
The majority of the nonaccrual additions related to residential 1-4 family - commercial loans, residential 1-4 family - revolving loans, and commercial and industrial loans.
The following table presents the composition of nonaccrual loans and the coverage ratio, which is the ALL expressed as a percentage of nonaccrual loans, at the years ended December 31, (dollars in thousands):
Nonperforming assets at December 31, 2020 also included $2.8 million in foreclosed property, a decrease of $1.9 million or 41.1% from the prior year. The following table shows the activity in foreclosed property for the years ended December 31, (dollars in thousands):
(1) Includes subsequent measurement period adjustments.
During 2020, the majority of sales of foreclosed property were primarily related to residential real estate and land.
The following table presents the composition of the foreclosed property portfolio at the years ended December 31, (dollars in thousands):
Past Due Loans
At December 31, 2020 past due loans still accruing interest totaled $49.8 million or 0.36% of total loans held for investment, compared to $76.6 million or 0.61% of total loans held for investment at December 31, 2019. Excluding the impact of the PPP loans (1), past due loans still accruing interest were 0.39% of total adjusted loans held for investment at December 31, 2020. Of the total past due loans still accruing interest $13.6 million or 0.10% of total loans held for
investment were loans past due 90 days or more at December 31, 2020, compared to $13.4 million or 0.11% of total loans held for investment at December 31, 2019.
Troubled Debt Restructurings
A modification of a loan’s terms constitutes a TDR if the creditor grants a concession that it would not otherwise consider to the borrower for economic or legal reasons related to the borrower’s financial difficulties. Management strives to identify borrowers in financial difficulty early and work with them to modify their loan to more affordable terms before their loan reaches nonaccrual status. These modified terms may include rate reductions, extension of terms that are considered to be below market, conversion to interest only, principal forgiveness and other actions intended to minimize the economic loss and to avoid foreclosure or repossession of the collateral.
The total recorded investment in TDRs at December 31, 2020 was $20.6 million, an increase of $1.1 million or 5.6% from $19.5 million at December 31, 2019. Of the $20.6 million of TDRs at December 31, 2020, $14.0 million or 68.0% were considered performing while the remaining $6.6 million were considered nonperforming. Of the $19.5 million of TDRs at December 31, 2019, $15.7 million or 80.5% were considered performing while the remaining $3.8 million were considered nonperforming. Loans are removed from TDR status in accordance with the established policy described in Note 1 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K.
For loan modifications made under the March 22 Joint Guidance and CARES Act, as amended by the CAA, refer to Note 1 “Summary of Significant Accounting Polices” in Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K. this report.
Net Charge-offs
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net charge-offs of loans were $11.4 million or 0.08% of total average loans, compared to $20.9 million or 0.17% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Excluding the impact of the PPP loans (1), net charge-offs were 0.09% of total average loans compared to 0.17% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The majority of net charge-offs in 2020 were related to the third-party consumer loan portfolio.
Provision for Credit Losses
The provision for credit losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $87.1 million, an increase of $66.0 million or 313.2% from the prior year. The provision for credit losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 included $82.2 million in provision for loan losses and $4.9 million in provision for unfunded commitments. The increase in the provision for credit losses in the current year compared to the prior year was primarily due to the impact of the worsening economic forecast due to the impact of COVID-19 under CECL accounting for credit losses.
Allowance for Credit Losses
At December 31, 2020, the ACL was $170.5 million and included an ALLL of $160.5 million and an RUC of $10.0 million. The ACL increased $127.3 million from December 31, 2019 due to the adoption of CECL (the “CECL Day 1 impact”) as well as the impact of the worsening economic forecast related to COVID-19 subsequent to the adoption of CECL (the “CECL Day 2 impact”).
At December 31, 2020, the ALLL increased $118.2 million from December 31, 2019, due to the CECL Day 1 impact of $47.5 million and the CECL Day 2 impact of $70.7 million. The ALLL as a percentage of the total loan portfolio was 1.14% at December 31, 2020 and 0.34% at December 31, 2019. When excluding PPP loans (2), which are 100% guaranteed by the SBA, the ALLL as a percentage of adjusted loans increased 91 bps from December 31, 2019 to 1.25% at December 31, 2020. The ratio of the ALLL to nonaccrual loans was 378.20% at December 31, 2020, compared to 149.81% at December 31, 2019.
(1) Refer to the “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” section within this Item 7 for more information about these non-GAAP financial measures, including a reconciliation of these measures to the most directly comparable financial measures in accordance with GAAP.
The ACL as a percentage of the total loan portfolio was 1.22% at December 31, 2020, compared to 0.34% at December 31, 2019. The ACL as a percentage of adjusted loans (2) increased 99 bps from December 31, 2019 to 1.33% at December 31, 2020.
The RUC increased $9.1 million from December 31, 2019, due to the CECL Day 1 impact of $4.2 million and the CECL Day 2 impact of $4.9 million.
The following table summarizes activity in the ALLL during the years ended December 31, (dollars in thousands):
The following table shows the ALLL by loan segment and the percentage of the loan portfolio that the related ALL covers as of December 31, (dollars in thousands):
(1) The percent represents the loan balance divided by total loans.
(2) Refer to the “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” section within this Item 7 for more information about these non-GAAP financial measures, including a reconciliation of these measures to the most directly comparable financial measures in accordance with GAAP.
Deposits
As of December 31, 2020, total deposits were $15.7 billion, an increase of $2.4 billion, or 18.2%, compared to December 31, 2019. Total interest-bearing deposits consist of NOW, money market, savings, and time deposit account balances. Total time deposit balances of $2.6 billion accounted for 22.7% of total interest-bearing deposits at December 31, 2020, compared to $2.7 billion and 26.6% at December 31, 2019.
The following table presents the deposit balances by major category as of December 31 (dollars in thousands):
(1) Includes time deposits of $250,000 and over of $654,224 and $684,797 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The Company may also borrow additional funds by purchasing certificates of deposit through a nationally recognized network of financial institutions. The Company utilizes this funding source when rates are more favorable than other funding sources. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, there were $145.9 million and $190.7 million, respectively, purchased certificates of deposit included in certificates of deposit on the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Maturities of time deposits of $100,000 or more as of December 31, 2020 were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Capital Resources
Capital resources represent funds, earned or obtained, over which financial institutions can exercise greater or longer control in comparison with deposits and borrowed funds. The adequacy of the Company’s capital is reviewed by management on an ongoing basis with reference to size, composition, and quality of the Company’s resources and consistency with regulatory requirements and industry standards. Management seeks to maintain a capital structure that will assure an adequate level of capital to support anticipated asset growth and to absorb potential losses, yet allow management to effectively leverage its capital to maximize return to shareholders.
On June 9, 2020, the Company announced the closing of an offering of 6,900,000 depositary shares, each representing a 1/400th ownership interest in a share of its Series A preferred stock, with a liquidation preference of $10,000 per share of Series A preferred stock (equivalent to $25 per depositary share), including 900,000 depositary shares pursuant to the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase additional depositary shares. The total net proceeds to the Company were approximately $166.4 million, after deducting the underwriting discount and other offering expenses payable by the Company. The Company is using the net proceeds of the offering for general corporate purposes in the ordinary course of its business, such as the repayment of debt, loan funding, acquisitions, additions to working capital, capital expenditures and investments in the Company’s subsidiaries.
On January 28, 2021 the Company announced that its Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.25 per share of common stock. The common stock dividend is payable on February 26, 2021 to common shareholders on record as of February 12, 2021. The Board also declared a quarterly dividend on the outstanding shares of its Series A preferred stock. The dividend of $171.88 per share (equivalent to $0.43 per outstanding depositary share) is payable on March 1, 2021 to preferred shareholders of record as of February 12, 2021.
On February 1, 2019, the Company completed its acquisition of Access. As a result, as of December 31, 2019, the Company’s assets exceeded $15.0 billion and the trust preferred capital notes qualify for Tier 2 capital for regulatory purposes.
The Federal Reserve requires the Company and the Bank to comply with the following minimum capital ratios: (i) a common equity Tier 1 capital ratio of 7.0% of risk-weighted assets; (ii) a Tier 1 capital ratio of 8.5% of risk-weighted assets; (iii) a total capital ratio of 10.5% of risk-weighted assets; and (iv) a leverage ratio of 4.0% of total assets. These ratios, with the exception of the leverage ratio, include a 2.5% capital conservation buffer, which is designed to absorb losses during periods of economic stress. Banking institutions with a ratio of common equity Tier 1 to risk-weighted assets above the minimum but below the conservation buffer will face constraints on dividends, equity repurchases, and compensation based on the amount of the shortfall.
On July 10, 2019, the Company announced that its Board of Directors has authorized a share repurchase program to purchase up to $150.0 million of the Company’s common stock through June 30, 2021 in open market transactions or privately negotiated transactions. On March 20, 2020, the Company suspended its share repurchase program, which had approximately $20.0 million remaining in authorization at the time of suspension and as of December 31, 2020. The Company repurchased an aggregate of approximately 3.7 million shares, at an average price of $35.48 per share, under the authorization prior to suspension.
On March 27, 2020, the banking agencies issued an interim final rule that allows the Company to phase in the impact of adopting the CECL methodology up to two years, with a three-year transition period to phase out the cumulative benefit to regulatory capital provided during the two-year delay. The Company is allowed to include the impact of the CECL transition, which is defined as the CECL Day 1 impact to capital plus 25% of the Company’s provision for credit losses during 2020, in regulatory capital through 2021. The Company elected to phase in the regulatory capital impact as permitted under the aforementioned interim final rule. Beginning in 2022, the transition amount will begin to impact regulatory capital by phasing it in over a three-year period ending in 2024.
The table summarizes the Company’s regulatory capital and related ratios for the periods ended December 31, (dollars in thousands):
(1) Calculated by subtracting the regulatory minimum capital ratio requirements from the Company’s actual ratio results for Common equity, Tier 1, and Total risk-based capital. The lowest of the three measures represents the Company’s capital conservation buffer ratio.
(2) Refer to "Non-GAAP Measures" within this Item 7.
In connection with the acquisition of Xenith on January 1, 2018, the Company acquired $8.5 million of fixed interest rate subordinated notes with a maturity date of June 30, 2025, and the Company subsequently redeemed those subordinated notes effective as of November 30, 2020. At December 31, 2020, the aggregate carrying value of the subordinated notes was $148.8 million. The subordinated notes are classified as Tier 2 capital for the Company.
Commitments and Off-Balance Sheet Obligations
In the normal course of business, the Company is a party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk to meet the financing needs of its customers and to reduce its own exposure to fluctuations in interest rates. These financial instruments include commitments to extend credit and letters of credit. These instruments involve elements of credit and interest rate risk in excess of the amount recognized in the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets. The contractual amounts of these instruments reflect the extent of the Company’s involvement in particular classes of financial instruments. For more information pertaining to these commitments, reference Note 10 “Commitments and Contingencies” in the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K.
The Company’s exposure to credit loss in the event of nonperformance by the other party to the financial instruments for commitments to extend credit and letters of credit written is represented by the contractual amount of these instruments. The Company uses the same credit policies in making commitments and conditional obligations as it does for on-balance sheet instruments. Unless noted otherwise, the Company does not require collateral or other security to support off-balance sheet financial instruments with credit risk.
The following table represents the Company’s other commitments with balance sheet or off-balance sheet risk as of December 31, (dollars in thousands):
The following table presents the Company’s contractual obligations and scheduled payment amounts due at the various intervals over the next five years and beyond as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
For more information pertaining to the previous table, reference Note 5 “Premises and Equipment” and Note 9 “Borrowings” in the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K.
MARKET RISK
Interest Sensitivity
Market risk is the risk of loss arising from adverse changes in the fair value of financial instruments due to changes in interest rates, exchange rates, and equity prices. The Company’s market risk is composed primarily of interest rate risk. The ALCO of the Company is responsible for reviewing the interest rate sensitivity position of the Company and
establishing policies to monitor and limit exposure to this risk. The Company’s Board of Directors reviews and approves the guidelines established by ALCO.
Interest rate risk is monitored through the use of three complementary modeling tools: static gap analysis, earnings simulation modeling, and economic value simulation (net present value estimation). Each of these models measures changes in a variety of interest rate scenarios. While each of the interest rate risk models has limitations, taken together they represent a reasonably comprehensive view of the magnitude of interest rate risk in the Company, the distribution of risk along the yield curve, the level of risk through time, and the amount of exposure to changes in certain interest rate relationships. Static gap, which measures aggregate re-pricing values, is less utilized because it does not effectively measure the options risk impact on the Company and is not addressed here. Earnings simulation and economic value models, which more effectively measure the cash flow and optionality impacts, are utilized by management on a regular basis and are explained below.
The Company determines the overall magnitude of interest sensitivity risk and then formulates policies and practices governing asset generation and pricing, funding sources and pricing, and off-balance sheet commitments. These decisions are based on management’s expectations regarding future interest rate movements, the states of the national, regional and local economies, and other financial and business risk factors. The Company uses simulation modeling to measure and monitor the effect of various interest rate scenarios and business strategies on net interest income. This modeling reflects interest rate changes and the related impact on net interest income and net income over specified time horizons.
Earnings Simulation Analysis
Management uses simulation analysis to measure the sensitivity of net interest income to changes in interest rates. The model calculates an earnings estimate based on current and projected balances and rates. This method is subject to the accuracy of the assumptions that underlie the process, but it provides a better analysis of the sensitivity of earnings to changes in interest rates than other analyses, such as the static gap analysis discussed above.
Assumptions used in the model are derived from historical trends and management’s outlook and include loan and deposit growth rates and projected yields and rates. These assumptions may not materialize and unanticipated events and circumstances may occur. The model also does not take into account any future actions of management to mitigate the impact of interest rate changes. Such assumptions are monitored by management and periodically adjusted as appropriate. All maturities, calls, and prepayments in the securities portfolio are assumed to be reinvested in like instruments. Mortgage-backed securities prepayment assumptions are based on industry estimates of prepayment speeds for portfolios with similar coupon ranges and seasoning. Different interest rate scenarios and yield curves are used to measure the sensitivity of earnings to changing interest rates. Interest rates on different asset and liability accounts move differently when the prime rate changes and are reflected in the different rate scenarios.
The Company uses its simulation model to estimate earnings in rate environments where rates are instantaneously shocked up or down around a “most likely” rate scenario, based on implied forward rates and futures curves. The analysis assesses the impact on net interest income over a 12-month time horizon after an immediate increase or “shock” in rates, of 100 basis points up to 300 basis points. The model, under all scenarios, does not drop the index below zero.
The following table represents the interest rate sensitivity on net interest income for the Company across the rate paths modeled for balances at the period ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
Asset sensitivity indicates that in a rising interest rate environment the Company’s net interest income would increase and in a decreasing interest rate environment the Company’s net interest income would decrease. Liability sensitivity indicates that in a rising interest rate environment the Company’s net interest income would decrease and in a decreasing interest rate environment the Company’s net interest income would increase.
From a net interest income perspective, the Company was more asset sensitive as of December 31, 2020 compared to its position as of December 31, 2019. This shift is in part due to the changing market characteristics of certain loan and deposit products and in part due to various other balance sheet strategies. The Company would expect net interest income to increase with an immediate increase or shock in market rates. In the decreasing interest rate environments, the Company would expect a decline in net interest income as interest-earning assets re-price at lower rates and interest-bearing deposits remain at or near their floors.
Economic Value Simulation
Economic value simulation is used to calculate the estimated fair value of assets and liabilities over different interest rate environments. Economic values are calculated based on discounted cash flow analysis. The net economic value of equity is the economic value of all assets minus the economic value of all liabilities. The change in net economic value over different rate environments is an indication of the longer-term earnings capability of the balance sheet. The same assumptions are used in the economic value simulation as in the earnings simulation. The economic value simulation uses instantaneous rate shocks to the balance sheet.
The following chart reflects the estimated change in net economic value over different rate environments using economic value simulation for the balances at the period ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s economic value of equity is generally more asset sensitive in a rising interest rate environment compared to its position as of December 31, 2019 primarily due to the composition of the Consolidated Balance Sheets and due in part to the market characteristics of certain deposits.
Liquidity
Liquidity represents an institution’s ability to meet present and future financial obligations through either the sale or maturity of existing assets or the acquisition of additional funds through liability management. Liquid assets include cash, interest-bearing deposits with banks, money market investments, federal funds sold, loans held for sale, and securities and loans maturing or re-pricing within one year. Additional sources of liquidity available to the Company include its capacity to borrow additional funds when necessary through federal funds lines with several correspondent banks, a line of credit with the FHLB, the Federal Reserve Discount Window, the PPPLF, the purchase of brokered certificates of deposit, corporate line of credit with a large correspondent bank, and debt and capital issuance. Management considers the Company’s overall liquidity to be sufficient to satisfy its depositors’ requirements and to meet its customers’ credit needs.
On June 9, 2020, the Company announced the closing of an offering of 6,900,000 depositary shares, each representing a 1/400th ownership interest in a share of its Series A preferred stock, with a liquidation preference of $10,000 per share of Series A preferred stock (equivalent to $25 per depositary share), including 900,000 depositary shares pursuant to the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase additional depositary shares. The total net proceeds to the Company were approximately $166.4 million, after deducting the underwriting discount and other offering expenses payable by the Company.
The Company intends to use the net proceeds of the offering for general corporate purposes in the ordinary course of its business. General corporate purposes may include repayment of debt, loan funding, acquisitions, additions to working capital, capital expenditures and investments in the Company’s subsidiaries.
As a result of adverse market conditions including the impacts of COVID-19, the Company has continued to see elevated customer deposit balances. These increased balances are due primarily to the combination of government stimulus programs, and customer expense and savings habits in response to the pandemic. As a result of the increases in customer deposits, the Company has reduced its wholesale borrowings during 2020. The Company considers a portion of the increases in customer deposits to be temporary, which it expects will result in outflows in subsequent quarters.
Under the terms of the PPPLF, the Company can borrow funds which are secured by the Company’s PPP loans. During 2020, the Company’s borrowings pursuant to the PPPLF fluctuated; however, at its peak, the Company borrowed $200.5 million. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had no outstanding advances under the PPPLF. The Company’s available borrowing capacity under the PPPLF as of December 31, 2020 was $1.2 billion.
In response to the current rate environment, the Company prepaid $550.0 million of long-term FHLB advances throughout 2020, which resulted in prepayment penalties of $31.2 million. Additionally, the Company sold several securities, which resulted in a gain of approximately $10.3 million during the second quarter of 2020, and redeemed $8.5 million in subordinated debt during the fourth quarter of 2020. Also in response to the current rate environment, in February 2021 the Company prepaid a $200.0 million long-term FHLB advance, which resulted in a prepayment penalty of $14.7 million.
As of December 31, 2020, liquid assets totaled $6.5 billion or 32.9% of total assets, and liquid earning assets totaled $6.3 billion or 35.7% of total earning assets. Asset liquidity is also provided by managing loan and securities maturities and cash flows. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $5.4 billion or 38.6% of total loans are scheduled to mature within one year based on contractual maturity, adjusted for expected prepayments, and approximately $447.7 million or 14.1% of total securities are scheduled to mature within one year.
For additional information and the available balances on various lines of credit, please refer to Note 9 “Borrowings” in the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Items 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K. In addition to lines of credit, the Bank may also borrow additional funds by purchasing certificates of deposit through a nationally recognized network of financial institutions. For additional information and outstanding balances on purchased certificates of deposits, please refer to “Deposits” within this Item 7.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
The Company’s financial statements included in Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K below have been prepared in accordance with GAAP, which requires the financial position and operating results to be measured principally in terms of historic dollars without considering the change in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. Inflation affects the Company’s results of operations mainly through increased operating costs, but since nearly all of the Company’s assets and liabilities are monetary in nature, changes in interest rates affect the financial condition of the Company to a greater degree than changes in the rate of inflation. Although interest rates are greatly influenced by changes in the inflation rate, they do not necessarily change at the same rate or in the same magnitude as the inflation rate. The Company’s management reviews pricing of its products and services, in light of current and expected costs due to inflation, to mitigate the inflationary impact on financial performance.
NON-GAAP MEASURES
In this Form 10-K, the Company has provided supplemental performance measures on a tax-equivalent, tangible, operating, adjusted or pre-tax pre-provision basis. These measures are a supplement to GAAP used to prepare the Company’s financial statements and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for comparable measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. In addition, the Company’s non-GAAP measures may not be comparable to non-GAAP measures of other companies. The Company uses the non-GAAP measures discussed herein in its analysis of the Company’s performance.
Net interest income (FTE), total revenue (FTE) and total adjusted revenue (FTE), which are used in computing net interest margin (FTE) and adjusted operating efficiency ratio (FTE), respectively, provide valuable additional insight into the net interest margin and the efficiency ratio by adjusting for differences in the tax treatment of interest income sources. The entire FTE adjustment is attributable to interest income on earning assets, which is used in computing the yield on earning assets. Interest expense and the related cost of interest-bearing liabilities and cost of funds ratios are not affected by the FTE components.
The following table reconciles non-GAAP financial measures from the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures for each of the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
The Company believes tangible common equity is an important indication of its ability to grow organically and through business combinations as well as its ability to pay dividends and to engage in various capital management strategies. Tangible common equity is used in the calculation of certain profitability, capital, and per share ratios. The Company believes tangible common equity and related ratios are meaningful measures of capital adequacy because they provide a meaningful base for period-to-period and company-to-company comparisons, which the Company believes will assist investors in assessing the capital of the Company and its ability to absorb potential losses. The Company believes that ROTCE is a meaningful supplement to GAAP financial measures and is useful to investors because it measures the performance of a business consistently across time without regard to whether components of the business were acquired or developed internally.
The following table reconciles non-GAAP financial measures from the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures for each of the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
Adjusted operating measures exclude merger-related costs, rebranding-related costs and nonrecurring tax expenses, which are tax expenses that are unrelated to the Company’s normal operations. In addition, adjusted operating measures now exclude the gains or losses related to balance sheet repositioning (principally composed of gains and losses on debt extinguishment) and gains or losses on sale of securities. The Company believes these measures are useful to investors as they exclude certain costs resulting from acquisition activity as well as the impact of the Tax Act and allow investors to more clearly see the combined economic results of the organization's operations.
The following table reconciles non-GAAP financial measures from the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures for each of the periods presented (dollars in thousands, except per share amounts):
The adjusted operating efficiency ratio (FTE) excludes the amortization of intangible assets, merger and rebranding-related costs and gains or losses related to balance sheet repositioning (principally composed of gains and losses on debt extinguishment). This measure is similar to the measure utilized by the Company when analyzing corporate performance and is also similar to the measure utilized for incentive compensation. The Company believes this adjusted measure provides investors with important information about the combined economic results of the organization’s operations. In prior periods, the Company has not excluded the gains or losses related to balance sheet repositioning from noninterest expense when calculating the operating efficiency ratio (FTE). The Company has adjusted its presentation for all periods in this release to exclude the gains or losses related to balance sheet repositioning from noninterest expense.
The following table reconciles non-GAAP financial measures from the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures for each of the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
The Company believes that operating ROTCE is a meaningful supplement to GAAP financial measures and useful to investors because it measures the performance of a business consistently across time without regard to whether components of the business were acquired or developed internally.
The following table reconciles non-GAAP financial measures from the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures for each of the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
Pre-tax pre-provision adjusted operating earnings exclude the provision for credit losses, which can fluctuate significantly from period-to-period under the recently adopted CECL methodology, merger and rebranding-related costs, income tax expense, gains or losses related to balance sheet repositioning (principally composed of gains and losses on debt extinguishment), and gains or losses on sale of securities. The Company believes this adjusted measure provides investors with important information about the combined economic results of the organization’s operations.
PPP adjustment impact excludes the SBA guaranteed PPP loans funded during 2020. The Company believes loans held for investment (net of deferred fees and costs), excluding PPP is useful to investors as it provides more clarity on the Company’s organic growth. The Company also believes that the related non-GAAP financial measures of past due loans still accruing interest as a percentage of total loans held for investment (net of deferred fees and costs), provision for credit losses as a percentage of average loans held for investment, and net charge-offs as a percentage of average loans held for investment (net of deferred fees and costs), in each case excluding impacts from the PPP, are useful to investors as loans originated under the PPP carry an SBA guarantee. The Company believes that the ALLL and the ACL, each as a percentage of loans held for investment (net of deferred fees and costs), and each excluding impacts from the PPP, are useful to investors because of the size of the Company’s PPP loan originations and the impact of the embedded credit enhancement provided by the SBA guarantee.
The following table reconciles non-GAAP financial measures from the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures for each of the periods presented (dollars in thousands, except per share amounts):
The information presented excludes discontinued operations. Refer to Note 19 "Segment Reporting & Discontinued Operations" in Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K for further discussion regarding discontinued operations.
QUARTERLY RESULTS
The information presented excludes discontinued operations. Refer to Note 19 "Segment Reporting & Discontinued Operations" in Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K for further discussion regarding discontinued operations.
The following table presents the Company’s quarterly performance for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands, except per share amounts):
(1) Second quarter 2020 includes $10.3 million in gains on securities transactions. All other quarterly results for 2020 include an immaterial amount of gains on securities transactions.
(2) Third quarter 2019 includes $7.1 million in gains on securities transactions. All other quarterly results for 2019 include an immaterial amount of gains on securities transactions.