ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties as described under the heading “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” elsewhere in this Annual Report. You should review the disclosure under the heading “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
Augmedix was incorporated in 2013 and launched its commercial real-time, remote documentation services in 2014. We provide software compatible with off-the-shelf, mobile client devices (smartphones or Google Glass) that enables clinicians to communicate with RDSs. Our RDSs observe the clinician-patient interaction, through an audio/video stream, and extract the relevant elements of that interaction to create the medical notes that are then uploaded into the patient’s chart contained within the EHR system. The EHR system is third-party software licensed by the healthcare clinic or system to manage patient charts.
Patient care in the U.S. is provided in ambulatory or clinical environments and hospitals. We focus most of our efforts in the ambulatory/clinical segment of the patient care market. Roughly 85% of the physicians who subscribe to our service are employed directly by, or are affiliated with, a healthcare enterprise. The remaining 15% consists of small practices and individual practitioners.
We have generated in excess of four million medical notes since we began offering our service and are currently delivering approximately 35,000 notes to our customers each week. We estimate that our solution saves doctors two to three hours each day which is time that they can redeploy to see more patients or improve their work-life balance. We believe the benefits to healthcare enterprises are increased productivity and higher clinician and patient satisfaction.
The current COVID-19 pandemic and resulting safety protocols have prompted a significant shift towards delivering health services remotely via telemedicine. Our technology platform was designed to enable real time, two-way communication between remotely-located participants. As such, we were able to continue to provide uninterrupted service to our customers. We believe telemedicine will remain an important part of health services delivery even after the end of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The COVID-19 pandemic has also required modifications to how we deliver our service. While our general business model is to provide RDS service from central operating centers, local shelter in place orders have required us to shift to work-from-home for all employees and contracted employees. We will continue our work from home model until local conditions remove workplace restrictions and employees can safely work from our central operations centers. We instituted additional system controls to ensure compliance with our privacy practices.
Our technology vision is to automate as much of the medical note creation process as possible by applying intelligent automation. While the unstructured nature of a conversation between physician and patient places inherent limitations on how much note creation can ultimately be automated, we believe automation, even if partial, could generate significant benefits including improved operating efficiencies, higher-quality medical notes and a more uniform level of note quality.
Listing on the OTCQX Market
On March 29, 2021, shares of our common stock were approved for trading on the OTCQX Best Market under the symbol “AUGX.”
Merger Agreement
On October 5, 2020, Malo Holdings Corporation, Acquisition Sub and Private Augmedix entered into a Merger Agreement. Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, on the Closing Date, Acquisition Sub merged with and into Private Augmedix, with Private Augmedix continuing as the surviving corporation and our wholly-owned subsidiary. Following the consummation of the Merger, Private Augmedix changed its name to “Augmedix Operating Corporation.”
On October 5, 2020, our board of directors and all of our stockholders approved a restated certificate of incorporation, which was effective upon its filing with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware on October 5, 2020 and through which we changed our name to “Augmedix, Inc.”
As a result of the Merger, we acquired the business of Private Augmedix, a provider of remote medical documentation and live clinical support services with a mission to rehumanize the clinician-patient relationship so that doctors can focus on what they do best - patient care.  At the Effective Time, each of Private Augmedix’s shares of capital stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the closing of the Merger was converted into the right to receive (a) 0.420864013 shares of our common stock (the “Common Share Conversion Ratio”) (in the case of shares held by accredited investors) or (b) $3.00 multiplied by the Common Share Conversion Ratio (in the case of shares held by unaccredited investors and those with an entitlement to shares of Private Augmedix’s capital stock), with the maximum number of shares of our common stock issuable to the former holders of Private Augmedix’s capital stock equal to 15,458,133 after adjustments due to rounding for fractional shares. Immediately prior to the Effective Time, an aggregate of 2,833,333 shares of our common stock owned by the stockholders of Malo Holdings Corporation prior to the Merger were forfeited and cancelled (the “Stock Forfeiture”).
In addition, pursuant to the Merger Agreement, (i) options to purchase 10,011,161 shares of Private Augmedix’s common stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the closing of the Merger under the 2013 Plan (as defined below) were assumed and converted into options to purchase 4,213,153 shares of our common stock, (ii) stock appreciation rights to purchase 601,768 shares of Private Augmedix’s common stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the closing of the Merger under the 2013 Plan were assumed and converted into stock appreciation rights to purchase 252,983 shares of our common stock (iii) warrants to purchase 6,576,565 shares of Private Augmedix’s 2019 Series B convertible preferred stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the closing of the Merger were assumed and converted into warrants to purchase 2,767,836 shares of our common stock, and (iv) warrants to purchase 13,273 shares of Private Augmedix’s common stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the closing of the Merger were assumed and converted into warrants to purchase 5,585 shares of our common stock
Private Placement Offering
Following the Effective Time of the Merger, we sold 8,472,188 shares of our common stock pursuant to an initial closing of a private placement offering for up to 10,000,000 shares of our common stock at $3.00 per share. On November 13, 2020, we had a second and final closing of the private placement and sold 666,667 shares at $3.00 (such sales of our common stock, the “Offering”).
COVID-19 Pandemic Update
In light of the uncertain and rapidly evolving situation relating to the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic and in compliance with ongoing workplace restrictions orders and other government executive orders directing that all non-essential businesses close their physical operations, we have taken measures intended to help minimize the risk of transmitting the virus to our employees, our customers and the communities in which we participate, which could negatively impact our business. These measures include temporarily requiring most non-essential employees to work remotely, suspending all non-essential travel worldwide for our employees, canceling, postponing or holding virtually our sponsored events and discouraging employee attendance at industry events and in-person work-related meetings. While we have a distributed workforce and our employees are accustomed to working remotely or working with other remote employees, our workforce is not fully remote. Under normal conditions, our employees travel frequently to establish and maintain relationships with one another and with our customers, partners and investors.
The COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted revenue significantly for three months for the year ended December 31, 2020, as we experienced lower revenues due a significant number of Clinicians going on hold (i.e. temporarily pausing service as their patient volumes dropped dramatically) during the height of the COVID-19 pandemic. During 2020, we implemented cost reduction actions across all functional disciplines of the Company, including headcount reductions and temporary salary reduction measures. We believe our cost reduction actions and current liquidity provide us with operating and financial flexibility to assist us in navigating through this uncertain environment.
Our management team has, and will likely continue, to spend significant time, attention and resources monitoring the COVID-19 pandemic and seeking to manage its effects on our business and workforce. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic and our precautionary measures may impact our business will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time.
Key metrics
We regularly review the following key metrics to measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections, make strategic business decisions and assess working capital needs.
Average Clinicians in Service Headcount: We define a clinician in service as an individual doctor, nurse practitioner or other healthcare professional using our services. We average the month end number of clinicians in service for all months in the measurement period and the number of clinicians in service at the end of the month immediately preceding the measurement period. We believe growth in the average number of clinicians in service is a key indicator of the performance of our business as it demonstrates our ability to penetrate the market and grow our business. Most of our customer contracts contain minimum service levels that range from a low of 60 hours per month to a high of 240 hours per month. Higher hours per month equate to higher revenue per clinician. The average number of clinicians in service stood at 555 and 462 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Average Annual Revenue Per Clinician: Average revenue per clinician is determined as total revenue, excluding Data Services revenue, recognized during the period presented divided by the average number of clinicians in service during that same period. Using the number of clinicians in service at the end of each month, we derive an average number of clinicians in service for the periods presented. The average annual revenue per clinician will vary based upon minimum hours of service requested by clinicians, pricing, and our product mix. The average annual revenue per clinician decreased to approximately $29,000 in fiscal 2020 from $30,000 in fiscal 2019 due to the impact of COVID-19 from March to June 2020.
Dollar-Based Net Retention Rate: We define a “Health Enterprise” as a company or network of doctors that has at least 50 clinicians currently employed or affiliated that could utilize our services. Dollar-based net revenue retention is determined as the revenue from Health Enterprises as of twelve months prior to such period end as compared to revenue from these same Health Enterprises as of the current period end, or current period revenue. Current period revenue includes any expansion or new products and is net of contraction or churn over the trailing twelve months but excludes revenue from new Health Enterprises in the current period. We believe growth in dollar-based net revenue retention is a key indicator of the performance of our business as it demonstrates our ability to increase revenue across our existing customer base through expansion of users and products, as well as our ability to retain existing customers. Our annual dollar-based net revenue retention decreased to 114% in fiscal 2020 from 135% in fiscal 2019 with the decrease driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Growth from existing clients has historically represented a majority of our total revenue growth.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
Our revenues primarily consist of service fees we charge customers to subscribe to our remote medical documentation and clinical support solutions. We generate subscription fees pursuant to contracts that typically have initial terms of one year, automatically renew after the initial term and are subject to a 90 day cancellation notice after the initial one year term. Customer attrition, as it pertains to our Enterprise clients is infrequent. In fiscal 2019, 2018, and 2017, we did not lose any of our Health Enterprise clients. We lost three Health Enterprise clients in fiscal 2020, with the COVID-19 pandemic being the main contributing factor for these losses, but we also won three new Health Enterprise clients during the year. Subscription revenue is driven primarily by the number of clinicians using our services, the minimum number of hours contracted per month, and the contracted monthly price. We typically invoice customers one to three months in advance for subscriptions to our services. For customers who use more than the minimum number of monthly hours, we have the ability to bill for the additional hours utilized at a prescribed contractual price. We also perform upfront implementation services such as ensuring adequate Wi-Fi capability of the clinician’s facilities, shipping devices and accessories to the clinician, testing, selecting and assigning RDSs, obtaining EHR credentials for the RDSs and clinician orientation. Revenues associated with implementation efforts are deferred until we go live with our service and then recognized ratably over the initial term of the contract.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Profit
Cost of Revenues. Our cost of revenues primarily consists of the cost of the RDSs, some of whom are employees of our Vendors and some of whom are our employees, their direct supervisors, and clinician and technical support. Cost of revenues also consists of infrastructure costs to operate our SaaS-based platform such as hosting fees and fees paid to various third-party partners for access to their technology, plus hardware depreciation and cost of shipping for the devices and accessories we provide to our clinicians.
Gross Profit. Our gross profit is calculated by subtracting our cost of revenues from revenues. Gross margin is expressed as a percentage of total revenues. Our gross profit may fluctuate from period to period as revenues fluctuate, and as a result of the mix of RDS centers from which service is provided, operational efficiencies regarding the relationship between the number of RDSs and clinicians, product mix, and changes to our technology expenses and customer support.
Our gross profit varies by RDS center. We plan to focus on and grow the operations of the RDS centers with the best quality and highest gross margin. We intend to continue to invest additional resources in our platform infrastructure. We will also continue to invest in technology innovation, such as Notebuilder, to reduce the level of effort required by RDSs. We expect these optimization efforts and our investment in technology to expand the efficiency and capability of our platform, enabling us to improve our gross margin over time. Our new all-in pricing with vendors will create some gross margin headwinds. The level and timing of investment in these areas, plus the mix of RDS centers, could affect our cost of revenues in the future.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee compensation costs for operations management, finance, accounting, information technology, compliance, legal, and human resources personnel, and our business support team in Bangladesh. In addition, general and administrative expenses include non-personnel costs, such as facilities, legal, accounting, and other professional fees, as well as other supporting corporate expenses not allocated to other departments. We expect our general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars as our business grows, but we expect general and administrative expenses to decrease as a percent of revenues in the coming years.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of employee compensation costs related to sales and marketing, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, and stock-based compensation, costs of general marketing activities and promotional activities, travel-related expenses, and allocated overhead. Sales and marketing expenses also include costs for advertising and other marketing activities. Advertising is expensed as incurred. We expect our sales and marketing expenses will increase in absolute dollars as we expand our sales and marketing efforts.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs for the design, development, testing, and enhancement of our products and services and are generally expensed as incurred. These costs consist primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, and stock-based compensation for our development personnel. Research and development expenses also include direct RDS training costs, product management, third-party partner fees, and third-party consulting fees. We expect our research and development expenses will increase in absolute dollars as our business grows, but that as a percent of revenues, R&D expenses are expected to decrease.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net consists primarily of the interest incurred on our debt obligations and the noncash interest expense associated with the amortization of debt discounts and contingent beneficial conversion feature associated with certain convertible notes payable. Interest expense is offset by any interest income we earn on our cash balances held in our interest-bearing savings account.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) consists primarily of the change in the fair value of warrants and income derived from a technology and a data partnership agreement we entered into in 2018. Any upfront payments received were deferred and were recognized over the term of the agreement. The agreement was terminated in June 2019 and any deferred revenues were immediately recognized. Included in other income (expense) is the change in the fair value of the warrants to purchase shares of 2019 Series B convertible preferred stock which were classified as liabilities and were subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until consummation of the Merger whereby the warrants were exchanged for warrants to receive shares of our common stock. Upon completing the exchange, the warrants were eligible for equity classification and no longer subject to re-measurement. Also included in other income (expense) are foreign currency gains and losses due to exchange rate fluctuations on transactions denominated in a currency other than our functional currency.
The following table summarizes the results of our operations for the periods presented:
Comparison for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Revenues
Revenues increased $2.4 million to $16.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $14.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to a 20% increase in the number of clinicians in service, partially offset by a lower ARPU due to Clinicians reducing their monthly minimum number of service levels during the height of the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in clinicians in service was driven predominately by our existing Health Enterprises adding physicians. Dollar-based net recurring revenue retention was 114% in the year ended December 31, 2020. Increases in revenue were also attributable to the addition of new Health Enterprises during the year ended December 31, 2020. These new Health Enterprises revenue increases were more than offset by the loss of three Health Enterprises, predominantly due to COVID-19 and a $0.3 million decrease in revenue attributable to the decline in the number of clinicians in service among our independent and small group customers. The overall number of customers among independent and small groups declined due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on this part of our end market and due to our focus on Health Enterprise clients.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin
Cost of revenues increased $0.3 million to $9.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $9.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to increases in RDS costs as clinicians in service grew during 2020. These increases were offset by a $0.2 million decrease in customer support and third-party hosting costs resulting from our operating efficiencies. As a result of operating efficiencies in our RDS operations and customer support, our gross margin was 41% during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 33% during the year ended December 31, 2019. During the first three months of 2020 we moved from paying our Vendors an upfront fee for successfully trained RDSs to all-in pricing, which includes both amortization of expected training costs and cost of services in the monthly ongoing rates our Vendors charge us. This change improves our cash flow and better aligns our interests with those of our Vendors, which we believe will produce better overall operating leverage long-term.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $0.7 million to $11.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $10.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to a $1.3 million increase in legal and professional fees as we completed the Merger and prepared to become a public company and from a $0.2 million increase in employee compensation costs as a result of an increase in our executive headcount. These increases were largely offset by a $0.4 million decline in employee compensation expense for COVID-19 pandemic related temporary reductions in salary and a $0.4 million decrease in overhead and travel costs.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased $0.8 million to $4.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $3.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable an increase of $0.9 million in employee compensation as a result of an increase in our sales professional headcount and related commissions and an increase of $0.1 million in advertising spend. These increases were offset by a $0.1 million decrease in customer onboarding costs resulting from operational efficiencies and a $0.2 million decrease in customer account management compensation due to the COVID-19 pandemic related temporary reductions.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses decreased $2.5 million to $4.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $7.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to a $2.3 million reduction in our training expenses for new RDSs due to both the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020 reducing our need to train new RDSs and due to our new contract terms with our vendors in how we pay for their training efforts. Engineering and product expenses each decreased $0.1 million mainly due to the COVID-19 pandemic related temporary salary reductions.
Other Income (Expense)
Our interest expense decreased $1.4 million to $1.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $2.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to a beneficial conversion feature expense on our convertible debt and one-time non-cash interest expense related to a debt amendment, both recorded in the third quarter of 2019.
Other income (expense) decreased $1.5 million to $0.5 million of expense during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $1.0 million of income during the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to $1.0 million of income related to a partnership arrangement that ended on June 30, 2019 at which time which we immediately recognized all remaining deferred revenue. During the year ended December 31, 2020 we received a $0.2 million grant from the Bangladesh government for our investments and expenditures in that country and we recognized $0.7 million of additional expense due to the warrant liability revaluation.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash raised from private sales of common stock, preferred stock previous to 2020, and cash from borrowings under various facilities, which are further described below. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash resources of $23.0 million which includes $2.2 million of restricted cash as a requirement in connection with our debt arrangements. Since Private Augmedix’s inception in 2013 until today, we have financed our operations primarily through the private sale of over $130 million of preferred and common stock and from various debt arrangements. As described in Footnote 1 of our audited financial statements, we have incurred recurring losses and negative cash flows from operations since inception and have an accumulated deficit at December 31, 2020 of $83.9 million. We have relied on debt and equity financing to fund operations to date and we expect losses and negative cash flows to continue, primarily as a result of continued research, development and marketing efforts. We raised $27.4 million of gross proceeds through two closings on October 5, 2020 and November 13, 2020. This additional capital plus our recent debt refinancing will provide sufficient resources to meet working capital needs for over twelve months. Over the longer term, if we do not generate sufficient revenue from new and existing products, additional debt or equity financing may be required along with a reduction in expenditures. Additionally, there is no assurance if we require additional future financing that such financing will be available on terms, which are acceptable to us, or at all.
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities was $14.4 million and $14.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 principally resulted from our net loss of $15.6 million, which includes non-cash charges of $2.2 million, and positive changes in working capital of $1.0 million. Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 principally resulted from our net loss of $18.5 million, which includes non-cash charges of $2.6 million, and negative changes in working capital of $1.2 million.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $0.6 and $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Cash used in investing activities resulted from capital expenditures of property and equipment for all periods presented.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 of $26.4 million principally resulted from $24.3 million in net proceeds from sale of our common stock, $2.2 million in debt proceeds and $0.5 million in proceeds from the sale of our convertible preferred stock which were offset by $0.6 million in payments made to unaccredited investors in connection with the Merger.
Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 of $17.2 million principally resulted from proceeds from the sale of our 2019 convertible preferred stock and the issuance of our convertible promissory notes of $15.3 million and $3.3 million, respectively, less $1.4 million in payments of principal on our notes payable.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following summarizes our significant contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we do not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) requires us to make certain estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the balance sheet date, as well as reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Our most significant estimates and judgments involve the identification of performance obligations in revenue recognition and valuation of our warrant liability and stock-based compensation, including the underlying deemed estimated fair value of our preferred and common stock. Actual results may differ from these estimates. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows will be affected.
 We believe that the accounting policies described below involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
We account for revenue from contracts with clients by applying the requirements of Topic 606, which includes the following steps:
● Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a client;
● Identification of the performance obligations in a contract;
● Determination of the transaction price;
● Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
● Recognition of revenue when, or as, performance obligations are satisfied.
Revenues are recognized when services are delivered to our clients, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. For our Live service revenue recognized is based on the minimum amount per month, plus any additional hours delivered. For our Notes service, revenue recognized is based on the number of visiting notes, i.e. doctor patient visits, per month, and the contracted price per visit note, or based on recording time and the contracted price per hour.
We generate subscription fees for access to our remote medical documentation and clinical support solutions for telemedicine, medical offices, clinics and hospitals. Our clients are typically billed monthly or quarterly in advance. Subscription revenues are recognized ratably over the term of the contract. Implementation revenue is recognized over the initial term of the contract. We recognize revenue from data services contracts based on hours worked.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize the grant-date fair value of stock-based awards issued as compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the award. To date, we have not issued awards where vesting is subject to performance or market conditions. The fair value of stock options is estimated at the time of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which requires the use of inputs and assumptions such as the estimated fair value of the underlying common stock, exercise price of the option, expected term, risk-free interest rate, expected volatility and dividend yield, the most critical of which is the estimated fair value of our common stock.
The estimated fair value of each grant of stock options awarded during fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 were determined using the following methods and assumptions:
● Estimated fair value of common stock. As our common stock has not historically been publicly traded, our board of directors periodically estimates the fair value of our common stock considering, among other things, contemporaneous valuations of our preferred and common stock prepared by an independent third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 2013 Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation.
● Expected term. Due to the lack of a public market for the trading of our common stock and the lack of sufficient company-specific historical data, the expected term of employee stock options is determined using the “simplified” method, as prescribed in SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin (“SAB”) No. 107 (SAB 107), Share-Based Payment, whereby the expected life equals the arithmetic average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option.
● Risk-free interest rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the interest rate payable on U.S. Treasury securities in effect at the time of grant for a period that is commensurate with the assumed expected term.
● Expected volatility. The expected volatility is based on historical volatilities of peer companies within our industry which were commensurate with the expected term assumption, as described in SAB 107.
● Dividend yield. We assume a dividend yield of 0% because we have never paid, and for the foreseeable future do not expect to pay, a dividend on our common stock.
The inputs and assumptions used to estimate the fair value of stock-based payment awards represent management’s best estimates and involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if factors change and management uses different inputs and assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different for future awards.
In valuing our common and preferred stock, our board of directors determined the equity value of our business by taking a combination of the income and market approaches.
The income approach estimates the fair value of a company based on the present value of its future estimated cash flows and the residual value of the company beyond the forecast period. These future values are discounted to their present values using a discount rate which is derived from an analysis of the cost of capital of comparable publicly-traded companies in the same industry or similar lines of business as of each valuation date and is adjusted to reflect the risks inherent in us achieving these estimated cash flows. For the market approach, we utilized the guideline company method by analyzing a population of comparable companies and selected those technology companies that we considered to be the most comparable to us in terms of product offerings, revenue, margins and growth. We then used these guideline companies to develop relevant market multiples and ratios, which are then applied to our corresponding financial metrics to estimate our equity value.
The enterprise values determined by the income and market approaches were then allocated to our common stock using the Option Pricing Method, or OPM.
The OPM treats common stock and preferred stock as call options on a company’s enterprise value, with exercise prices based on the liquidation preferences of the preferred stock. Therefore, the common stock has value only if the funds available for distribution to the stockholders exceed the value of the liquidation preference at the time of an assumed liquidity event such as a merger, sale or initial public offering. The common stock is modeled as a call option with a claim on the enterprise at an exercise price equal to the remaining value immediately after the preferred stock is liquidated. The OPM uses the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to determine the price of the call option. The OPM is appropriate to use when the range of possible future outcomes is so difficult to predict that forecasts would be highly speculative.
Given the absence of a public trading market for our capital stock, our board of directors exercised reasonable judgment and considered a number of subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our common stock, including: 
● our business, financial condition and results of operations, including related industry trends affecting our operations;
● the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or the sale of the Company, given prevailing market conditions;
● the lack of marketability of our preferred and common stock;
● the market performance of comparable publicly traded companies; and
● U.S. and global economic and capital market conditions and outlook.
Once our common stock is quoted on the OTCQX, it will not be necessary to use estimates to determine the fair value of the common stock. In addition, as all of our preferred stock was converted into common stock, we will no longer need to estimate the fair value of preferred stock.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date that we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. We have elected to early adopt certain new accounting standards, as described in Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements. As a result, these financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with the new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our audited financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report.