Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate estimates and judgments, including those described in greater detail below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
As used in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation,” except where the context otherwise requires, the term “we,” “us,” “our,” or “the Company,” refers to the business of Ipsidy Inc.
Overview
Ipsidy Inc. together with its subsidiaries is a provider of an Identity as a Service (IDaaS) platform that delivers a suite of secure, mobile, biometric identity solutions, available to any vertical, anywhere. In a world that is increasingly digital and mobile, our mission is to help our customers know with biometric certainty the identity of the people with whom they are engaging. We provide solutions to everyday problems: Who is applying for a loan? Who is accessing the computer system? Who is in my lobby?
Ipsidy provides secure, biometric, identity verification and electronic transaction authentication services. We have developed an IDaaS platform for our customers, be they businesses, residences, houses of worship, or other organizations, to enable their users to authenticate their identity more easily to a mobile phone or portable device of their choosing (as opposed to dedicated hardware). Our system enables participants to consent to transactions using their biometric information with a digitally signed authentication response, including the underlying transaction data and embedded attributes of the participant’s identity. In this way our systems can provide pre-transaction authentication of identity as well as embed each user’s identity attributes, within every electronic transaction message processed through our platform, or other electronic systems.
The Company’s products focus on the broad requirement for identity verification, authentication and access and transaction controls and associated identity management needs. Organizations of all descriptions require cost-effective and secure mobile electronic solutions for themselves and their customers. We aim to offer our customers solutions that can be integrated into each customer’s business and organizational operations in order to facilitate their use and enhance the end user customer experience.
Ipsidy Inc. (formerly ID Global Solutions Corporation) (formerly IIM Global Corporation) (formerly Silverwood Acquisition Corporation) was incorporated on September 21, 2011 under the laws of the State of Delaware to engage in any lawful corporate undertaking, including, but not limited to, selected mergers and acquisitions. Ipsidy has been in the developmental stage since inception.
The Company’s headquarters are in Long Beach, New York.
Key Trends
We believe that our financial results will be impacted by several market trends in the identity management security and transaction processing marketplace, including growing concerns over identity theft and fraud, in part resulting from the impact of the Coronavirus pandemic on the acceleration of digital transformation and remote working; security of offices, residences, places of worship and other public places and the increase in electronic payments, solutions provided by non-bank entities. The key drivers for these alternative payment methods are consumer demands for safe, convenient payment transactions, with less friction. Our results are also impacted by the changes in levels of spending on identity management and security methods, and thus, negative trends in the global economy and other factors which negatively impact such spending may negatively impact the growth our revenue from those products. The global economy has been undergoing a period of political and economic uncertainty and stock markets are experiencing high levels of volatility, and it is difficult to predict how long this uncertainty and volatility will continue.
We plan to grow our business by increasing the use of our services by our existing customers, by adding new customers through our channel partners and by expanding into new markets and innovation. If we are successful in these efforts, we would expect our revenue to continue to grow. In addition, based on the positive trends in the international payment processing industry noted above, we anticipate that as and when more payments are made using electronic and mobile methods, such as those that we offer, our revenue would also increase.
Going Concern
The Company has an accumulated deficit of approximately $98.2 million as of December 31, 2020. The Company’s continuation as a going concern is dependent on its ability to generate sufficient cash flows from operations to meet its obligations, which it has not been able to accomplish to date, and/or obtain additional financing from its stockholders and/or other third parties.
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which implies the Company will continue to meet its obligations and continue its operations for the next fiscal year. The continuation of the Company as a going concern is dependent upon financial support from its stockholders, the ability of the Company to obtain necessary equity or debt financing to continue operations, successfully locating and negotiating with other business entities for potential acquisition and /or acquiring new clients to generate revenues. Although the Company has been successful in raising capital, additional financing or improvement in operations is not assured.
In 2020 and 2019, the Company raised a total of approximately $8.2 million and $3.3 million, respectively, of additional funds from Accredited Investors.
In order to further implement its business plan and satisfy its working capital requirements, the Company will need to raise additional capital. There is no guarantee that the Company will be able to raise additional equity or debt financing at acceptable terms, if at all.
There is no assurance that the Company will ever be profitable. These consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classifications of liabilities that may result should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern. As there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to achieve positive cash flows (become cash flow profitable) and raise sufficient capital to maintain operations, there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements. Those material accounting estimates that we believe are the most critical to an investor’s understanding of our financial results and condition are discussed immediately below and are particularly important to the portrayal of our financial position and results of operations and require the application of significant judgment by our management to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of certain estimates.
Use of Estimates
In preparing these consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP, management is required to make estimates and assumptions that may affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Significant estimates and assumptions included in our consolidated financial statements relate to the valuation of long-lived assets, accruals for potential liabilities, and valuation assumptions related to derivative liabilities, equity instruments and share based payments.
Revenue Recognition
Below is the Company’s revenue recognition policy determined by revenue stream for its significant revenue generating activities.
Cards Plus - The Company recognizes revenue for the design and production of cards at the point in time when products are shipped, or services have been performed due to the short-term nature of the contracts.
Payment Processing - The Company recognizes revenue for variable fees generated for payment processing solutions that are earned on a usage fee over time based on monthly transaction volumes or on a monthly flat fee rate. Additionally, the Company also sells certain equipment from time to time for which revenue is recognized at a point in time the equipment is delivered to the customer.
Identity Solutions Software - The Company recognizes revenue based on the identified performance obligations over the performance period for fixed consideration and for variable fees generated that are earned on a usage fee based over time based on monthly transaction volumes or on a monthly flat fee rate. We allocate the selling price in the contract to one customer which has multiple performance obligations based on the contract selling price that we believe represents a fair market price for the service rendered.
All contracts are reviewed for their respective performance obligations and related revenue and expense recognition implications. Certain of the revenues are derived from the identity services could include multiple performance obligations. A performance obligation under the revenue standard is defined as a promise to provide a “distinct” good or service to a customer. The Company has determined that one possible treatment under the standard is that these services will represent a stand-ready series of distinct daily services that are substantially the same, with the same pattern of transfer to the customer. Further, the Company has determined that the performance obligation to provide account access and facilitate transactions may meet the criteria for the “as invoiced” practical expedient, in that the Company has a right to consideration from a customer in an amount that corresponds directly with the value to the customer of the Company’s performance completed to date. As a result, the Company anticipates it may recognize revenue in the amount to which the Company has a right to invoice, based on completed performance at the relevant date. Additionally, the contracts could include implementation services, or support on an “as needed” basis and we will review each contract and determine whether such performance obligations are separate and distinct and apply the standard accordingly to the revenue and expense derived from or related to each such service.
Additionally, the Company capitalizes the incremental costs of acquiring and fulfilling a contract with a customer if the Company expects to recover those costs. The incremental costs of acquiring and fulfilling a contract are those that the Company incurs to acquire and fulfill a contract with a customer that it would not have incurred if the contract had not been acquired (for example, a sales commission or specific incremental costs associated with the contract).
Financing revenue related to direct financing leases is recognized over the term of the lease using the effective interest rate method.
Accounts Receivable
All customers are granted credit on a short-term basis and related credit risks are considered minimal. The Company routinely reviews its trade receivables and makes provisions for probable doubtful accounts; however, those provisions are estimates and actual results could differ from those estimates and those differences may be material. Trade receivables are deemed uncollectible and removed from accounts receivable and the allowance for doubtful accounts when collection efforts have been exhausted. On December 31, 2020 and 2019 no allowance for doubtful accounts was necessary.
Inventories
Inventory of plastic/ID cards, digital printing material, which are held by Cards Plus Pty Ltd., are at the lower of cost (using the average method) or market. The Plastic/ID cards and digital printing material are used to provide plastic loyal ID and other types of cards. Inventories of kiosks held by IDGS S.A.S are stated at the lower of cost (using the first-in, first-out method) or net realizable value. The kiosks provide electronic ticketing for transit systems.
Inventories on December 31, 2020 consist solely of cards inventory and inventories at December 31, 2019 consist of cards inventory and kiosks that have not been placed into service. As of December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an inventory valuation allowance of approximately $18,000 to reflect net realizable value of the cards inventory. As of December 31, 2019, the Company had an inventory valuation allowance for kiosks of $236,000 that were being held for sale and $18,000 for the cards inventory.
Any adjustments to reduce the cost of inventories to their net realizable value are recognized in earnings in the current period.
Property and Equipment, net
Property and equipment consist of furniture and fixtures and computer equipment and are stated at cost. Property and equipment are depreciated using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of three to five years. Maintenance and repairs are expensed as incurred and improvements are capitalized. Gains or losses on the disposition of property equipment are recorded upon disposal.
Other Assets - Software Development Costs
Other assets includes when applicable, costs associated with software development of new product offerings and enhancements to existing applications. Research & development costs are expensed as incurred. Development costs of computer software to be sold, leased or otherwise marketed are subject to capitalization beginning when a product’s technological feasibility has been established and ending when a product is available for general release to customers. As of December 31, 2020, all assets have been placed into service. As of December 31, 2019, a portion of the software was still under development and had not been placed in service. Upon completion, the amounts were transferred to the appropriate asset category and expensed over their estimated useful lives. In 2020 and 2019, approximately $0.1 million and $3.1 million of software development costs were placed into service and classified as internally developed software.
Intangible Assets
Excluding goodwill, acquired intangible assets and internally developed software are amortized over their estimated useful lives which is currently five to ten years. Acquired amortizing intangible assets are carried at cost, less accumulated amortization. Internally developed software costs are capitalized upon reaching technological feasibility.
Goodwill
Goodwill is recorded when the purchase price paid for an acquisition exceeds the fair value of net identified tangible and intangible assets acquired. The Company performs an annual impairment test of goodwill and further periodic tests to the extent indicators of impairment develop between annual impairment tests. The Company’s impairment review process compares the fair value of the reporting unit to it carrying value, including the goodwill related to the reporting unit utilizing qualitative considerations. To determine the fair value of the reporting unit, the Company may use various approaches including an asset or cost approach, market approach or income approach or any combination thereof. These approaches may require the Company to make certain estimates and assumptions including future cash flows, revenue and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are reviewed each time the Company tests goodwill for impairment and are typically developed as part of the Company’s routine business planning and forecasting process. While the Company believes its estimates and assumptions are reasonable, variations from those estimates could produce materially different results.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an impairment loss of approximately $1.0 million, associated with goodwill at one of its reporting units. As a result of the current pandemic and its potential impact on future results, the Company updated its reporting unit projections, and it indicated a goodwill impairment as the carrying value may not be recovered as revenue assumptions and related revenue were revised downward.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company updated our projections associated with our reporting units and it indicated that the carrying value may not be recovered as revenue assumptions were not met. The goodwill impairment loss for the year ended December 31, 2019 was approximately $1.5 million across the three reporting units.
The fair value of the reporting unit in both years was determined using discounted cash flow as well as future realizable value.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset.
If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its undiscounted estimated future cash flows, an impairment review is performed. An impairment charge is recognized in the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. Generally fair value is determined using valuations techniques such as expected discounted cash flows or appraisals, as appropriate. Assets to be disposed of would be separately presented in the balance sheet and reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell and are no longer depreciated. The assets and liabilities of a disposed group classified as held for sale would be presented separately in the appropriate asset and liability sections of the balance sheet. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company impaired intangible assets of approximately $297,000 at one of the reporting units as the carrying were in excess its recoverable amount. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company impaired intangible assets related to developed software of approximately $155,000 as the net assets were no longer being used for commercial purposes.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs consist of expenditures for the research and development of new products and technology. These costs are primarily expenses to vendors contracted to perform research projects and develop technology for the Company’s products. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred.
Stock-based compensation
The Company has accounted for stock-based compensation under the provisions of FASB ASC 718 - “Stock Compensation” which requires the use of the fair-value based method to determine compensation for all arrangements under which employees and others receive shares of stock or equity instruments (stock options and common stock purchase warrants). For employee awards, the fair value of each stock option award is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model that uses assumptions for expected volatility, expected dividends, expected term, and the risk-free interest rate. For non-employees, the fair value of each stock option award is estimated on the measurement date using the Black-Scholes valuation model that uses assumptions for expected volatility, expected dividends, expected term, and the risk-free interest rate. For non-employees, the Company utilizes the graded vesting attribution method under which the entity treats each separately vesting portion (tranche) as a separate award and recognizes compensation cost for each tranche over its separate vesting schedule. Expected volatilities are based on historical volatility of peer companies and other factors estimated over the expected term of the stock options. For employee awards, the expected term of options granted is derived using the “simplified method” which computes expected term as the average of the sum of the vesting term plus the contract term. The risk-free rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant for the period of the expected term.
The Company adopted as of January 1, 2019 the requirements of ASU 2018-07 which simplified the accounting for share-based payments granted to non-employees for share based payments granted to non-employees for goods and services. Under the ASU, most of the guidance on such payments to non-employees were aligned with the share-based payments granted to employees. The Company determined on the date of adoption that the impact was not significant.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In January 2017, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2017-04, “Intangibles-Goodwill and Other: Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment” (ASU 2017-04). The standard simplifies the subsequent measurement of goodwill by eliminating Step 2 from the goodwill impairment test. Under the amendments of ASU 2017-04, an entity should perform its goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with it carrying amount. An entity will recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, but the loss cannot exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. The Company adopted ASU 2017-04 for the calendar year ending December 31, 2020, the effective date for adoption. The adoption of this standard did not have a have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
Adjusted EBITDA.
This discussion includes information about Adjusted EBITDA that is not prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA is not based on any standardized methodology prescribed by U.S. GAAP and is not necessarily comparable to similar measures presented by other companies. A reconciliation of this non-GAAP measure is included below.
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure that represents U.S. GAAP net income (loss) adjusted to exclude (1) interest expense, (2) interest income, (3) provision for income taxes, (4) depreciation and amortization, (5) stock-based compensation expense (stock options and restricted stock) and (6) certain other items management believes affect the comparability of operating results. Other items included the following:
● Severance cost of $0.4 million in 2020
● Impairment loss of $1.3 million in 2020 and $1.7 million in 2019
● Extinguishment of debt of $1.0 million in 2020
● Warrant inducement expense of $0.4 million in 2020.
Management believes that Adjusted EBITDA, when viewed with our results under U.S. GAAP and the accompanying reconciliations, provides useful information about our period-over-period results. Adjusted EBITDA is presented because management believes it provides additional information with respect to the performance of our fundamental business activities and is also frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties in the evaluation of comparable companies. We also rely on Adjusted EBITDA as a primary measure to review and assess the operating performance of our company and our management, and it will be a focus as we invest in and grow the business.
Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation from, or as a substitute for, analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect our cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
● Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements;
● Adjusted EBITDA does not include the impact of certain charges or gains resulting from matters we consider not to be indicative of our ongoing operations.
Because of these limitations, adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as a measure of discretionary cash available to us to invest in the growth of our business. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our U.S. GAAP results and using Adjusted EBITDA only as a supplement to our U.S. GAAP results.
Reconciliation of Net Loss to Adjusted EBITDA
The decrease in Adjusted EBITDA loss in 2020 compared to 2019 is principally due to the Company’s increased focus and investment on its principal products combined with its cost minimization programs to reduce overall expenses.
Results of Operations and Financial Condition for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 as Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company’s revenue decreased $2.1 million from $2.6 million, or $0.5 million. The decrease in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 is principally due to the Covid-19 pandemic. Revenue at Cards Plus and our Colombian operations declined by $0.3 million and $0.1 million respectively.
Cost of sales
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, cost of sales was $0.7 million in both periods. Costs of sales was slightly higher in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 due to lower margin revenue at Cards Plus. Although sales decreased, cost of sales was comparable year over year due to sales of inventory purchased in prior year that was brought at a higher exchange rate causing lower margins.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by approximately $1.2 million as compared to the same period in 2019 due in part due to lower stock compensation charges (reduced by $0.4 million) with the balance related to staff reductions and other cost minimization efforts.
Research and development
During the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, research and development expenses decreased by approximately $0.5 million as the Company reduced its overall spend while focusing its resources on key product initiatives and reducing staff.
Impairment loss
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a goodwill impairment loss of approximately $1.0 million, associated with goodwill at a reporting unit based in Africa. Additionally, in the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an impairment on intangible assets of approximately $0.3 million at a reporting unit in Latin America as the carrying value was in excess of its estimated recoverable value. As a result of the current pandemic and its potential impact on future results, the Company updated its reporting unit projections and these indicated impairments for either goodwill or intangible assets were required as the carrying value may not be recovered as revenue assumptions and related revenue were revised downward. The fair value of the reporting unit was determined using discounted cash flow.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 due to increased amortization expense associated with approximately $3.1 million in capitalized software being placed into service in 2019.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to convertible debt offerings in December 2019 and February 2020 that increased the level of debt outstanding and related interest expense.
Other Income (Expense)
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a charge of approximately $986,000 related to the amendment of a promissory note which was treated as an extinguishment of a note payable and a charge of $367,000 in connection with the inducement to certain warrant holders to exercise their outstanding warrants.
Covid-19
A novel strain of coronavirus (“Covid-19”) emerged globally in December 2019 and has been declared a pandemic. The extent to which Covid-19 has impacted and will impact our customers, business, results and financial condition will depend on current and future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time. The Company’s day-to-day operations beginning March 2020 have been impacted differently depending on geographic location and services that are being performed. The Cards Plus business located in South Africa did not have any operations in April 2020 and has had limitations on its operations starting in May 2020, as the Company is following the guidance and requirements of the South African government. Our operations in the United States and Colombia have suffered less immediate impact as most staff can work remotely and can continue to develop our product offerings.
That said, we have seen our business opportunities develop more slowly as business partners and potential customers are dealing with Covid-19 issues, working remotely and these issues are causing delays in decision making and finalization of negotiations and agreements. However, the level of inquiries about our services has increased during the last quarter of 2020, as our products are designed to serve an increasingly mobile economy and workforce.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, current assets were $4.4 million and current liabilities outstanding amounted to $2.9 million which resulted in net working capital of $1.5 million.
Net cash used by operating activities was $4.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $6.1 million in 2019. Cash used in operations for 2020 and 2019 was the primarily result of funding the business operations as the Company invested in people and product a developing business.
Net cash used in investing activities in 2020 and 2019 was approximately $0.3 million and $1.6 million as the Company invested in software development expenditures which were capitalized.
Net cash provided by financing activities for 2020 and 2019 was approximately $8.2 million and $3.3 million, which consisted primarily of the net proceeds from the sale of common stock, issuance of convertible notes payable, and the exercise of warrants in 2020 and the sale of common stock and issuance of convertible notes payable in 2019.
Description of Indebtedness
As described in Item 1A, (Risk Factors) the Company has a history of losses and may not be able to achieve profitability in the near term. The Company has not been able to achieve positive cash flows from operations and raised additional financing in 2019 and 2020 from equity financing and convertible notes payable financing.
See Notes 6 and 7 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information associated with the notes and convertible notes payable.
The following is a summary of the convertible notes payable outstanding on December 31, 2020:
● On January 31, 2017, the Company entered and closed a Securities Purchase Agreement with the Stern Trust pursuant to which the Stern Trust invested an aggregate of $3,000,000 into the Company in consideration of the Stern Note and 4,500,000 shares of common stock. The Stern Note bears interest of 10% per annum, which compounds annually. On August 9, 2018, the Company prepaid $1,000,000 of principal of the Stern Note plus the related accrued interest of approximately $158,000. On February 14, 2020 the Company and the Stern Trust entered an Amended and Restated Promissory Note (the “Restated Stern Note”) providing that the $2,000,000 principal of the Stern Note will be due and payable on the same terms (bearing interest at 15% per annum) and on the same maturity date as the 2020 Notes. The interest due under the Stern Note as of January 31, 2020 in the amount of $662,000 has been capitalized and will earn interest at 10% per annum, which at the election of the Stern Trust can be paid in shares of common stock at a conversion price of $0.20 and the maturity of such interest shall be extended to the same maturity date as the 2020 Notes.
● On December 13, 2019, the Company, entered into Securities Purchase Agreements with several accredited investors (the “8% Note Investors”) providing for the sale by the Company to the Investors of 8% Convertible Notes in the aggregate amount of $428,000 (the “8% Notes”). The 8% Notes mature on November 30, 2021 and pursuant to the amendment in February 2020 referenced below, are a secured obligation of the Company. The Company shall pay interest on the 8% Notes at the rate of 8.0% per annum payable at the earlier of the maturity date or conversion date, in cash or, at the holder’s option, shares of common stock of the Company. At the option of the 8% Note Investors, all or a portion of the 8% Notes may be converted into shares of common stock of the Company at $0.08 per share. On February 14, 2020 the Company and the 8% Note Investors entered into an amendment agreement pursuant to which that the principal and interest due under the 8% Notes will remain due and payable on the same terms as exist in the 8% Notes prior to modification, save that the maturity shall be extended to the same maturity date as the 2020 Notes.
● On February 14, 2020, the Company entered into Securities Purchase Agreements with the 2020 Note Investors providing for the sale by the Company to the 2020 Note Investors of 15% Senior Secured Convertible Notes in the aggregate amount of $1,510,000 which mature in February 2022. The security interest granted to the holders of the 2020 Notes, 8% Notes and Stern Note ranks pari passu. Each of the secured parties appointed Mr. Stern and a third-party investor as joint collateral agents. Mr. Stern, a director of the Company, is the trustee of the Stern Trust.
Paycheck Protection Program
● In May 2020, the Company received a loan of approximately $486,000 under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) of the U.S. Small Business Association (“USSBA”) related to its U.S. operations. The Company anticipates, subject to approval by USSBA, if certain requirements are met, the loan will be forgiven. Any amounts not forgiven will be required to be repaid. The loan forgiven application has been filed with its lender and the USSBA.
● In January 2021, the Company received a second loan of approximately $486,000 under the PPP related to its U.S. Operations. The Company anticipates subject to approval by USSBA, if certain requirements are met the second loan will be forgiven. Any amounts not forgiven will be required to be repaid.
If the USSBA determines that the PPP loan was not properly obtained and/or expenditures supporting forgiveness were not appropriate, the Company would need to repay some or all of the PPP loan and record additional expense which could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition and results of operations in a future period.
As of December 31, 2020, the total notes payable is approximately $493,300 of which approximately $485,800 could be forgiven under the provisions of the USSBA PPP. Additionally, the Company has approximately $5.8 million of Convertible Notes Payable outstanding, net of discounts as of December 31, 2020.
Equity Financing
See Note 9 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information associated with equity financing in 2020 and 2019.
2020 Common Stock Transactions
● In June 2020, the Company entered into Subscription Agreements with two accredited investors (the “June 2020 Accredited Investors”) pursuant to which the June 2020 Accredited Investors agreed to purchase 3,441,558 shares of common stock for $200,000.
● On June 30, 2020, Company entered into and consummated a private transaction pursuant to which a portion of the Company’s $0.10 Warrants were exercised for cash at an exercise price of $0.07 per share. In addition, the holders that exercised the $0.10 Warrants received a $0.15 Warrant for every four $0.10 Warrants exercised. As a result, the Company issued 10,008,333 shares of common stock and 2,502,085 $0.15 Warrants in consideration of $700,583.
● On June 30, 2020, Company entered into and consummated a private transaction pursuant to which a portion of the Company’s $0.05 Warrants were exercised for cash. In addition, the holders that exercised the $0.05 Warrants received a $0.15 Warrant for every two $0.05 Warrants exercised. As a result, the Company issued 4,632,000 shares of common stock and 2,316,000 $0.15 Warrants, in consideration of $231,600. Separately, certain holders of the $0.05 Warrants to acquire 1,770,000 shares of common stock exercised on a cashless basis resulting in the issuance of 560,659 shares of common stock.
● On June 30, 2020, Company entered into and consummated a private transaction pursuant to which a portion of the Company’s $0.06 Warrants were exercised. In addition, the holders that exercised the $0.06 Warrants also received $0.15 Warrant for every two $0.06 Warrants exercised. As a result, the Company issued 5,280,000 shares of common stock and 2,640,000 $0.15 Warrants in consideration of $316,800.
● On October 30, 2020 and on November 6, 2020, Ipsidy Inc. entered into Securities Purchase Agreements with several accredited investors (the “October 2020 Accredited Investors”) pursuant to which the October 2020 Accredited Investors agreed to purchase an aggregate of 52,435,000 shares of the Company’s common stock together with Warrants to acquire 26,217,500 shares of common stock for a term of five years at an exercise price of $0.15 per share for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $5.24 million. In connection with this private offering, the Company paid a registered broker-dealer, a cash fee of approximately $367,000 and issued the broker-dealer a common stock purchase warrant to acquire approximately 3.15 million shares of common stock of the Company exercisable for a term of five years at an exercise price of $0.15 per share.
● During 2020, the Company issued approximately 1.7 million shares of common stock pursuant to cashless exercises of common stock purchase warrants and options, other than the June 2020 warrant exercises.
2019 Common Stock Transactions
● In June 2019, the Company entered into Subscription Agreements with accredited investors (the “2019 Accredited Investors”) pursuant to which the 2019 Accredited Investors purchased an aggregate of approximately 38,764,000 shares of the Company’s common stock for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $3,100,000. In connection with the private offering, the Company paid a cash fee of approximately $173,000 and issued 1,251,750 common stock purchase warrants with a fair value of approximately $79,000 that are exercisable during a term of five years at an exercise price of $0.088 per share.
In 2021, the Company will continue to be opportunistic as well as judicious in raising additional funds to support its operations and investments as it creates a sustainable organization. There is no guarantee that such financing will be available if available on acceptable terms.
Our growth-oriented business plan to offer products to our customers will require continued capital investment. Research and development activities will also require continued investment. We raised approximately $8.2 million and $3.5 million and in 2020 and 2019, respectively, through equity and debt financing at varying terms. In order to implement and grow our operations through December 31, 2022, achieve an expected annual revenue stream from our products and repay our outstanding convertible debt obligations ($7.6 million) in February 2022 we expect that we will need to raise between $14 and $16 million dollars. See Note 7 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information with respect conversion options of the respective convertible noteholders. There is no guarantee that our current business plan will not change, and as a result of such change, we will need additional capital to implement such business plan. Further, assuming we achieve our expected growth plan, of which there is no guarantee, we will need additional capital to implement growth beyond our current business plan.
As of December 31, 2020, the total notes payable is approximately $493,300 of which approximately $485,800 could be forgiven under the provisions of the USSBA Paycheck Protection Program. Additionally, the Company has approximately $5.8 million of Convertible Notes Payable outstanding, net of discounts as of December 31, 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet financing arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had the following contractual obligations.
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto and the report of our independent registered public accounting firm, are set forth on pages through of this report.
Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
None
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
As of the end of the period covered by this Annual Report, our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer performed an evaluation of the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) of the Exchange Act. Based on the evaluation, the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer concluded that, as of December 31, 2020, the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures are effective to ensure that the information required to be disclosed by the Company in the report that it files or submits under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized, and reported within the time periods specified in SEC rules and forms.
Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
The Company’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting for the Company, as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. Our internal control over financial reporting is designed to provide reasonable, but not absolute, assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Our management, including the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, does not expect that our disclosure controls and procedures or our internal control over financial reporting will prevent or detect all errors and all fraud. A control system, no matter how well-designed and operated, can provide only reasonable, not absolute, assurance that the control system’s objectives will be met. The design of a control system must reflect the fact that there are resource constraints, and the benefits of controls must be considered relative to their costs. Further, because of the inherent limitations in all control systems, no evaluation of controls can provide absolute assurance that misstatements due to error or fraud will not occur or that all control issues and instances of fraud, if any, have been detected and such evaluation is subject to the risks discussed in item 1A - Risk Factors of this Report.
The Company’s management assessed the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020, using the criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. Based on management’s assessment using the above criteria, management concluded that the Company maintained effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020. During 2020, the Company revised their quarterly and annual financial reporting and closing procedures to remediate previously reported control deficiency.
Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting
There have been no changes in our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during our last fiscal year that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting except that, during 2020, the Company revised their quarterly and annual financial reporting and closing procedures to remediate previously reported control deficiency.
Item 9B. Other Information
None.
PART III
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers, and Corporate Governance;
The current Directors and Officers of the Company are as follows:
* denote Committee Chair
** Appointed March 2020
(1) Audit Committee
(2) Governance Committee
(3) Compensation Committee
Phillip Kumnick
Phillip Kumnick serves as Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Company, having been appointed as CEO in May 2020, as a director in 2019 and Chairman of the Board of Directors in October 2020. From 2010 to 2018, Mr. Kumnick was Senior Vice President Global Acquirer Processing at Visa, Inc., and was the executive in charge of leading and growing Visa’s acquirer and merchant processing services and omni-channel solutions on a global basis. Mr. Kumnick was also a key contributor to the design of the Secure Remote Commerce (SRC) standard now being rolled out by the card brands, which aims to provide a simple and secure card payment experience. SRC uses tokenization to protect consumers’ sensitive data and intelligent identity authentication to help distinguish legitimate cardholders from fraudsters. Mr. Kumnick was the product owner and developer of Visa’s critical entry into encryption and tokenization products and services for their acquiring partners for transactions at the physical point of sale. Prior to joining Visa, Mr. Kumnick was the leader of the Cards & Payments practice of Cap Gemini Consulting from October 2009 through June 2010. Prior to Cap Gemini Consulting. Mr. Kumnick was a Senior Vice President at TSYS Acquiring Solutions from 2001 to 2009, with responsibility for leading the Product Management team and expanding the Company’s portfolio of merchant and acquirer products. He was also a leader of key M&A activities, including business development and strategic investment in Europe, Latin America and Asia, and helped expand TSYS’ client footprint to over 70 countries. Mr. Kumnick started his payments career at MasterCard International where he worked from 1988 to 2000, in various capacities, rising to Vice President & Chief Settlement Officer - Global Settlement Operations. In that role he was responsible for the 7 x 24 x 365 mission critical clearing and payment operations of a $3.0 billion per day global EFT and treasury operation. Mr. Kumnick was a strategic subject matter expert and key contributor to the evolution of MasterCard’s global processing functions. Mr. Kumnick has an MBA- Finance and a BS Finance from St. Louis University.
Philip R. Broenniman.
Mr. Broenniman, serves as Chief Operating Officer and President, having been appointed in May 2020, as well as a Director of the Company, having been appointed in March 2020, Mr. Broenniman has been, for the last nine years, Managing Partner and Portfolio Manager for Varana Capital, LLC (“VCLLC”), a firm he co-founded in 2011. Through his position at VCLLC, Mr. Broenniman invests in, and consults with the Board of Directors of, certain public and private companies, working with each on strategic planning, financing, and/or balance sheet restructuring. Mr. Broenniman began his portfolio management career with the Bass family of Fort Worth, TX in 1993, investing in event strategies, assisting on a $1 billion book of derivative hedging and investment strategies, and developing his skills in derivative analytics, risk management, and portfolio construction. Privately, from August 2010 until February 2018, Mr. Broenniman was co-founder and a member of Cadence Distributors, LLC, an import/export company focused on the fragrance industry. From February 2012 to April 2017, Mr. Broenniman was a founding investor in Cacao Prieto, a bourbon and rum distillery, providing strategic guidance during the initial launch of the business. Mr. Broenniman served as a member of the Board of Directors and Special Committee evaluating strategic options for CSS Industries, Inc. (Formerly NYSE: CSS) from July 2019 until March 2020, upon the successful closing of its merger. Mr. Broenniman has a BS from Duke University, an MBA from University of Virginia and is a Chartered Financial Analyst.
Herbert Selzer
Herbert Selzer serves as an Independent Director of the Company. Mr. Selzer is an attorney based on New York, New York with a focus in corporate, international estate planning, trust and estates and wealth management. Mr. Selzer has been with Loeb, Block & Partners LLP since 1972 and became a partner in 1978. Prior to 1972, Mr. Selzer was employed by Ernst & Young. Mr. Selzer holds a BS Economics from Brooklyn College, a JD from George Washington University Law Center, an LLM in Taxation from New York University Law School.
Theodore Stern
Mr. Stern has served in several executive positions in the energy and software industries over his career. Previously he served as Chairman of the Board of inContact Inc. from 2000 to 2016 (when the company was acquired). He was Chairman and CEO from 2000 to 2005 when the positions were split. He oversaw the acquisition of four companies and the transition of inContact from a telecommunications company to a rapidly growing software-as-a-service company. Additionally, he previously served as a member of the Board of Directors of Ensync Inc and served on the Governance, Audit and Compensation Committees.
Mr. Stern also was a Senior Executive Vice President and member of the Board of Directors of Westinghouse Electric Corporation until his retirement. In his last position at Westinghouse Electric, Mr. Stern was responsible for multiple business units. Mr. Stern served as Vice Chairman of the Board of Directors of Superconductivity, Inc. of Madison, Wisconsin, a small technology company, until it was acquired in April 2007. Mr. Stern also served on the Board of Directors of Copperweld Corporation of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, a privately-owned steel and cable manufacturer, until its acquisition by LTV. Mr. Stern also served on the Board of Directors of Northern Power Systems of Waitsfield, Vermont, a privately-owned manufacturer of renewable and distributed generation systems until it was acquired by Distributed Energy Systems Incorporated (DESC). Mr. Stern also served on the board of directors of DESC. Mr. Stern holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Mechanical Engineering from the Pratt Institute and a Master of Arts degree in Theoretical Mathematics from New York University. He is a fellow of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers and a member of the National Academy of Engineering. He is the author of a number of technical papers on nuclear power technology.
Stuart Stoller
Stuart Stoller serves as Chief Financial Officer of the Company having been appointed in January 2017. Mr. Stoller. Prior to joining the Company served as Chief Financial Officer and Board Member for TestAmerica Environmental Services LLC from May 2016 to October 2017. From December 2013 to April 2016, he was the Chief Financial Officer of Associated Food Stores. Mr. Stoller served as Chief Financial and Administrative Officer for Sleep Innovations from August 2009 to October 2013. Prior to joining Sleep Innovations, Mr. Stoller for 27 years served various roles with the New York Times Company including Senior Vice President for Process Reengineering and Corporate Controller and various capacities at Macy’s which included the role of Senior Vice President and Corporate Controller. He also was the controller of Coopers & Lybrand LLP. He is a Certified Public Accountant.
Thomas Szoke
Thomas R. Szoke serves as Chief Solutions Architect and a Director of the Company. Mr. Szoke is a co-founder of Innovation in Motion (“IIM”) a predecessor of Ipsidy and has over 25 years of product engineering, global sales and operations management experience. He has held several executive positions in the Company and has successfully led it from its inception to its listing on the OTC Market as well as expanding its market presence and product portfolio through strategic acquisitions in the United States, South America and Africa. Mr. Szoke pioneered the concept and development of certain product lines as well as its Multi-Factor Out-of-Band Identity and Transaction Authentication Platform.
Prior to founding IIM, Mr. Szoke spent 23 years with Motorola, Inc. holding various management positions in field and product engineering, systems integration, program management and sales. He spent the last 10 years of his career at Motorola in the Biometrics Industry as Director of Integration and Project Management and then Director of Global Business Development for Civil Biometrics. From 2008-2011, Mr. Szoke was President of Thomas Szoke LLC, a technology consulting company focused on identity management and secure credentialing solutions. Mr. Szoke holds a degree in Electrical Engineering and Applied Mathematics from the University of Akron, in Ohio and is fluent in Hungarian.
Christopher White
Chris White was appointed Chief Technology Officer in January 2020. Mr. White joined the Company in 2018, initially as Director Dev-Ops, and was promoted to SVP Engineering in February 2019. In those roles he was responsible for the Company’s payments and mobile solutions application development. Prior to joining Ipsidy from 2016 to 2018, Mr. White served as Software Engineering Director at NCR Corporation and was responsible for development and maintenance of retail location management and point-of-sale systems for the petroleum industry. From 2015 to 2016 he was Director, Software Device & Tools at Verifone responsible for SDK’s, which were used by internal and third-party developers to develop software on Verifone devices. Prior to joining Verifone, Chris White was at Ingenico from 2011 to 2015, rising to VP of Core Engineering, where he was responsible for North American payment systems. Mr. White is a veteran of the United States Marine Corps in which he served honorably from 1991-1996 and received multiple certifications in electronics.
Board & Committees
Board meetings during calendar year ended 2020
During 2020, the Board of Directors held thirteen meetings as well as committee meetings, as outlined below. Each director attended all of the meetings of the Board and all of the meetings held by all committees on which such director served. The Board also approved certain actions by unanimous written consent.
Committees established by the Board
The Board of Directors has standing Audit, Compensation, and Governance Committees. Information concerning the function of each Board committee follows.
Audit Committee
The Audit Committee is responsible for overseeing management’s implementation of effective internal accounting and financial controls, supervising matters relating to audit functions, reviewing and setting internal policies and procedures regarding audits, accounting and other financial controls, reviewing the results of our audit performed by the independent public accountants, and evaluating and selecting the independent public accountants. The Audit Committee has adopted an Audit Committee Charter which is posted on our Corporate Governance landing page under the tab labeled “Investors” on our website at http://www.ipsidy.com. The Board has not designated a member as the “audit committee financial expert” as defined by the SEC, which is not required at this time. During 2020, the Audit Committee held five conference call meetings.
Compensation Committee
The Compensation Committee determines matters pertaining to the compensation of our named executive officers and administers our stock option and incentive compensation plans. The Compensation Committee has adopted a Compensation Committee Charter which is posted on our Corporate Governance landing page under the tab labeled “Investors” on our website at http://www.ipsidy.com. During 2020, the Compensation Committee held two meetings through conference calls.
Governance Committee
The Governance Committee is responsible for considering potential Board members, nominating Directors for election to the Board, implementing the Company’s corporate governance policies, recommending compensation for the Board and for all other purposes outlined in the Governance Committee Charter, which is posted on our Corporate Governance landing page under the tab labeled “Investors” on our website at http://www.ipsidy.com. During 2020, the Governance Committee did not hold any meetings.
Nomination of Directors
As provided in its charter, the Governance Committee is responsible for identifying individuals qualified to become directors. The Governance Committee seeks to identify director candidates based on input provided by a number of sources including (1) the Governance Committee members, (2) our other directors, (3) our stockholders, (4) our Chief Executive Officer or Chair of the Board, and (5) third parties such as service providers. In evaluating potential candidates for director, the Governance Committee considers the entirety of each candidate’s credentials.
Qualifications for consideration as a director nominee may vary according to the particular areas of expertise being sought as a complement to the existing composition of the Board of Directors. However, at a minimum, candidates for director must possess:
● high personal and professional ethics and integrity;
● the ability to exercise sound judgment;
● the ability to make independent analytical inquiries;
● a willingness and ability to devote adequate time and resources to diligently perform Board and committee duties; and
● the appropriate and relevant business experience and acumen.
Legal Proceedings
There are currently no legal proceedings, and during the past 10 years there have been no legal proceedings, that are material to the evaluation of the ability or integrity of any of our directors.
Family Relationships
There are no family relationships among our directors and executive officers. There is no arrangement or understanding between or among our executive officers and directors pursuant to which any director or officer was or is to be selected as a director or officer.
Involvement in Certain Legal Proceedings
To our knowledge, during the last ten years, none of our directors and executive officers has:
● Had a bankruptcy petition filed by or against any business of which such person was a general partner or executive officer either at the time of the bankruptcy or within two years prior to that time.
● Been convicted in a criminal proceeding or been subject to a pending criminal proceeding, excluding traffic violations and other minor offenses.
● Been subject to any order, judgment or decree, not subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated, of any court of competent jurisdiction, permanently or temporarily enjoining, barring, suspending or otherwise limiting his involvement in any type of business, securities or banking activities.
● Been found by a court of competent jurisdiction (in a civil action), the SEC, or the Commodities Futures Trading Commission to have violated a federal or state securities or commodities law, and the judgment has not been reversed, suspended or vacated.
● Been the subject to, or a party to, any sanction or order, not subsequently reverse, suspended or vacated, of any self-regulatory organization, any registered entity, or any equivalent exchange, association, entity or organization that has disciplinary authority over its members or persons associated with a member.
Code of Ethics
We have adopted a Code of Business Conduct and Ethics Policy (the “Code of Ethics”) that applies to all directors and officers. The Code of Ethics describes the legal, ethical and regulatory standards that must be followed by the directors and officers of the Company and sets forth high standards of business conduct applicable to each director and officer. As adopted, the Code of Ethics sets forth written standards that are designed to deter wrongdoing and to promote, among other things:
● honest and ethical conduct, including the ethical handling of actual or apparent conflicts of interest between personal and professional relationships;
● compliance with applicable governmental laws, rules and regulations;
● the prompt internal reporting of violations of the Code of Ethics to the appropriate person or persons identified in the code; and
● accountability for adherence to the Code of Ethics.
Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance
Section 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, requires our directors and executive officers and persons who own more than 10% of the issued and outstanding shares of our common stock to file reports of initial ownership of common stock and other equity securities and subsequent changes in that ownership with the SEC. Officers, directors and greater than ten percent stockholders are required by SEC regulation to furnish us with copies of all Section 16(a) forms they file. To our knowledge, based solely on a review of the copies of such reports furnished to us and written representations that no other reports were required, during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 all Section 16(a) filing requirements applicable to our officers, directors and greater than 10% beneficial owners were complied with.
Item 11. Executive Compensation
The below table sets forth information concerning all cash and non-cash compensation awarded to, earned by or paid to (i) all individuals serving as the Company’s principal executive officers or acting in a similar capacity during the last two completed fiscal years, regardless of compensation level, and (ii) the Company’s two most highly compensated executive officers other than the principal executive officers serving at the end of the last two completed fiscal years (collectively, the “Named Executive Officers”).
SUMMARY COMPENSATION TABLE
(1)
Mr. Kumnick was hired on May 22, 2020 and as part of his compensation package was granted 33,333,334 stock options of which 20% vest at grant date and the balance vest subject to performance conditions. As of December 31, 2020, 6,666,666 of the stock options were vested and exercisable, and the performance conditions for remaining stocks options were not met. In December 2019, Mr. Kumnick was granted 3,000,000 stock options in connection with his appointment to the Board of Directors. Additionally, in March 2020, Mr. Kumnick was granted 1,500,000 shares of restricted stock which shares vest upon attainment of certain performance thresholds.
The stock option aggregate grant date fair value was $1,033,333. There award aggregate grant date fair value was $127,500. The performance criteria for vesting of the restricted stock were not met. Mr. Kumnick has not exercised or realized a gain on these options as of the date of the submission of this report. Furthermore, the bonus of $64,980 will only earned upon meeting certain performance criteria.
(2)
Mr. Beck was hired on January 31, 2017 and as part of his compensation package was granted 15,000,000 stock options which vest 1/3 immediately effective January 31, 2017 with the balance over two years and 15,000,000 shares of restricted stock which shares vest upon attainment of certain performance thresholds. As of December 31, 2020, all shares under the options vested and were exercisable, but none of the restricted stock were exercisable. Mr. Beck has not exercised or realized a gain on these options as of the date of the submission of this report.
On May 22, 2020, the Company and Mr. Beck entered into a separation letter agreement, which provided for payment to Mr. Beck of one year’s severance in the amount of $350,000 plus the cost of medical benefits, payable in accordance with the terms of Mr. Beck’s Retention Agreement. During 2020, the Company paid $287,500 plus his monthly medical insurance premiums. The remaining $87,500 was paid in February 2021. On October 30, 2020, pursuant to the terms of Mr. Beck’s Restricted Stock Agreement, as amended by the Separation Agreement, the Company repurchased for $1.00 the 15,000,000 shares of Unvested Restricted Stock.
(3) In 2020, Mr. Szoke was appointed Chief Solutions Architect. In 2019, Mr. Szoke was paid a bonus of $36,667 earned in 2018 for attaining the performance targets as set forth in his employment agreement.
(4) Mr. Stoller was hired on January 31, 2017 and as part of his compensation package was granted 5,000,000 stock options which vest over three years and 5,000,000 shares of restricted stock which shares vest upon attainment of certain performance criteria. In October 2020, Mr. Stoller was granted 2,500,000 stock options which vest over three years. The aggregate grant date fair value was of the 2020 stock grant was $127,500. As of December 31, 2020, 5,000,000 of the stock options granted were vested and exercisable and the restricted stock was not exercisable. Mr. Stoller has not exercised or realized a gain on these options as of the date of the submission of this report.
Mr. Szoke and Mr. Stoller each are party to an Executive Retention Agreement to encourage the Executive to continue to devote the Executive’s full attention and dedication to the success of the Company, and to provide specification compensation and benefits to the Executive in the event of a Termination Upon Change of Control or certain other terminations pursuant to the terms of this Agreement. These agreements include payment of salary and other benefits for one year in addition to acceleration and vesting of certain stock compensation plans.
Pursuant to the Executive Retention Agreements, as more fully described below, certain executive officers could earn additional compensation if certain performance thresholds were met. The targets for Mr. Szoke and Stoller were not met in 2020 and 2019. No other incremental compensation targets for any executive were met in 2020 and 2019. However, the Board of Directors may allocate salaries and benefits to the officers in its sole discretion.
The Company currently has no retirement, pension, or profit-sharing plan covering its officers and directors; The Company provide medical benefits on a cost sharing basis and has a dental plan which is fully paid by the employees cost. See “Executive Agreements” below.)
Grant of Plan-Based Awards
During the calendar year ended December 31, 2020, the following grants were made to the named executive officers.
● Mr. Kumnick in connection with his employment agreement was granted 33,333,334 stock options of which 20% were vest at grant date and the balance vest subject to performance conditions. Mr. Kumnick was also granted 1,500,000 shares of restricted stock which shares vest upon attainment of certain performance thresholds.
● In October 2020, Mr. Stoller was granted 2,500,000 stock options which vest over three years.
As previously described, in connection with their respective employment arrangements, Philip Beck and Stuart Stoller were awarded 15,000,000 and 5,000,000 common stock options in 2017. Additionally, Philip Beck and Stuart Stoller received 15,000,000 and 5,000,000 restricted common shares in 2017. On October 30, 2020, pursuant to the terms of Mr. Beck’s Restricted Stock Agreement, as amended by the Separation Agreement, the Company repurchased for $1.00 the 15,000,000 shares of Unvested Restricted Stock
There were no other grants of plan-based awards or common stock options, to other named executive officers during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Outstanding Equity Awards to Executive Officers
The following table sets forth information with respect to outstanding equity awards held by our named executive officers as of December 31, 2020.
(1) The performance criteria for 26,666,667 stock options for Phillip Kumnick and restricted stock awards to Philip Kumnick and Stuart Stoller have not been met as of December 31, 2020.
(2) The amounts for Philip Beck include previously awarded common stock options for consulting services rendered prior to his employment (17,000,000 stock options) which became exercisable on January 31, 2017 upon his appointment as the Chief Executive Officer of the Company. The consulting services were provided by Parity Labs, LLC, a company principally owned by Mr. Beck and his family.
Compensation of Directors
The non-management Directors consisting of the Board of Directors earn $72,000 per annum for Board membership, inclusive of all Board meeting and committee meeting attendance fees in the form of a stock grant and they earn an additional annual retainer for service on each committee of $5,000. The Company has recorded the expense associated with Board Compensation but has not granted or paid fees since October 2019. Total board compensation recorded in 2020 was approximately $349,000 of which $47,000 was the retainer for Board Committees and the balance of $302,000 was the retainer for service on the Board. Mr. Stern and Mr. Selzer each earned $15,000, Mr. Kumnick and Mr. Beck each earned $6,250, Mr. Broenniman earned $3,750 and Mr. Solomon $833.
The non-management directors in 2020 were as follows:
● Herb Selzer and Theodore Stern for all of 2020.
● Phillip Kumnick until May 22, 2020 when he was appointed Chief Executive Officer of the Company.
● Philip Broenniman who was appointed in March 2020 until he was appointed President of the Company on May 22, 2020.
● Philip Beck from May 22, 2020 (former Chief Executive Officer) until he resigned from the Board of Directors in October 2020.
● Ricky Solomon - January 2020 until he resigned from the Board of Directors.
The non-management Board of Directors will be compensated for their service in 2020 through the issuance of stock compensation after the next Annual Meeting.
During 2019, the Company recorded expense of $40,000 for the annual retainer for service on Board. The amounts recorded for Mr. Selzer, Mr. Stern and Mr. Solomon for the annual retainer for service on Board committees was $15,000, $15,000, and $10,000 in addition to their stock compensation of $72,000 each per annum. Total board compensation recorded in 2019 was approximately $256,000.
On his appointment Mr. Kumnick received a grant of an option to purchase 3,000,000 shares of common stock vesting in equal parts over three years, or earlier in the event of a change of control of the Company (as defined in the option grant). In March 2020, the Company entered into a restricted stock purchase agreement with Phillip Kumnick, providing Mr. Kumnick with the right to acquire 1,500,000 shares of common stock at par value subject to the Vesting Criteria (as defined in the stock purchase agreement). On his appointment, the Company entered into a restricted stock purchase agreement with Philip Broenniman, providing Mr. Broenniman with the right to acquire 1,500,000 shares of common stock at par value subject to the Vesting Criteria.
Executive Employment Agreements
On May 22, 2020, Phillip L. Kumnick, Deputy Chairman of the Company, was appointed as Chief Executive Officer of the Company. Philip R. Broenniman, a director of the Company, was appointed as Chief Operating Officer and President of the Company. On December 31, 2020 effective May 22, 2020, Mr. Kumnick and Mr. Broenniman each entered into Offer Letters with the Company providing that each of the executives will devote their full time and attention to the business of the Company on an “at will” basis.
Pursuant to the Offer Letter entered with Mr. Kumnick, Mr. Kumnick base salary since his engagement was $125,000 per annum and was increased to $187,500 per annum as of November 1, 2020. Subject to the Company achieving a revenue target of not less than $8,000,000 in a fiscal year (the “Revenue Target”), the base salary is to be increased to $250,000 per annum and to be again further reviewed by the Compensation Committee based on prevailing market conditions. Further, upon achieving the Revenue Target or a portion thereof or in the event of a change of control or involuntary termination, Mr. Kumnick will receive a bonus of up to $64,980. Mr. Kumnick is also eligible to receive the usual benefits available to the executives of the Company.
Pursuant to the Offer Letter entered with Mr. Broenniman, Mr. Broenniman base salary since his engagement was $87,500 per annum and was increased to $131,250 per annum as of November 1, 2020. Subject to the Company achieving the Revenue Targets, the base salary is to be increased to $175,000 per annum and to be again further reviewed by the Compensation Committee based on prevailing market conditions. Further, upon achieving the Revenue Target or a portion thereof or in the event of a change of control or involuntary termination, Mr. Broenniman will receive a bonus of up to $45,833. Mr. Broenniman is also eligible to receive the usual benefits available to the executives of the Company.
In May 2020, Mr. Kumnick was granted options to acquire 33,333,334 shares of common stock and Mr. Broenniman was granted options to acquire 16,666,666 shares of common stock. 20% of the options were vested at grant and the balance vest subject to performance conditions.
On January 31, 2017, Mr. Beck and the Company entered an Executive Retention Agreement pursuant to which Mr. Beck agreed to serve as Chief Executive Officer and President in consideration of an annual salary of $350,000 of which $50,000 shall be deferred until the Company raises in the aggregate $15 million in debt and/or equity capital. The Company has agreed to provide a bonus of 75% of the base salary upon the Company timely filing its annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2017 and the Company raising gross proceeds of $15 million in debt and/or equity capital (“Milestone 1”) and a bonus of 150% of the base salary upon the Company achieving (i) any merger or sale of the Company or its assets, (ii) the Company achieving adjusted EBITDA of $10 million in a fiscal year, (iii) the Company achieving a listing on a national exchange and then or subsequently raising gross proceeds in the amount of $10 million or achieving a valuation of $125 million or (iv) the Company achieving $20 million of revenue on a trailing 12 months basis (“Milestone 2”).
The Company also granted Mr. Beck a Stock Option to acquire 15 million shares of common stock of the Company at an exercise price of $0.10 per share for a period of ten years and the Company agreed to a Restricted Stock Purchase Agreement with Mr. Beck pursuant to which Mr. Beck purchased 15 million shares of common stock at a per share price of $0.0001, which shares of common stock vest upon achieving Milestone 2. The Stock Options vest with respect to (i) one-third of the shares of common stock as of January 31, 2017 and (ii) in 24 equal monthly tranches commencing on the grant date.
On May 22, 2020, the Company and Mr. Beck entered into a separation letter agreement, which provided for payment to Mr. Beck of one year’s severance in the amount of $350,000 as well as certain employee benefits, payable in accordance with the terms of Mr. Beck’s Retention Agreement. During 2020, the Company paid $287,500 plus his monthly medical insurance premiums. The remaining $87,500 was paid in February 2021. On October 30, 2020, Philip Beck resigned as a director of the Company and the Company repurchased Mr. Beck’s restricted stock for $1.00 under the provisions of his Restricted Stock Agreement.
On January 31, 2017, Mr. Szoke and the Company entered into an Executive Retention Agreement pursuant to which Mr. Szoke agreed to serve as Chief Technology Officer in consideration of an annual salary of $250,000. The Company has agreed to provide a bonus of up to 50% of the base salary in 2017 upon the Company achieving a gross margin to be mutually agreed upon by the Company and Mr. Szoke and a bonus of 75% of the base salary upon the Company achieving Milestone 2. The Company and Mr. Szoke entered into an Indemnification Agreement on January 31, 2017. Mr. Szoke’s annual salary was increased in late 2017 to $275,000 per year. Mr. Szoke did not meet the 2017 bonus requirement.
The Company entered an Executive Retention Agreement with pursuant to which Stuart Stoller agreed to serve as Chief Financial Officer in consideration of an annual salary of $225,000. The Company has agreed to provide two different bonus levels upon the achievement of certain performance, financial and other milestones. The Company also granted Mr. Stoller a stock option to acquire 5 million shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.10 per share for a period of ten years. Further, Company has agreed to a Restricted Stock Purchase Agreement in which Mr. Stoller purchased an additional 5 million shares at a per share price of $0.0001, which shares of common stock vest upon meeting certain performance, financial and other milestones. The Stock Options vest with respect to (i) one third of common stock upon the anniversary of the grant date and (ii) in 24 equal installments commencing on the one year anniversary of the grant.
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
The following table sets forth the number of shares known to be beneficially owned by all persons who own at least 5% of Ipsidy’s outstanding common stock, the Company’s directors, the Company’s executive officers, and the directors and executive officers as a group as of February 28, 2021, unless otherwise noted. Unless otherwise indicated, the stockholders listed in the table have sole voting and investment power with respect to the shares indicated.
(1) Applicable percentage ownership is based on 593,952,012, shares of common stock outstanding as of February 28, 2021. Beneficial ownership is determined in accordance with the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission and generally includes voting or investment power with respect to securities. Shares of common stock that are currently exercisable or exercisable within 60 days of are deemed to be beneficially owned by the person holding such securities for computing the percentage of ownership of such person, but are not treated as outstanding for computing the percentage ownership of any other person.
(2) Includes (i) 5,885,445 shares of common stock, (ii) 8,166,667 shares of common stock held by Theodore Stern Revocable Trust, (iii) a common stock purchase warrant to acquire 250,000 shares of common stock at $0.15 per share and (iv) 20,372,702 shares of common stock that may be issued upon the conversion of principal and interest accrued as of April 29, 2021 under the Stern Note, which is held by the Theodore Stern Revocable Trust.
(3) Includes (i) 19,083,317 shares of common stock, (ii) 3,000,000 shares held by Mr. Szoke’s wife, and (iii) a stock option to acquire 10,000,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.45 per share.
(4) Includes (i) 3,682,412 shares of common stock, (ii) 1,500,000 shares of restricted common stock that vest upon meeting performance criteria. The performance criteria have not been met as of February 28, 2021, (iii) a stock option to acquire 16,666,666 shares of common stock at $0.07 per share, of which 8,666,666 are vested and the remainder vest upon meeting performance criteria. The performance criteria have not been met as of February 28, 2021, (iv) common stock purchase warrants to acquire 350,000 shares of common stock at $0.165 per share and 262,500 shares of common stock at $0.088 per share, (v) 9,153,969 shares of common stock held by Varana Capital Focused L.P. (“VCFLP”) and a common stock purchase warrant to acquire 929,167 shares of common stock at $0.15 per share held by VCFLP. Mr. Broenniman is the Managing Partner of Varana Capital, LLC, which, in turn, is the investment manager of and has dispositive control over the shares held by VCFLP. By virtue of these relationships, in addition to the shares he holds personally, Mr. Broenniman may be deemed to beneficially own the shares held by VCFLP.
(5) Includes (i) 1,500,000 shares of restricted common stock that vest upon meeting performance criteria. The performance criteria have not been met as of February 28, 2021, (ii) a stock option to acquire 3,000,000 shares of common stock at $0.055 per share vesting over a three year period, of which 1,000,000 have vested as of February 28, 2021 and (iii) a stock option to acquire 33,333,334 shares of common stock at $0.07 per share, of which 17,333,334 are vested and the remainder vest upon meeting performance criteria. The performance criteria have not been met as of February 28, 2021.
(6) Includes (i) 312,500 shares of common stock (ii) a stock option to acquire 5,000,000 shares of common stock at $0.10 per share, (iii) 5,000,000 restricted stock common shares that vest upon meeting performance criteria. The performance criteria have not been met as of February 28, 2021 and (iv) stock options to acquire 2,500,000 shares of common stock at a price of $0.0925 per share which vest as to one-third on each of October 7, 2021, 2022 and 2023.
(7) Includes (i) 5,594,714 shares of common stock, (ii) stock options to acquire 400,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.10 per share, (iii) 812,592 shares of common stock arising on conversion of principal and interest accrued as of April 29, 2021 under a 2020 Note and (iv) 2,417,778 shares of common stock held by Vista PBG Associates, LLC (“Vista”), a company of which Mr. Selzer is the manager and a common stock purchase warrant to acquire 440,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.15 per share held by Vista. Mr. Selzer may be deemed to beneficially own the shares held by Vista.
(8) Includes (i) 500,000 shares of common stock, (ii) 250,000 shares of restricted common stock which vest June 3, 2021 (iii) stock options to acquire 250,000 shares of common stock at a price of $0.119 per share which vest as follows: (a) 125,000 upon achievement of agreed performance goals and (b) 125,000 as to one-third on each of February 18, 2020, 2021 and 2022 and (iv) stock options to acquire 2,500,000 shares of common stock at a price of $0.0925 per share which vest as to one-third on each of October 7, 2021, 2022 and 2023.
(9) Includes (i) 45,937,008 shares of common stock, (ii) 4,062,962 shares of common stock arising on conversion of principal and interest as of April 29, 2021 under a 2020 Note, (iii) Garchik Universal Limited Partnership, which Mr. Garchik jointly controls with his sister, holds 350,000 shares of common stock, and (iv) a common stock purchase warrant to acquire 2,500,000 shares of common stock at $0.15 per share.
(10) Includes 3,200,000 shares held by Multipolaris Corporation, 24,968,260 shares held by Interpolaris Pte. Ltd. and 19,200,000 held by MP Informatikai Kft. Mr. Vago is an officer and principal of each of these entities, and he may be deemed the beneficial owner or the shares held by such entities.
(11) Includes (i) 15,037,302 shares of common stock and (ii) a stock option to acquire 20,000,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.45 per share
(12) Includes (i) 24,124,857 shares of common stock, (ii) a common stock purchase warrant to acquire 10,000,000 shares of common stock at $0.10 per share and (iii) a common stock purchase warrant to acquire 369,334 shares of common stock at $0.15 per share.
(13) Includes (i) 1,340,833 shares of common stock, (ii) a stock option to acquire 15,000,000 shares of common stock at $0.10 per share, and (iii) 1,902,884 shares of common stock and a stock option to acquire 14,000,000 shares of common stock at $0.05 per share held by Parity Labs LLC, a private consulting firm which is principally owned by Mr. Beck
See Item 5 for information pertaining to Securities Authorized for Issuance under Equity Compensation Plans.
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions and Director Independence
The Company is admitted to the OTCQB tier of OTC Markets, but as a company that is required to file reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, the Company is not required under the rules mandated by OTC Markets for US companies to comply with the Director Independence standard, which requires certain companies maintain a Board that has at least two independent directors and an Audit Committee, a majority of the members of which are independent directors. However, the Company is voluntarily complying with such standard. Pursuant to Rule 4200 of The NASDAQ Stock Market one of the definitions of an independent director is a person other than an executive officer or employee of a company. The Company’s board of directors has reviewed the materiality of any relationship that each of the directors has with the Company, either directly or indirectly. Based on this review the board has determined that there are two (2) independent directors, including all the members of the Audit Committee.
In connection with the Company’s ability to secure third-party financing, during the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company paid Network 1 cash fees of approximately $110,000 and issued Network 1 and issued 858,000 common stock purchase warrants at a price of $0.088 cents per share. In connection with the offering of the 2020 Notes and the sale of common stock in the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company paid Network 1 Financial Securities, Inc., a registered broker-dealer (“Network 1”), a cash fee of approximately $471,800. A former member of the Company’s Board of Directors maintains a partnership with a principal of Network 1.
On August 10, 2016, the Company entered into a Letter Agreement (the “Amendment”) with Parity Labs, LLC (“Parity”), a company principally owned by Mr. Beck (former director and CEO) and his family, to amend the compensation section of that certain Advisory Agreement previously entered into between the Company and Parity on November 16, 2015 for the provision of strategic advisory services, to provide for the issuance to Parity of a common stock option (the “Parity Option”) to acquire 20,000,000 shares of common stock of the Company exercisable at $0.05 per share for a period of ten years. The Parity Option vested in entirety upon Mr. Beck becoming the Chief Executive Officer of Ipsidy, Inc. on January 31, 2017. The Company’s headquarters are located in Long Beach, New York where the Company currently leases offices on a month-to-month basis. The facilities are managed by Bridgeworks LLC, (“Bridgeworks”) a company providing office facilities to emerging companies, principally owned by Mr. Beck and his family. The arrangement with Bridgeworks LLC allows the Company to use offices and conference rooms for a fixed, monthly fee. Since 2014, Mr. Beck has served as managing member of Parity, and since 2016, as Chairman, a Member and co-founder of Bridgeworks. During 2020 and 2019, the Company paid Bridgeworks $52,500 and $89,100, respectively in each year for the use of the facilities.
In June 2019, two of the Company’s Directors and one Officer purchased 1,562,500 shares of common stock of the 2019 of the common stock offering.
In December 2019 Mr. Beck Chairman and CEO of the Company purchased $25,000 of 8% Notes.
In February 2020, Mr. Beck, Mr. Selzer and Mr. Stern purchased $50,000, $100,000 and $50,000 respectively of 2020 Notes. In addition, Mr. Stern is a trustee of the Stern Trust whose Stern Note was amended and restated as part of the 2020 Notes Offering. A comprehensive disclosure of the 2020 Notes can be found in Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the Year Ended December 31, 2020.
In March 2020, the Company granted 1,500,000 shares of Restricted Common Stock to each of Phillip Kumnick and Philip Broenniman, new members of our Board of Directors, in connection with their compensation for service as Board Members. The restricted stock vests upon the achievement of certain performance criteria. The performance criteria have not been met as of December 31,2020.
Mr. Phillip Kumnick and Mr. Philip Broenniman, two of the Company’s Director’s became employed by the Company as Chief Executive Officer and President and Chief Operating Officer effective May 22, 2020. Mr. Kumnick earned an initial base salary of $125,000 per annum which was increased to $187,500 per annum as of November 1, 2020 and is subject to review after one year. Mr. Kumnick was granted options to acquire 33,333,334 shares of common stock of which 20% vest at grant and the balance vest subject to performance conditions. Mr. Broenniman earned an initial base salary of $87,500 per annum which was increased to $131,250 as of November 1, 2020 and is subject to review after one year. Mr. Broenniman was granted options to acquire 16,666,666 shares of common stock of which 20% vest at grant and the balance vest subject to performance conditions.
On June 30, 2020, Company entered into and consummated a private transaction pursuant to which a portion of the Company’s warrants exercisable at per share price of $0.10 (the “$0.10 Warrants”) were exercised for cash at an exercise price of $0.07 per share. In addition, the holders that exercised the $0.10 Warrants received a warrant exercisable for two years to acquire one share of common stock at an exercise price of $0.15 per share (the $0.15 Warrants”) for every four $0.10 Warrants exercised. Mr. Theodore Stern, a director of the Company, participated in the private transaction resulting in the issuance of 1,000,000 shares of common stock and 250,000 $0.15 Warrants in consideration of $70,000; and Varana Capital Focused, LP (“VCFLP”), participated in the private transaction resulting in the issuance of 3,716,667 shares of common stock and 929,167 $0.15 Warrants, in consideration of $260,167. Mr. Philip Broenniman, a director, the President and COO of the Company is the investment manager of VCFLP.
On June 30, 2020, Company entered into and consummated a private transaction pursuant to which a portion of the Company’s warrants exercisable at per share price of $0.06 (the “$0.06 Warrants”) were exercised. In addition, the holders that exercised the $0.06 Warrants also received a $0.15 Warrant for every two $0.06 Warrants exercised. Vista Associates, L.P., (“Vista”) of which, Mr. Herbert Selzer a director of the Company, is the General Partner, participated in the private transaction resulting in the issuance of 880,000 shares of common stock and 440,000 $0.15 Warrants, in consideration of $52,800.
On June 30, 2020, the Company also entered into a Subscription Agreement with VCFLP pursuant to which VCFLP purchased 714,285 shares of common stock in consideration of $50,000.
Item 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services.
The aggregate fees incurred for each of the last two years for professional services rendered by Cherry Bekaert, LLP, the independent registered public accounting firm for the audit of the Company’s annual financial statements included in the Company’s Form 10-K and review of financial statements for its quarterly reports (Form 10-Q) are reported below.
The total fees paid to Cherry Bekaert, LLP in 2020 aggregated $230,500 which includes fees for the 2020 audited financial statements and review of the quarterly financial statements for 2020. Additionally, the company paid Cherry Bekaert, LLP $5,000 for services associated with the updated filing of the Company’s S-1.
The total fees billed by Cherry Bekaert, LLP in 2019 aggregated $250,000 which includes fees for the audit of financial statements and review of the quarterly financial statements for 2019. Additionally, the company paid Cherry Bekaert, LLP $16,000 for services associated with the filing of the Company’s S-1.
The Audit Committee by its Charter pre-approves all audit services to be provided to the Company, whether provided by the principal auditor or other firms, and all other services (review, attest and non-audit) to be provided to the Company by the independent auditor. The Audit Committee approved the services rendered for the audit of the financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 in addition to the services rendered for the filing of the quarterly financial statements on Form 10-Q in 2020 and 2019.
The current policy of the directors, acting via the Audit Committee, is to approve the appointment of the principal auditing firm and any permissible audit-related services. The audit and audit related fees include fees for the annual audit of the financial statements and review of financial statements included in 10K and Q filings.
* Filed herewith.
(1) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on August 13, 2013.
(2) Incorporated by reference to the Form 10-12G Registration Statement filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on November 9, 2011.
(3) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on October 9, 2014.
(4) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on February 6, 2017.
(5) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on October 3, 2017.
(6) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on June 1, 2015.
(7) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on September 9, 2015.
(8) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on October 1, 2015.
(9) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on October 1, 2015.
(10) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on October 1, 2015.
(11) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on October 1, 2015.
(12) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on December 29, 2015.
(13) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on April 25, 2016.
(14) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on August 16, 2016.
(15) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on February 1, 2017.
(16) Incorporated by reference to the Form S-1 Registration Statement filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on February 13, 2014.
(17) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on November 28, 2014.
(18) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on March 12, 2015.
(19) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on October 1, 2015.
(20) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on October 1, 2015.
(21) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on October 1, 2015.
(22) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on February 12, 2016.
(23) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on January 6, 2017.
(24) Incorporated by reference to the Form 10-Q Quarterly Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on March 31, 2017.
(25) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on September 14, 2017.
(26) Incorporated by reference to the Form 10-Q Quarterly Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on November 13, 2017.
(27) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on November 15, 2017.
(28) Incorporated by reference to the Form 10-K Annual Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on July 12, 2017.
(29) Incorporated by reference to the Form 10-Q Quarterly Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on May 4, 2018.
(30) Incorporated by reference to the Form 10-K Annual Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on August 17, 2018.
(31) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on June 21, 2019.
(32) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on December 16, 2019.
(33) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on February 18, 2020.
(34) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on March 10, 2020
(35) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on May 13, 2020.
(36) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on May 29, 2020.
(37) Incorporated by reference to the Form 8-K Current Report filed with the Securities Exchange Commission on January 22, 2021.
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned thereunto duly authorized.
Ipsidy Inc.
Date: March 8, 2021 By: /s/ Phillip L. Kumnick
Name: Phillip L. Kumnick
Title: Chairman of the Board of Directors, &
Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
Date: March 8, 2021 By: /s/ Stuart P. Stoller
Name: Stuart P. Stoller
Title: Chief Financial Officer
(Principal Financial and Accounting Officer)
In accordance with the Exchange Act, this report has been signed below by the following persons on March 8, 2021 on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities indicated.
Signature
Title
/s/ Phillip L. Kumnick
Chairman of the Board of Directors and Chief Executive Officer,
Phillip L. Kumnick
(Principal Executive Officer)
/s/ Philip R. Broenniman
Chief Operating Officer and Director
Philip R. Broenniman
/s/ Thomas R. Szoke
Chief Solutions Architect and Director
Thomas R. Szoke
/s/ Theodore Stern
Director
Theodore Stern
/s/ Stuart P. Stoller
Chief Financial Officer
Stuart P. Stoller
(Principal Financial and Accounting Officer)
/s/ Herbert Selzer
Director
Herbert Selzer
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of
Ipsidy Inc.
Long Beach, New York
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Ipsidy Inc. and subsidiaries (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive loss, stockholders’ equity, and cash flows for each of the years then ended, and the related notes (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial statements”). In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the years then ended, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Going Concern
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern. As discussed in Note 1 to the financial statements, the Company has suffered recurring losses from operations that raise substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern. Management’s plans in regard to these matters are also described in Note 1. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Basis for Opinion
These consolidated financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s consolidated financial statements based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (“PCAOB”) and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over financial reporting. As part of our audits, we are required to obtain an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion.
Our audits included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Critical Audit Matters
The critical audit matters communicated below are matters arising from the current period audit of the consolidated financial statements that were communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and that: (1) relate to accounts or disclosures that are material to the consolidated financial statements and (2) involved our especially challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on the consolidated financial statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matters below, providing separate opinions on the critical audit matters or on the accounts or disclosures to which they relate.
Impairment of Goodwill
Description of Matter
The Company’s consolidated goodwill balance was approximately $4,183,000 at December 31, 2020. The Company’s evaluation of goodwill for impairment involves the comparison of the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. The fair value of each reporting unit is estimated using the income approach, which requires the use of estimates and assumptions related to cash flow forecasts, discount rates, and terminal values. Management’s cash flow forecasts included significant judgments and assumptions relating to revenue growth rates.
The fair value of a reporting unit did not exceed its carrying value as of the annual evaluation date; therefore, impairment expense of approximately $1,036,000 was recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Management made significant judgments when developing the fair value estimate of the reporting units. As a result, a high degree of auditor judgment and effort was required in performing audit procedures to evaluate the reasonableness of management’s cash flow forecasts and the significant assumptions identified above. Significant uncertainty exists with these assumptions because they are sensitive to future market or economic conditions.
How We Addressed the Matter in Our Audit
Our audit procedures included the following:
● Obtained an understanding of the internal controls and processes in place over the Company’s annual goodwill impairment review process, including management’s review of the significant assumptions described above.
● Evaluated management’s determination of reporting units and segments.
● Evaluated the significant assumptions and inputs used in the income model based and reviewed corroborating documentation to support the assumptions and inputs.
● Evaluated the reasonableness of management’s current revenue forecasts by comparing the forecasts to actual results subsequent to year-end.
● Performed a sensitivity analysis over the Company’s annual goodwill impairment analysis.
Revenue from Contracts with Customers - Identity Solutions Software
Description of Matter
The Company had approximately $2,141,000 in revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020. As disclosed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company recognizes revenue from Identity Solutions Software based on the identified performance obligations over the performance period for fixed consideration and for variable fees generated that are earned on a usage fee based over time, which represented approximately $852,000 of the Company’s revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Due to the nature of the Company's contracts including multiple performance obligations, management exercises significant judgment in the following areas in determining appropriate revenue recognition:
● Determination of which products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately or combined, such as software licenses and related implementation or support services.
● Determination of stand-alone selling prices for each distinct performance obligation.
● Estimation of contract transaction price and allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations.
● The pattern of delivery (i.e. timing of when revenue is recognized) for each distinct performance obligation.
As a result, a high degree of auditor judgment was required in performing audit procedures to evaluate the reasonableness of management’s judgments. Changes in these judgments can have a material effect on the amount of revenue recognized on these contracts
How We Addressed the Matter in Our Audit
Based on our knowledge of the Company, we determined the nature and extent of procedures to be performed over revenue, including the determination of the revenue streams over which those procedures were performed. Our audit procedures included the following for each revenue stream where procedures were performed:
● Obtained an understanding of the internal controls and processes in place over the Company’s revenue recognition processes.
● Analyzed the significant assumptions and estimates made by management as discussed above.
● Assessed the recorded revenue by selecting a sample of transactions, analyzing the related contract, testing management’s identification of distinct performance obligations, and comparing the amounts recognized for consistency with underlying documentation.
● Assessed the completeness of contract liabilities by selecting a sample of transactions, analyzing the related contract, and recalculating contract liability based on remaining subscription period.
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 2015.
Tampa, Florida
March 8, 2021
IPSIDY INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
IPSIDY INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
IPSIDY INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE LOSS
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
IPSIDY INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
IPSIDY INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
IPSIDY INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE 1 - DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS AMD SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Ipsidy Inc. (“Ipsidy” or the “Company”) was incorporated on September 21, 2011 under the laws of the State of Delaware. Ipsidy is a provider of an Identity as a Service (IDaaS) platform that delivers a suite of secure, mobile, biometric identity solutions. The Company provides its biometric identification services to government and private sector organizations and businesses, seeking to authenticate and manage identities for a variety of security purposes, including issuing identity cards, exercise of rights such as voting in elections and controlling access to digital and physical environments. The Company’s platform supporting internally developed software as well as acquired and licensed technology is intended to provide solutions for multi modal biometric matching, multi-factor out of band identity and transaction authentication, and electronic transactions.
Going Concern
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had an accumulated deficit of approximately $98.2 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company earned revenue of approximately $2.1 million and incurred a loss from operations of approximately $9.0 million.
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which implies the Company will continue to meet its obligations and continue its operations for the next fiscal year. The continuation of the Company as a going concern is dependent upon financial support from the Company’s current shareholders, the ability of the Company to obtain additional equity financing to continue operations, the Company’s ability to generate sufficient cash flows from operations, successfully locating and negotiating with other business entities for potential acquisition and /or acquiring new clients to generate revenues and cash flows. As there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to achieve positive cash flows (become profitable) and raise sufficient capital to maintain operations there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
Covid-19
A novel strain of coronavirus (“Covid-19”) emerged globally in December 2019 and has been declared a pandemic. The extent to which Covid-19 will impact our customers, business, results and financial condition will depend on current and future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time. The Company’s day-to-day operations beginning March 2020 have been impacted differently depending on geographic location and services that are being performed. The Cards Plus business located in South Africa did not have any operations in April 2020 and has had limitations on its operations starting in May 2020, as the Company is following the guidance and requirements of the South African government. Our operations in the United States and Colombia have suffered less immediate impact as most staff can work remotely and can continue to develop our product offerings.
That said, we have seen our business opportunities develop more slowly as business partners and potential customers are dealing with Covid-19 issues, working remotely and these issues are causing delays in decision making and finalization of negotiations and agreements. However, the level of inquiries about our services has increased during the last quarter of 2020, as our products are designed to serve an increasingly mobile economy and workforce.
Basis of Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Ipsidy Inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiaries Innovation in Motion Inc. MultiPay S.A.S., ID Global LATAM, IDGS S.A.S., ID Solutions, Inc., FIN Holdings, Inc., Cards Plus Pty Ltd., Ipsidy Perú S.A.C., and Ipsidy Enterprises Limited (collectively, the “Company”). All significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
The summary of significant accounting policies presented below is designed to assist in understanding the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Such consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes are the representations of the Company’s management, who are responsible for their integrity and objectivity. These accounting policies conform to accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“US GAAP”) in all material respects and have been consistently applied in preparing the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Use of Estimates
In preparing these consolidated financial statements in conformity with US GAAP, management is required to make estimates and assumptions that may affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Significant estimates and assumptions included in our consolidated financial statements relate to the realizability of accounts receivable and inventory, valuation of long-lived assets, accruals for potential liabilities, and valuation assumptions related to derivative liabilities, equity instruments and share based payments.
Revenue Recognition
Cards Plus - The Company recognizes revenue for the design and production of cards at the point in time when products are shipped, or services have been performed due to the short term nature of the contracts. Additionally, the cards produced by the Company have no alternative use and the Company has an enforceable right to payment for work performed should the contract be cancelled. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, Cards Plus had approximately $87,000 and $88,000, respectively, of contract liability from payments received in advance that will be earned in future periods.
Payment Processing - The Company recognizes revenue for variable fees generated for payment processing solutions that are earned on a usage fee over time based on monthly transaction volumes or on a monthly flat fee rate. Additionally, the Company also sells certain equipment from time to time for which revenue is recognized at a point in time the equipment is delivered to the customer.
Identity Solutions Software - The Company recognizes revenue based on the identified performance obligations over the performance period for fixed consideration and for variable fees generated that are earned on a usage fee based over time based on monthly transaction volumes or on a monthly flat fee rate. The Company had a contract liability of approximately $150,000 and $137,000 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 for certain revenue that will be earned in future periods. The majority of the $150,000 of deferred revenue contract liability as of December 31, 2020 will be earned in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021. As of December 31, 2019, the majority of the deferred revenue contract liability was recognized in the quarter ended March 31, 2020. We have allocated the selling price in the contract to one customer which has multiple performance obligations based on the contract selling price that we believe represents a standalone selling price for the service rendered.
All contracts are reviewed for their respective performance obligations and related revenue and expense recognition implications. Certain of the revenues are derived from identity services that could include multiple performance obligations. A performance obligation is defined as a promise to provide a “distinct” good or service to a customer. The Company has determined that one possible treatment under U.S. GAAP is that these services will represent a stand-ready series of distinct daily services that are substantially the same, with the same pattern of transfer to the customer. Further, the Company has determined that the performance obligation to provide account access and facilitate transactions should meet the criteria for the “as invoiced” practical expedient, in that the Company has a right to consideration from a customer in an amount that corresponds directly with the value to the customer of the Company’s performance completed to date. As a result, the Company anticipates it may recognize revenue in the amount to which the Company has a right to invoice, based on completed performance at the relevant date. Additionally, the contracts could include implementation services, or support on an “as needed” basis and we will review each contract and determine whether such performance obligations are separate and distinct and apply the new standard accordingly to the revenue and expense derived from or related to each such service.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had revenues from operations in North America, South America and Africa of $0.6 million, $0.3 million and $1.2 million, respectively, compared to $0.6 million, $0.5 million, $1.5 million, respectively, in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Additionally, the Company will capitalize the incremental costs of acquiring and fulfilling a contract with a customer if the Company expects to recover those costs. The incremental costs of acquiring and fulfilling a contract are those that the Company incurs to acquire and fulfill a contract with a customer that it would not have incurred if the contract had not been acquired (for example, a sales commission or specific incremental costs associated with the contract).
The Company capitalizes the costs incurred to acquire and fulfill a contract only if those costs meet all the following criteria:
a. The costs relate directly to a contract or to an anticipated contract that the Company can specifically identify.
b. The costs generate or enhance resources of the Company that will be used in satisfying (or in continuing to satisfy) performance obligations in the future.
c. The costs are expected to be recovered.
The Company will capitalize contract acquisition and fulfillment costs related to signing or renewing contracts that meet the above criteria, which will be classified as contract cost assets in the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Contract cost assets will be amortized using the straight-line method over the expected period of benefit beginning at the time revenue begins to be realized. The amortization of contract fulfillment cost assets associated with facilitating transactions will be recorded as cost of services in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations. The amortization of contract acquisition cost assets associated with sales commissions that qualify for capitalization will be recorded as selling, general and administrative expense in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company did not have any deferred contract costs or fees payable. As of December 31, 2019, the company had approximately $5,000 of accounts payable and accrued expenses related to the delivery of biometric identity system and services which was delivered in February 2020.
Financing revenue related to direct financing leases is outside the scope of Topic 606 and is recognized over the term of the lease using the effective interest method. The Company leases kiosks to one customer that has meet the criteria for a financing lease. The revenue associated with the leased kiosks is expected to be recognized through April 2026.
Accounts Receivable
All customers are granted credit on a short-term basis and related credit risks are considered minimal. The Company routinely reviews its trade receivables and makes provisions for probable doubtful accounts; however, those provisions are estimates and actual results could differ from those estimates and those differences may be material. Trade receivables are deemed uncollectible and removed from accounts receivable and the allowance for doubtful accounts when collection efforts have been exhausted. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, management determined no allowance for doubtful accounts was required.
Inventories
Inventory of plastic/ID cards, digital printing material, which are held by Cards Plus Pty Ltd., are at the lower of cost (using the average method) or market. The Plastic/ID cards and digital printing material are used to provide plastic loyal ID and other types of cards. Inventories of kiosks held by IDGS S.A.S are stated at the lower of cost (using the first-in, first-out method) or net realizable value. The kiosks provide electronic ticketing for transit systems.
Inventories at December 31, 2020 consist of cards inventory and inventories at December 31, 2019 consist of cards inventory and kiosks that have not been placed into service. As of December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an inventory valuation allowance of approximately $18,000 to reflect net realizable value of the cards inventory.
As of December 31, 2019, the Company had an inventory valuation allowance for kiosks of $236,000 that are being held for sale and $18,000 for the cards inventory.
Any adjustments to reduce the cost of inventories to their net realizable value are recognized in earnings in the current period.
Concentration of Credit Risk
The Company’s financial instruments that potentially expose the Company to a concentration of credit risk consist of cash and accounts receivable.
Cash: The Company’s cash is deposited at financial institutions and cash balances held in United States (“US”) bank accounts are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”) up to $250,000. At various times during the year, the Company may have exceeded amounts insured by the FDIC. At December 31, 2020, the Company had approximately $3,231,000 in funds in the United States which were in excess of the insured amounts by the FDIC. For the Company’s foreign subsidiaries, no amounts are insured. At December 31, 2020, the Company held approximately $11,000, $70,000, $189,000, and $9,000 in cash maintained in Peruvian, Colombian, African, and British Banks, respectively.
2020 Revenues and accounts receivable: For the year ended December 31, 2020, 27% of consolidated revenues were derived from one customer who is a US customer and is substantially all of the US based income. Additionally, for the year ended December 31, 2020, 55%, and 16% of the consolidated revenues were from Cards Plus (Africa) and the Colombian operations, respectively. Revenue for approximately 87% of the Colombian operations were derived from two customers. As of December 31, 2020, accounts receivable related to Cards Plus (Africa) amounted to 90% of the accounts receivable. The US operations represented 9% of the accounts receivable and the balance of 1% was from the Colombian operations, respectively.
2019 Revenues and accounts receivable: For the year ended December 31, 2020, 25% of consolidated revenues were derived from one customer who is a US customer and is substantially all of the US based income. Additionally, for the year ended December 31, 2020, 57%, 5% and 18% of the consolidated revenues were from Cards Plus (Africa), Zimbabwe Election Commission (US provided services), and the Colombian operations, respectively. Revenue for approximately 89% of the Colombian operations were derived from four customers. As of December 31, 2020, accounts receivable related to Cards Plus (Africa), amounted to 70% of the accounts receivable, Colombia operations represented 26% of the accounts receivable operations and the balance of 4% was from US operations, respectively.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 740 “Income Taxes.” Under the asset and liability method of FASB ASC 740, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Under FASB ASC 740, the effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period the enactment occurs. A valuation allowance is provided for certain deferred tax assets if it is more likely than not that the Company will not realize tax assets through future operations.
Leases
All leases are classified at the inception as direct finance leases or operating leases based on whether the lease transfers substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership. Leases that transfer to the leasee substantially all of the risks and rewards incidental to ownership of the asset are classified as direct finance leases.
The Company, effective January 1, 2019 adopted the provisions of Topic 842. The Company uses the practical expedients available under Topic 842 which allows Ipsidy to run off existing leases, as initially classified as operating or financing, and classify new leases after implementation under the new standard as the business evolves.
The practical expedients elected by the Company allows the Company not to reassess our prior conclusions about lease identification, lease classification and initial direct costs. Furthermore, Company elected the short-term lease recognition exemption for leases with a term of 12 or less months which are not reasonably certain of exercising any available renewal options that would extend past 12 months. Additionally, we will continue to account for the executory costs of the direct financing lease as previously concluded and the initial direct costs were not considered significant.
The Company has operating leases principally for offices and some of the leases have renewal options. Management evaluates each lease independently to determine the purpose, necessity to its future operations in addition to other appropriate facts and circumstances.
The adoption of Topic 842 as of January 1, 2019 impacted our balance sheet by the recognition of the operating lease right-of-use assets and the liability for operating leases. The accounting for finance leases (capital leases) was substantially unchanged. Accordingly, leases that were classified as operating leases under the previous guidance were classified as operating leases under Topic 842. The lease liability is based on the present value of the remaining lease payments, discounted using a market based incremental borrowing rate as the effective date of January 1, 2019 using current estimates as to lease term including estimated renewals for each operating lease. As of January 1, 2019, the Company recorded an adjustment of approximately $514,000 to operating lease right-of-use assets (“ROU”) and the related lease liability. See Note 12 for further information with respect to leases.
See Notes 8, 11, 12 and 13 to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Property and Equipment, net
Property and equipment consist of furniture and fixtures and computer equipment and are stated at cost. Property and equipment are depreciated using the straight-line method over the estimated useful service lives of three to five years. Maintenance and repairs are expensed as incurred and improvements are capitalized. Gains or losses on the disposition of property and equipment are recorded upon disposal.
Other Assets - Software Development Costs
Other assets consist primarily of costs associated with software development of new product offerings and enhancements to existing and new applications. Development costs of computer software to be sold, leased or otherwise marketed are subject to capitalization beginning when a product’s technological feasibility has been established and ending when a product is available for general release to customers. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the balance sheet “Other assets” are under further development and have not been placed in service. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2020, approximately $0.4 million and $3.1 million of software developed were placed into service. Upon completion, the amounts remaining in “other assets” will be recorded in the appropriate asset category and amortized over their estimated useful lives.
Intangible Assets
Excluding goodwill, acquired intangible assets and internally developed software are amortized over their estimated useful lives. Acquired amortizing intangible assets are carried at cost, less accumulated amortization. Internally developed software costs are capitalized upon reaching technological feasibility. Amortization of acquired finite-lived intangible assets is computed over the estimated useful lives (5- 10 years) of the respective assets which is the shorter of the life of the asset or the period during which sales will be generated.
Goodwill
Goodwill is recorded when the purchase price paid for an acquisition exceeds the fair value of net identified tangible and intangible assets acquired. The Company performs an annual impairment test of goodwill and further periodic tests to the extent indicators of impairment develop between annual impairment tests. The Company’s impairment review process compares the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying value, including the goodwill related to the reporting unit utilizing qualitative considerations. To determine the fair value of the reporting unit, the Company may use various approaches including an asset or cost approach, market approach or income approach or any combination thereof. These approaches may require the Company to make certain estimates and assumptions including future cash flows, revenue and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are reviewed each time the Company tests goodwill for impairment and are typically developed as part of the Company’s routine business planning and forecasting process. While the Company believes its estimates and assumptions are reasonable, variations from those estimates could produce materially different results.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an impairment loss of approximately $1.0 million, associated with goodwill at one of its reporting units. As a result of the current pandemic and its potential impact on future results, the Company updated its reporting unit projections, and it indicated a goodwill impairment as the carrying value may not be recovered as revenue assumptions and related revenue were revised downward.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company updated our projections associated with our reporting units and these indicated that the carrying value may not be recovered as revenue assumptions were not met. The goodwill impairment loss for the year ended December 31, 2019 was approximately $1,517,000 across the three reporting units.
The fair value of the reporting unit in both years was determined using discounted cash flow.
Stock-based compensation
The Company has accounted for stock-based compensation under the provisions of FASB ASC 718 - “Stock Compensation” which requires the use of the fair-value based method to determine compensation for all arrangements under which employees and others receive shares of stock or equity instruments (stock options and common stock purchase warrants). For employee awards, the fair value of each stock option award is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model that uses assumptions for expected volatility, expected dividends, expected term, and the risk-free interest rate. For non-employees, the fair value of each stock option award is estimated on the measurement date using the Black-Scholes valuation model that uses assumptions for expected volatility, expected dividends, expected term, and the risk-free interest rate. For non-employees, the Company utilizes the graded vesting attribution method under which the entity treats each separately vesting portion (tranche) as a separate award and recognizes compensation cost for each tranche over its separate vesting schedule. Expected volatilities are based on historical volatility of peer companies and other factors estimated over the expected term of the stock options. For employee awards, the expected term of options granted is derived using the “simplified method” which computes expected term as the average of the sum of the vesting term plus the contract term. The risk-free rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant for the period of the expected term.
The Company adopted, as of January 1, 2019, the requirements of ASU 2018-07 which simplified the accounting for share-based payments granted to non-employees for share based payments granted to non-employees for goods and services. Under the ASU, most of the guidance on such payments to non-employees were aligned with the share-based payments granted to employees. The Company determined on the date of adoption that the impact was not significant.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets, including intangible assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset.
If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its undiscounted estimated future cash flows, an impairment review is performed. An impairment charge is recognized in the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. Generally, fair value is determined using valuation techniques such as expected discounted cash flows or appraisals, as appropriate. Assets to be disposed of would be separately presented in the balance sheet and reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell, and are no longer depreciated or amortized. The assets and liabilities of a disposed group classified as held for sale would be presented separately in the appropriate asset and liability sections of the balance sheet.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an impairment on intangible assets of approximately $0.3 million at one reporting unit. The current projection indicated the carrying value of the intangible assets was in excess of its estimated recoverable value.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company impaired intangible assets related to developed software of approximately $155,000 as the assets were no longer being utilized for commercial purposes.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs consist of expenditures for the research and development of new products and technology. These costs are primarily expenses to incurred to perform research projects and develop technology for the Company’s products. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred.
Net Loss per Common Share
The Company computes net loss per share in accordance with FASB ASC 260, “Earnings per Share”. ASC 260 requires presentation of both basic and diluted earnings per share (“EPS”) on the face of the statement of operations. Basic EPS is computed by dividing net loss available to common shareholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period. Diluted EPS gives effect to all dilutive potential common shares outstanding during the period including stock options, using the treasury stock method, and convertible notes and stock warrants, using the if-converted method. In computing diluted EPS, the average stock price for the period is used in determining the number of shares assumed to be purchased from the exercise of stock options, warrants and conversion of convertible notes. Diluted EPS excludes all dilutive potential common shares if their effect is anti-dilutive. The following potentially dilutive securities were excluded from the calculation of diluted loss per share for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 because their effect was antidilutive:
Foreign Currency Translation
The assets, liabilities and results of operations of certain of Ipsidy’s subsidiaries are measured using their functional currency which is the currency of the primary foreign economic environment in which they operate. Upon consolidating these subsidiaries with Ipsidy, the applicable assets and liabilities are translated to US dollars at currency exchange rates as of the applicable dates and their revenues and expenses are translated at the weighted average currency exchange rates during the applicable reporting periods. Translation adjustments resulting from the process of translating these subsidiaries’ financial statements are reported in other comprehensive loss in the accompanying consolidated statements of comprehensive loss.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company is required to disclose fair value information about financial instruments when it is practicable to estimate that value. The carrying amounts of the Company’s cash, accounts receivable, other receivables, accounts payable, accrued expenses, and other current liabilities approximate their estimated fair value due to the short-term maturities of these financial instruments and because related interest rates offered to the Company approximate current rates. The fair value of the Company’s notes payable is approximately $493,000 which reflects its carrying value as of December 31, 2020. The fair value of the Company’s convertible notes payable is $6,355,000, which differs from the carrying value of approximately $5,801,000 at December 31, 2020 because of the debt discounts as discussed in Note 7.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
In August the FASB issued a new standard (ASU 2020-06) to reduce the complexity of accounting for convertible debt and other equity-linked instruments. For certain convertible debt instruments with a cash conversion feature, the changes are a trade-off between simplifications in the accounting model (no separation of an “equity” component to impute a market interest rate, and simpler analysis of embedded equity features) and a potentially adverse impact to diluted EPS by requiring the use of the if-converted method. The new standard will also impact other financial instruments commonly issued by both public and private companies. For example, the separation model for beneficial conversion features is eliminated simplifying the analysis for issuers of convertible debt and convertible preferred stock. Also, certain specific requirements to achieve equity classification and/ or qualify for the derivative scope exception for contracts indexed to an entity’s own equity are removed, enabling more freestanding instruments and embedded features to avoid mark-to-market accounting. The new standard is effective for companies that are SEC filers (except for Smaller Reporting Companies) for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021 and interim periods within that year, and two years later for other companies. Companies can early adopt the standard at the start of a fiscal year beginning after December 15, 2020. The standard can either be adopted on a modified retrospective or a full retrospective basis. The Company is currently reviewing the newly issued standard and does not believe it will materially impact the Company.
See Notes 6 and 7 for additional information on indebtedness outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
NOTE 2 - PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT, NET
Property and equipment consisted of the following as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Depreciation expense totaled $54,903 and $86,054 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
NOTE 3 - OTHER ASSETS
The Company’s other assets consist of software being developed for new product offerings that have not been placed into service. Other assets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 include:
NOTE 4 - INTANGIBLE ASSETS, NET (OTHER THAN GOODWILL)
The Company’s intangible assets consist of intellectual property acquired from Multi-Pay and FIN in addition to internally developed software that have been placed into service. They are amortized over their estimated useful lives as indicated below. The following is a summary of activity related to intangible assets for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The following is a summary of intangible assets as of December 31, 2020:
The following is a summary of intangible assets as of December 31, 2019:
The following is the future amortization of intangible assets for the year ended December 31:
NOTE 5 - ACCOUNTS PAYABLE AND ACCRUED EXPENSES
Accounts payable and accrued expenses consisted of the following as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
* Included in other is accrued Board of Directors Compensation of $349,000 and $54,000 as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. We anticipate the non-management Board of Directors will be compensated for their service through the issuance of stock compensation after the next Annual Meeting.
NOTE 6 - NOTES PAYABLE, NET
The following is a summary of notes payable as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
In January 2017, the Company issued a Senior Unsecured Note (“Note”) a face value of $3,000,000, payable two years from issuance, along with an aggregate of 4,500,000 shares of Common Stock, with a fair value of $1,147,500. 2018 change in terms of the Note payable has been determined to be a debt extinguishment in accordance with ASC 470. The Note was amended on February 14, 2020 to conform to the terms of the 2020 Convertible Notes Payable offering.
Furthermore, the Company and the Theodore Stern Revocable Trust, the (“Stern Trust”) entered an Amended and Restated Promissory Note (the “Restated Stern Note”) providing that the $2,000,000 Note will be due and payable on the same terms (bearing interest at 15% per annum) and on the same maturity date as the 2020 Notes. The interest due under the Stern Note as of January 31, 2020 in the amount of $662,000 has been capitalized and will earn interest at 10% per annum, which at the election of the Stern Trust can be paid in shares of common stock at a conversion price of $0.20 and the maturity of such interest shall be extended to the same maturity date as the 2020 Notes. The Company accounted for the Restated Stern Note as an extinguishment of the Note and recorded a charge of $986,000 included in other expenses in accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
In May 2020, the Company received a loan of approximately $486,000 under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) as part of the CARES Act which is administered by the U.S. Small Business Association (“USSBA”) related to its U.S. Operations. The Company anticipates subject to approval by the Small Business Administration, if certain requirements are met, the loan proceeds may be forgiven. Any amounts not forgiven will be required to be repaid. The loan bears interest at an annual rate 1% per annum and matures on May 5, 2022.
In January 2021, the Company received a second loan of approximately $486,000 under the PPP related to its U.S. Operations. The Company anticipates subject to approval by USSBA, if certain requirements are met the second loan will be forgiven. Any amounts not forgiven will be required to be repaid.
If the USSBA determines that the PPP loan was not properly obtained and/or expenditures supporting forgiveness were not appropriate, the Company would need to repay some or all of the PPP loan and record additional expense which could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition and results of operations in a future period.
The following is a roll-forward of the Company’s notes payable and related discounts for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Future maturities of notes payable are as follows for the calendar years 2021 and 2022:
NOTE 7 - CONVERTIBLE NOTES PAYABLE
On December 13, 2019, the Company entered into Securities Purchase Agreements with several accredited investors (the “8% Note Investors”) providing for the sale by the Company to the Investors of 8% Convertible Notes in the aggregate amount of $428,000 (the “8% Notes”). The 8% Notes were to mature on November 30, 2021 and were a general unsecured obligation of the Company. The Company can prepay all or a portion of the 8% Notes at any time. The Company shall pay any interest on the 8% Notes at the rate of 8.0% per annum payable at the earlier of the maturity date or conversion date, in cash or, at the holder’s option, shares of common stock of the Company. At the option of the 8% Note investors, all or a portion of the 8% Notes may be converted into shares of common stock of the Company at a conversion price of $0.08 per share. If the holders of the 8% Notes owning outstanding 8.0% Notes representing in excess of half of the aggregate outstanding principal amount of all 8% Notes provide notice to the Company of their intent to convert their 8% Notes, then all 8% Notes plus unpaid interest and other amounts owing to each of the holders shall be automatically converted.
In February 2020, the Company and the holders of the 8% Notes entered into an amendment agreement pursuant to which the principal and interest due under the 8% Notes will remain due and payable on the same terms as exist in the 8% Notes prior to modification, that the maturity shall be extended to the same maturity date as the 2020 Notes, namely February 28, 2022, and the 8% Notes became a secured obligation of the Company.
On February 14, 2020 the Company, entered into Securities Purchase Agreements with several accredited investors (the “2020 Note Investors”) providing 15% Senior Secured Convertible Notes in the aggregate amount of $1,510,000 (the “2020 Notes”). Philip D. Beck, Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board, invested $50,000 in consideration of a 2020 Note in the principal amount of $50,000 paid by a deduction from his salary. Theodore Stern, a director of the Company, invested $50,000 in consideration of a 2020 Note in the principal amount of $50,000. Herbert Selzer, a director of the Company invested $100,000 in consideration of a 2020 Note in the principal amount of $100,000. Mr. Selzer provided $50,000 on the closing date and provided the balance of the funding in April 2020.
The 2020 Notes mature February 28, 2022 and are a secured obligation of the Company. The Company can prepay all or a portion of the 2020 Notes at any time provided that such amount prepaid shall be equal to 150% of the principal due. The Company shall pay interest on the 2020 Notes at the rate of 15% per annum payable at the earlier of the maturity date or conversion date, in cash or, at the investor’s option, shares of common stock of the Company.
At the option of the 2020 Note Investors, they may at any time convert the 2020 Notes. The number of shares delivered shall be equal to 150% of the amount of the principal converted divided by the conversion price of $0.20 per share. The Company may require that the 2020 Note Investors convert all or a portion of the 2020 Notes, if the Company’s volume weighted average price for any preceding 20-day period is equal to or greater than $0.30.
The 2020 Note Investors are entitled to nominate, and the Company will not unreasonably reject the appointment of a new member to the Company’s Board of Directors.
The Company and FIN Holdings, Inc. and ID Solutions, Inc., two of the Company’s subsidiaries, entered into a security agreement with the 2020 Note Investors (“Security Agreement”), the holders of the 8% Notes and the Stern Trust, which is the holder of the Promissory Note in the principal amount of $2,000,000 (the “Stern Note”). The Security Agreement provides that until the principal and accrued but unpaid interest under the 2020 Notes, 8% Notes and Stern Note is paid in full or converted pursuant to their terms, the Company’s obligations under the 2020 Notes, 8% Notes and Stern Note will be secured by a lien on all assets of the Company. The security interest granted to the holders of the 2020 Notes, 8% Notes and Stern Note ranks pari passu. The Security Agreement permits sales of assets up to a value of $1,000,000 which proceeds may be used for working capital purposes and the secured parties will take such steps as may be reasonably necessary to release its security interest and enable such sales in such circumstances. Each of the secured parties appointed Mr. Stern and a third-party investor as joint collateral agents. Mr. Stern, a director of the Company, is the trustee of the Stern Trust.
Further, the Company and the Stern Trust entered an Amended and Restated Promissory Note (the “Restated Stern Note”) providing that the $2,000,000 principal of the Stern Note will be due and payable on the same terms (bearing interest at 15% per annum) and on the same maturity date as the 2020 Notes. The interest due under the Stern Note as of January 31, 2020 in the amount of $662,000 has been capitalized and will earn interest at 10% per annum, which at the election of the Stern Trust can be paid in shares of common stock at a conversion price of $0.20 and the maturity of such interest shall be extended to the same maturity date as the 2020 Notes.
In connection with this private offering, the Company paid Network 1 Financial Securities, Inc., a registered broker-dealer, a cash fee of approximately $104,800.
The following is a summary of the convertible notes payable outstanding at December 31, 2020:
Future maturities of convertible notes payable are as follows:
NOTE 8 - RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
2020 Transactions
Appointment of Executive Officers
Mr. Phillip Kumnick and Mr. Philip Broenniman, two of the Company’s Director’s became employed by the Company as Chief Executive Officer and President and Chief Operating Officer effective May 22, 2020.
Mr. Kumnick earned an initial base salary of $125,000 per annum, which was increased to $187,500 as of November 1, 2020 and is subject to review after one year. Mr. Kumnick was granted options to acquire 33,333,334 shares of common stock of which 20% vest at grant and the balance vest subject to performance conditions. Mr. Broenniman will earn an initial base salary of $87,500 per annum which was increased to $131,250 as of November 1, 2020 and is subject to review after one year. Mr. Broenniman was granted options to acquire 16,666,666 shares of common stock of which 20% vest at grant and the balance vest subject to performance conditions. Mr. Kumnick and Mr. Broenniman have bonus targets in their respective employment arrangements subject to meeting certain performance thresholds.
Issuance of Common Stock
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company granted 1,500,000 shares of Restricted Common Stock to each of Phillip Kumnick and Philip Broenniman, new members of our Board of Directors, in connection with their compensation for service as Board Members. The restricted stock vests upon the achievement of certain performance criteria. The performance criteria have not been met as of December 31,2020. When the Company believes it is probable that these performance obligations will be met, the grant date fair value of the restricted stock will be ratably recognized over the expected service period.
Warrant Exercises
On June 30, 2020, Company entered into and consummated a private transaction pursuant to which a portion of the Company’s warrants exercisable at per share price of $0.10 (the “$0.10 Warrants”) were exercised for cash at an exercise price of $0.07 per share. In addition, the holders that exercised the $0.10 Warrants received a warrant exercisable for two years to acquire one share of common stock at an exercise price of $0.15 per share (the $0.15 Warrants”) for every four $0.10 Warrants exercised. Mr. Theodore Stern, a director of the Company, participated in the private transaction resulting in the issuance of 1,000,000 shares of common stock and 250,000 $0.15 Warrants in consideration of $70,000; and Varana Capital Focused, LP (“VCFLP”), participated in the private transaction resulting in the issuance of 3,716,667 shares of common stock and 929,167 $0.15 Warrants, in consideration of $260,167. Mr. Philip Broenniman, a director, the President and COO of the Company is the investment manager of VCFLP.
On June 30, 2020, Company entered into and consummated a private transaction pursuant to which a portion of the Company’s warrants exercisable at per share price of $0.06 (the “$0.06 Warrants”) were exercised. In addition, the holders that exercised the $0.06 Warrants also received a $0.15 Warrant for every two $0.06 Warrants exercised. Vista Associates, L.P., (“Vista”) of which, Mr. Herbert Selzer a director of the Company, is the General Partner, participated in the private transaction resulting in the issuance of 880,000 shares of common stock and 440,000 $0.15 Warrants, in consideration of $52,800.
Sale of Common Stock
On June 30, 2020, the Company also entered into a Subscription Agreement with VCFLP pursuant to which VCFLP purchased 714,285 shares of common stock in consideration of $50,000.
Convertible Notes Payable
Theodore Stern and Philip Beck (until October 30, 2020), members of the board of directors of the Company, invested $50,000 each in consideration of the 2020 Notes. Another director, Herbert Selzer invested $100,000 in consideration of a 2020 Note in the principal amount of $100,000. Vista held 880,000 2015 Warrants, which were also extended as a result of Mr. Selzer’s investment and as noted above were exercised for cash on June 30, 2020. See Note 7
Further, the Company and the Stern Trust entered the Restated Stern Note providing that the $2,000,000 principal of the Stern Note will be due and payable on the same terms (bearing interest at 15% per annum) and on the same maturity date as the 2020 Notes and subject to the same Security Agreement. The interest due under the Stern Note as of January 31, 2020 in the amount of $662,000 has been capitalized and will earn interest at 10% per annum, which at the election of the Stern Trust can be paid in shares of common stock at a conversion price of $0.20 and the maturity of such interest shall be extended to the same maturity date as the 2020 Notes. The Restated Stern Note includes a 50% repayment premium. Mr. Stern, the Trustee of the Stern Trust also entered into the Security Agreement as one of the joint collateral agents.
Other
In connection with the offering of the 2020 Notes and the sale of common stock in the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company paid Network 1 Financial Securities, Inc., a registered broker-dealer (“Network 1”), a cash fee of approximately $471,800. A former member of the Company’s Board of Director’s maintains a partnership with a principal of Network 1.
Additionally, the Company rents office space in Long Beach, New York at a monthly cost of $5,000 (as of January 1, 2020 reduced from $7,425). The rent was further reduced to $2,500 per month beginning October 1, 2020. The agreement is month to month and can be terminated on 30 days’ notice. The agreement is between the Company and Bridgeworks LLC, an entity principally owned by Mr. Beck, a former member of the Board of Director’s and his family. During years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company paid rent of $52,500 and $89,100 respectively.
On May 22, 2020, the Company and Mr. Beck entered into a separation letter agreement, which provided for payment to Mr. Beck of one year’s severance in the amount of $350,000 as well as certain employee benefits, payable in accordance with the terms of Mr. Beck’s Retention Agreement. Mr. Beck’s severance is expected to be paid over a one-year period. Furthermore, the company will start recording the expense associated with Mr. Beck’s restricted stock agreement dated September 29, 2017. In connection with the separation letter agreement, the Company exchanged the September 29, 2017 Restricted Stock Agreement to substantially modify the vesting provisions of the previously issued 15,000,000 shares of restricted stock and allows a time-vesting provision whereby the restricted shares will fully vest by May 2022. On October 30, 2020, pursuant to the terms of Mr. Beck’s Restricted Stock Agreement, as amended by the Separation Agreement, the Company repurchased for $1.00 the 15,000,000 Unvested Restricted Stock upon his resignation from the Board of Directors.
2019 Transactions
Notes Payable
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded approximately $240,000 of interest expense under the terms and conditions of the Stern Note (see Note 6) that is due to the Theodore Stern Revocable Trust, whose trustee Mr. Stern is a member of the Company’s Board of Directors.
Convertible Notes Payable
In December 2019, the Chairman of the Board of Directors invested $25,000 in the 8% Notes offering. See Note 7.
Purchase of Common Stock
In June 2019, two of the Company’s Directors and one Officer purchased 1,562,500 shares of common stock of the 2019 offering as described in Note 9.
Other
In connection with the 2019 offering of common stock, the Company incurred fees to Network 1 Financial Securities Inc. (“Network 1”), a registered broker dealer, one of the Company’s financial advisors. The Network 1 fees were approximately $109,000 paid in cash and 858,000 common stock purchase warrants with a fair value of approximately $54,000 that are exercisable during a term of five years at a price of $0.088 cents per share. A former member of the Company’s Board of Director’s maintains a partnership with a key principal of Network 1.
Additionally, the Company rents office space in Long Beach, New York at a monthly cost of $7,425 (reduced to $5,000 per month as of January 1, 2020). The agreement is month to month and can be terminated on 30 days’ notice. The agreement is between the Company and Bridgeworks LLC, an entity principally owned by Mr. Beck, our CEO, and his family.
NOTE 9 - STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
The Company is authorized to issue 1,000,000,000 shares of common stock. The Company had 589,272,023 and 518,125,454 shares of common stock issued and outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In addition, the Company is authorized to issue 20,000,000 shares of preferred stock but no shares of preferred stock have been issued.
Common Stock
2020 Common Stock Transactions
● During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company granted 8,000,000 shares of Restricted Common Stock of which 3,000,000 shares were granted to two new members of our Board of Directors in connection with their compensation for service as Board Members and 5,000,000 to an employee in connection with his employment compensation. The shares were valued at the fair market value at the date of grant. The restricted stock vests upon the achievement of certain performance criteria.
● During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company issued approximately 106,000 shares of common stock to a third-party provider of services in lieu of cash compensation.
● In June 2020, the Company entered into Subscription Agreements with two accredited investors (the “June 2020 Accredited Investors”) pursuant to which the June 2020 Accredited Investors agreed to purchase 3,441,558 shares of common stock for $200,000.
● On June 30, 2020, Company entered into and consummated a private transaction pursuant to which a portion of the Company’s $0.10 Warrants were exercised for cash at an exercise price of $0.07 per share. In addition, the holders that exercised the $0.10 Warrants received a $0.15 Warrant for every four $0.10 Warrants exercised. As a result, the Company issued 10,008,333 shares of common stock and 2,502,085 $0.15 Warrants in consideration of $700,583.
● On June 30, 2020, Company entered into and consummated a private transaction pursuant to which a portion of the Company’s $0.05 Warrants were exercised for cash. In addition, the holders that exercised the $0.05 Warrants received a $0.15 Warrant for every two $0.05 Warrants exercised. As a result, the Company issued 4,632,000 shares of common stock and 2,316,000 $0.15 Warrants, in consideration of $231,600. Separately, certain holders of the $0.05 Warrants to acquire 1,770,000 shares of common stock exercised on a cashless basis resulting in the issuance of 560,659 shares of common stock.
● On June 30, 2020, Company entered into and consummated a private transaction pursuant to which a portion of the Company’s $0.06 Warrants were exercised. In addition, the holders that exercised the $0.06 Warrants also received $0.15 Warrant for every two $0.06 Warrants exercised. As a result, the Company issued 5,280,000 shares of common stock and 2,640,000 $0.15 Warrants in consideration of $316,800.
● On October 30, 2020 and on November 6, 2020, Ipsidy Inc. entered into Securities Purchase Agreements with several accredited investors (the “October 2020 Accredited Investors”) pursuant to which the October 2020 Accredited Investors agreed to purchase an aggregate of 52,435,000 shares of the Company’s common stock together with Warrants to acquire 26,217,500 shares of common stock for a term of five years at an exercise price of $0.15 per share for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $5.24 million. In connection with this private offering, the Company paid a registered broker-dealer, a cash fee of approximately $367,000 and issue the broker-dealer a common stock purchase warrant to acquire approximately 3.15 million shares of common stock of the Company exercisable for a term of five years at an exercise price of $0.15 per share.
● During 2020, the Company issued approximately 1.7 million share of common stock pursuant to cashless exercises of common stock purchase warrants and options, other than the June 2020 warrant exercises.
2019 Common Stock Transactions
● In June 2019, the Company entered into Subscription Agreements with accredited investors (the “2019 Accredited Investors”) pursuant to which the 2019 Accredited Investors purchased an aggregate of approximately 38,764,000 shares of the Company’s common stock for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $3,100,000. In connection with the private offering, the Company paid a cash fee of approximately $173,000 and issued 1,251,750 common stock purchase warrants with a fair value of approximately $79,000 that are exercisable during a term of five years at an exercise price of $0.088 per share.
● The Company also issued approximately 411,000 shares of common stock to two service providers in satisfaction of $41,000 due for services.
The criteria for the 2019 and 2018 performance based restricted stock have not been met as of December 31, 2020.
Warrants
● During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company issued approximately 29.4 million common stock warrants in connection with its sale of common stock in the 4th quarter of 2020 for a term of five years at an exercise price $0.15 per share. Of the approximate 29.4 million shares, approximately 3.15 million shares were issued to a broker-dealer in connection with the sale of common stock.
● During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company issued approximately 7.5 million common stock warrants for a term of five years at an average exercise price of $0.15 cents in connection with cash exercises of previously issued warrants. The Company recorded a charge of approximately $367,000 in connection with an inducement to the warrant holders who exercised their outstanding warrants.
● During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company issued 1,251,750 common stock warrants to its investment bankers in connection with the June 2019 private common stock offering at an exercise price of $0.088 cents for a period of five years.
See Common Stock Transaction above for a further description of the warrant issuances.
The following is a summary of the Company’s warrant activity for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Stock Options
The Company has adopted the Ipsidy Inc. 2014 Equity Compensation Plan and the 2017 Incentive Stock Plan. The Company has no other stock options plans in effect as of December 31, 2020.
On November 21, 2014, our Board of Directors authorized the Ipsidy Inc. Equity Compensation Plan (the “2014 Plan”). On September 28, 2017, the shareholders of the Company approved the 2017 Incentive Stock Plan (“2017 Incentive Plan”). The following is a summary of principal features of the 2014 Plan and the 2017 Incentive Plan. The summaries, however, does not purport to be a complete description of all the provisions of each plan.
The terms of Awards granted under the plans shall be contained in an agreement between the participant and the Company and such terms shall be determined by the Compensation Committee consistent with the provisions of the applicable plan. The terms of Awards may or not require a performance condition in order to vest the equity comprised in the relevant Award. The terms of each Option granted shall be contained in a stock option agreement between the optionee and the Company and such terms shall be determined by the Compensation Committee consistent with the provisions of the applicable plan.
The Company has also granted equity awards that have not been approved by security holders.
2020 Stock Option Issuances
● During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company granted Mr. Kumnick and Mr. Broenniman granted options to acquire 33,333,334 and 16,666,666 shares of common stock upon their employment. The options granted to Mr. Kumnick and Mr. Broenniman vest 20% at date of the grant with the balance vesting upon achieving certain performance thresholds. Additionally, the Company granted options to acquire approximately 12,674,000 shares of common stock to employees and one service provider in connection with service. The options have a term of ten years with vesting ranging from immediate to a three-year period. All options granted approximated fair value.
2019 Stock Option Issuances
● During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company granted options to acquire 3,600,000 shares of common stock to one member of the Board of Directors and three employees at fair market value on date of grant. Of the 3,600,000 stock options, 3,475,000 options vest over a three-year period and 125,000 options vest upon achieving certain performance thresholds. The options have a term of ten years and the approximate fair value of the options as of the grant date was $150,000.
The Company determined the grant date fair value of the options granted during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 using the Black Scholes Method and the following assumptions:
Activity related to stock options for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is summarized as follows:
The following table summarizes stock option information as of December 31, 2020:
As of December 31, 2020, there was approximately $801,000 of unrecognized compensation costs related to employee stock options outstanding which will be recognized in 2021 through 2023. The company will recognize forfeitures as they occur. Stock compensation expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was approximately $823,000 and $1,246,000, respectively.
The criteria for certain performance-based stock options have not been achieved as of December 31, 2020.
NOTE 10 - DIRECT FINANCING LEASE
In September 2016, the Company and an entity in Colombia entered into a rental contract for the rental of kiosks to provide cash collection and fare services at transportation stations. The lease term commenced in May 2017 when the kiosks were installed and operational. The term of the rental contract is ten years at an approximate monthly rental of $11,900. The lessee has the option at the end of the lease term to purchase each unit for approximately $40. The term of the lease approximates the expected economic life of the kiosks. As such, the lease was accounted for as a direct financing lease.
The Company has recorded the transaction at its net investment in the lease and will receive monthly payments of $11,856 before estimated executory costs, or $142,272, annually, to reduce investment in the lease and record income associated with the related amount due. Executory costs are estimated to be $1,677 month and initial direct costs are not considered significant. The transaction resulted in incremental revenue in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 of approximately $56,800 and $63,400, respectively.
The equipment under the capital lease is valued at approximately $748,000. At the inception of the lease term, the aggregate minimum future lease payments to be received is approximately $1,422,000 before executory cost. Unearned income is recorded at the inception of this lease was approximately $474,000 and will be recorded over the term of the lease using the effective income rate method. Future minimum lease payments to be received under the lease for the next five years and thereafter are as follows:
NOTE 11 - LEASE OBLIGATION PAYABLE
The Company entered into a lease in March 2017 for the rental of its printer for its secured plastic and credential card products business under an arrangement that is classified as a capital lease. The leased equipment is amortized on a straight line basis over its lease term including the last payment (61 payments) which would transfer ownership to the Company. Total amortization related to the lease equipment as of December 31, 2020 is $123,225. The following is a schedule showing the future minimum lease payments under capital lease by year and the present value of the minimum lease payments as of December 31, 2020. The interest rate related to the lease obligation is 12% and the maturity date is March 31, 2022. Future cash payments related to this capital lease are as follow for the calendar years ending in 2021 and 2022.
NOTE 12 - INCOME TAXES
The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740 which prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement process for financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. ASC 740 also provides guidance on de-recognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim period, disclosure and transition. There were no unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The Company’s loss before income taxes from US and Foreign sources for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, are as follows:
The following table summarizes the significant differences between the U.S. Federal statutory tax rate and the Company’s effective tax rate for financial statement purposes for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The Company has paid certain minimum taxes and other obligations during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 of approximately $36,000 and $63,000, respectively.
The tax effects of temporary differences that give rise to deferred tax assets and liabilities as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 are summarized as follows:
As of December 31, 2020, the Company has available federal net operating loss carry forward of $33.4 million and state net operating loss carry forwards of $33.4 million. Operating loss carryforwards of approximately $14.4 million will expire through 2037 and the balance of $19.0 million have an indefinite life. Additionally, the Company has income tax net operating loss carryforwards related to our international operations which have an indefinite life.
The Company assess the recoverability of its net operating loss carry forwards and other deferred tax assets and records a valuation allowance to the extent recoverability does not satisfy the “more likely than not” recognition criteria. The Company continues to maintain the valuation allowance until sufficient positive evidence exists to support full or partial reversal. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had a valuation allowance of approximately $15.3 million against its deferred tax assets, net of deferred tax liabilities, due to insufficient positive evidence, primarily consisting of losses within the taxing jurisdictions that have tax attributes and deferred tax assets.
NOTE 13 - COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
Legal Matters
From time to time the Company is a party to various legal or administrative proceedings arising in the ordinary course of our business. While any litigation contains an element of uncertainty, we have no reason to believe that the outcome of such proceedings will have a material adverse effect on the financial condition or results of operations of the Company.
Executive Compensation
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had employment agreements with members of the management team providing base salary amounts and provisions for stock compensation, cash bonuses and other benefits to be granted at the discretion of the Board of Directors. Additionally, certain employment agreements include provisions for base salary, bonus amounts upon meeting certain performance milestones, severance benefits for involuntary termination from a change in control or other events as defined in their respective agreements. Additionally, the vesting of certain awards could be accelerated upon a change in control (as defined).
Leases
The lease related balances included in the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020 were as follows:
The weighted average lease term remining is 1.2 years and weighted average discount rate is 13.55%.
The following table presents the maturity of the Company’s operating lease liabilities as of December 31, 2020:
The Company leased office space in Plantation, Florida. Monthly rental was approximately $2,700 per month plus a share of building expenses. The lease ended in August 2020.
In October 2018, the Company leased office space in Alpharetta, Georgia, for approximately $3,800 per month. The lease ended March 31, 2020.
Additionally, the Company rents office space in Long Beach, New York at a monthly cost of $2,500 (reduced from $5,000 in September 2020) and $7,425 in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The agreement is month to month and can be terminated on 30 days notice. The agreement is between the Company and Bridgeworks LLC, an entity principally owned by Mr. Beck, our former CEO, former Board of Director and his family.
The Company leases an office location in Bogota, Colombia. In April 2017, MultiPay S.A.S. entered an office lease beginning April 22, 2017 for two years. The new lease cost is approximately $8,500 per month with an inflation adjustment after one year. The lease was extended for one additional year through April 21, 2021. The Company leased an apartment for a management team member for approximately $2,000 a month through April 2020. The Company intends to secure office space lease in Bogota with a smaller footprint and lower cost when its current lease expires in April 2021. The Company did not renew the apartment lease after it ended in October 2020.
The Company also leases space for its operation in South Africa. The current lease is through June 30, 2022 and the approximate monthly rent is $8,000.
Rent expense included in general and administrative on the Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was approximately $284,000 and $439,000, respectively.
Potential Obligation
The Company has entered an agreement with a facial recognition software company for the grant of a perpetual license for commercial use (unless terminated for breach by either party). The initial payment under the license of $160,000 was paid in 2018 with two additional installments due on the first and second anniversary of the Effective Date of the arrangement amounting to $80,000 and $40,000, respectively. The Company has recorded the outstanding liability and it is included in “Other of Accounts Payable and Accrued Expenses”. See Note 5. The Company is in discussion with the provider with respect to functionality as well as the financial obligation.
NOTE 14 - SEGMENT INFORMATION
General information
The segment and geographic information provided in the table below is being reported consistent with the Company’s method of internal reporting. Operating segments are defined as components of an enterprise for which separate financial information is available and which is evaluated regularly by the chief operating decision maker (“CODM”) in deciding how to allocate resources and in assessing performance. The CODM regularly reviews net revenue and gross profit by geographic regions. The Company products and services operate in two reportable segments: identity management and payment processing.
Information about revenue, profit/loss and assets
The CODM evaluates performance and allocates resources based on net revenue and operating results of the geographic region as the current operations of each geography are either primarily identity management or payment processing. Identity management revenue is generated in North America and Africa and payment processing is earned in South America which are the three geographic regions of the Company. We have included the lease income in payment processing are the leases are related to unattended ticking kiosks.
Long lived assets are in North America, South America and Africa. Most assets are intangible assets recorded from the acquisition of MultiPay (South America) in 2015 and FIN Holdings (North America and Africa) in 2016. Assets for North America, South America and Africa amounted to approximately $9.1 million, $0.4 million and $1.4 million, respectively, of which $4.2 million, $0.0 million and $1.2 million related to goodwill as of December 31, 2020.
Analysis of revenue by segment and geographic region and reconciliation to consolidated revenue, gross profit, and net loss are provided below. The Company has included in the schedule below an allocation of corporate overhead based on management’s estimate of resource requirements.