ITEM 7: MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes beginning on page in this annual report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Our Company
We were incorporated in Delaware under the Delaware General Corporation Law in March 2009 and are the successor to Apex Silver Mines Limited for purposes of reporting under the Exchange Act. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our only sources of income were revenues from the lease of our Velardeña oxide plant and sales of non-core assets. We incurred net operating losses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
We are primarily focused on operations at the Rodeo property as well as further studies of a restart plan for Velardeña, including use of bio-oxidation to improve the payable gold recovery. We are also focused on (i) advancing our El Quevar exploration property in Argentina through the Earn-in Agreement with Barrick and (ii) continuing to evaluate and search for mining opportunities in North America (including Mexico) with near term prospectus of mining, and particularly for properties within reasonable haulage distances of our processing plants at the Velardeña Properties. We are also reviewing strategic opportunities, focusing primarily on development or operating properties in North America, including Mexico.
2020 Highlights
COVID-19 uncertainties
We undertook several initiatives in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and will continue to implement most of these initiatives in 2021 until it is considered safe to alter or remove these practices. We followed, and continue to follow, World Health Organization protocols and local government rules and recommendations at all of our projects and corporate offices. Office employees are working remotely wherever possible. In compliance with a directive of the Mexican Federal Government to suspend all non-essential activities, including mining, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we suspended mining activities at our Velardeña Properties (Durango State, Mexico) during portions of April and May 2020. Activities at the Velardeña Properties, including processing of Hecla material at the oxide mill, continued uninterrupted since the temporary shutdown.
To provide greater financial flexibility at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, on March 30, 2020, we entered into a short-term loan agreement (the “Loan Agreement”) with Sentient Global Resources Fund IV , L.P., a Cayman Islands exempted limited partnership (“Sentient”), pursuant to which Sentient granted to us an unsecured loan in an amount equal
to $1.0 million (the “Sentient Loan”). Sentient is a private equity fund, and together with certain other Sentient equity funds, Sentient is our largest stockholder, and at the time of the loan held approximately 38% of our outstanding common stock. The Sentient Loan bore interest at a rate of 10% per annum and the loan was due in full, together with accrued interest and any other amount outstanding under the Loan Agreement, on December 31, 2020. On August 12, 2020, we repaid in full all outstanding borrowings under, and terminated, the Loan Agreement, with no prepayment penalty.
In addition to the Sentient Loan, we also reached an agreement in April 2020 with Compañía Minera Autlán S.A.B. de C.V. (“Autlán”) to extend the time to repay the then remaining $0.8 million related to the $1.5 million refundable deposit received for the proposed sale of our Velardeña Properties and other assets in June 2019 through December 2020. The deposit was related to the proposed sale of our Velardeña Properties and other assets to Autlán in June 2019, which was subsequently terminated. During August 2020, we paid the remaining refundable deposit plus accrued interest in full.
Rodeo Property
As a result of our decision to commence mining operations at our Rodeo project, we now consider the Rodeo property to be one of our material properties, along with the Velardeña Properties and the El Quevar project. Further information about our Rodeo project is set forth in Items 1 and 2 above.
In November 2020 we received the final necessary permits for us to commence mining at the Rodeo project from SEMARNAT, the environmental protection agency in Mexico. We began mining activities at the Rodeo property during December 2020, with processing of mined material at our Velardeña oxide plant beginning in January 2021. We pored our first doré bar at the end of January 2021.
We have completed the hiring of additional key mine and plant supervision to support the oxide plant operating workforce, which was already in place following the termination of the Hecla Lease on November 30, 2020. We entered into a contract mining agreement in December 2020 with a regional contractor to perform mine excavation work. We will continue to provide overall mine management and engineering, which includes in-pit technicians who will determine whether material is suitable for process or placement on the waste dump. In January 2021, we entered into an agreement with another regional contractor for haulage of mined material to the oxide plant. Our assay lab, located in Velardeña, Durango, Mexico will be used for the project’s assaying requirements.
We are installing a new regrind mill circuit at the plant specifically designed to process the harder mined material coming from the Rodeo property, with completion expected by the end of February 2021 at a total cost of approximately $0.6 million. The new circuit, which will allow for the maximum recovery of gold, will allow daily throughput in the oxide plant to increase to approximately 450 tonnes per day, following a ramp-up period we expect to complete by the end of the first quarter 2021. Mine life is estimated at approximately ten quarters (2.5 years) at currently estimated throughput levels.
Assays from early processing at the oxide plant indicate the doré produced should be comprised of approximately 10 to 15 percent gold and 65 to 75 percent silver and be of a quality that is readily marketable and saleable to refineries located either in Mexico or internationally, consistent with standard commercial terms. We entered into a refining agreement with a third party in February 2021 and expect to begin export shipments of doré to the U.S. as soon as the appropriate export documentation and permits are in place, which is expected to occur prior to the end of the first quarter 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we spent approximately $0.9 million on exploration and other pre-production costs and $0.3 million of capital expenditures in preparation for the processing of Rodeo material. We expect to spend an additional approximately $0.4 million in the first quarter 2021 to complete the installation of the new regrind mill circuit.
If we are successful in the ramp-up of processing the mined material from Rodeo to estimated levels by the end of the first quarter 2021, we anticipate total tonnes processed for the full year 2021 will be approximately 125,000 to 135,000, resulting in payable production of approximately 12,000 to 14,000 ounces of gold and 25,000 to 30,000 ounces of silver. Using an assumed gold price of $1,800/oz and an assumed silver price of $25.00/oz (the London Fix PM prices on December 31, 2020, as reported by Kitco, were $1,888 and $26.49 for gold and silver, respectively), estimated after-tax cash flow for the full year 2021 from production at the Rodeo operation, net of capital expenditures and working capital, is estimated at approximately $9.0 million to $10.5 million.
The estimates shown above are preliminary in nature and are based primarily on the assumptions described in the PEA, adjusted slightly to reflect the results of the recently completed drilling program and metallurgical testing and the proposed contract mining and hauling contracts (as noted above). Actual results from production at Rodeo may vary significantly based upon, among other things, unanticipated variations in grade, unexpected challenges associated with our proposed mining plan, volatility in commodity prices, variations in expected recoveries, increases in projected operating or capital costs or delays in commencement of or interruptions in production. See “Risk Factors - Risk Factors related to our Mining and Processing Activities.”
Velardeña Oxide Plant Lease Agreement
During the year ended December 31, 2020, Hecla processed approximately 120,000 tonnes of material through the oxide plant, resulting in total revenues to us of approximately $5.6 million, comprised of approximately $3.6 million for direct plant charges and fixed fees and approximately $2.0 million for other net reimbursable costs related to the services we provide under the lease. During the term of the lease, Hecla was responsible for the ongoing operation and maintenance of the oxide plant. The $2.0 million of reimbursable costs are also reported as plant lease costs, resulting in net operating margin of approximately $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
On July 7, 2020, in accordance with the terms of the Third Amendment to the Hecla Lease, the Company received notification from Hecla terminating the Hecla Lease effective November 30, 2020. Hecla continued to process material at approximately 400 tonnes per day during the remainder of the agreement through November 30, 2020.
Velardeña PEA
The Velardeña Properties contain two underground mines that were last operated in late 2015, at which point mining activities were suspended when a combination of low metals prices, mining dilution and metallurgical challenges rendered operations unprofitable. We elected to preserve the asset for future use, and since that time we have evaluated and tested various mining methods and processing alternatives that could enable sustainable profitable operations.
The recent rise in precious metals prices, the advancement of alternative processing technologies in the industry, and the results of our testing activities prompted us to pursue the preparation of an updated preliminary economic assessment (PEA). On April 2, 2020 we announced positive results from the updated PEA (as more fully described above in Items 1 and 2: “Velardeña Properties - Velardeña Properties Activities”). In the coming months, we plan to continue to optimize the mine plan and processing details in preparation for future test-mining and processing in advance of establishing a definite schedule for restarting commercial production at the Velardeña mines and the installation of the bio-oxidation circuit. No development decision has been made regarding a potential restart of the Velardeña mines.
El Quevar
On April 9, 2020, we entered into the Earn-In Agreement with Barrick, pursuant to which Barrick has acquired an option to earn a 70% interest in the Company’s El Quevar project located in the Salta Province of Argentina. For a discussion of the Earn-In Agreement, see “Items 1 and 2: Business and Properties - El Quevar - Barrick Earn-In Agreement” above.
Yoquivo
In September 2020 we began a 3,400-meter, 15-hole drill program to test the most promising portions of certain veins in the Yoquivo property in Chihuahua, Mexico. We completed the drill program in December 2020 and identified four separate vein systems in which surface sampling has returned grades up to 4,050 g/t silver and 27.7 g/t gold from surface. Complete results from the drill program were announced in our press release dated January 27, 2021. Of substantial interest is the discovery of a new vein parallel to and east of the Pertenencia vein. While the other principal veins have been partially mined from surface to the water table (up to 130 meters) in the case of San Francisco and Pertenencia, and over a much less extensive vertical interval in the case of El Dolar and Esperanza, the new vein is unmined from surface. We are planning a second phase drill program, which could start in the second quarter 2021.
For a further discussion of the Yoquivo property, see “Items 1 and 2: Business and Properties - Exploration Properties - Yoquivo” above.
Santa Maria
In December 2020, we entered into an Option Agreement with Fabled Silver Gold Corp. pursuant to which Fabled will have the right to acquire our interest in the Santa Maria mining claims in Chihuahua, Mexico. For a further discussion of the Santa Maria property and this Option Agreement, see “Items 1 and 2: Business and Properties - Exploration Properties - Santa Maria” above.
Sand Canyon
We have an earn-in agreement with Golden Gryphon Explorations for the Sand Canyon project located in northwestern Nevada. We completed surface exploration activities in late 2019 and completed an initial drill program of approximately 1,800 meters in March 2020. No potentially economic concentrations of precious metals were encountered in any of the four drill holes. Plans for further testing of the mineralized system are being considered. In the first year of exploration at Sand Canyon and through December 31, 2020, we spent $1.8 million toward the $2.5 million earn-in requirement, fulfilling the first and second year minimum expenditures and the minimum drill commitment.
For a further discussion of the Sand Canyon property, see “Items 1 and 2: Business and Properties - Exploration Properties - Sand Canyon” above.
Public offering
On July 21, 2020, we entered into an Amended and Restated Underwriting Agreement (the “Underwriting Agreement”) with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC as representative of the underwriters named in Schedule I thereto (the “Underwriters”), providing for the issuance and sale by us in a firm commitment offering (the “Offering”) of 17,857,143 shares of common stock at a price to the public of $0.42 per share (the “Offering Shares”). In addition, we granted the Underwriters an option to purchase, at the public offering price per share of common stock, up to an additional 2,678,571 shares of common stock, exercisable for 30 days from the date of the Underwriting Agreement (the “Option Shares”). The Offering Shares and Option Shares were registered pursuant to our registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-220461), and a prospectus supplement thereto filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. On July 24, 2020, the Underwriters acquired the Offering Shares and the full amount of the Option Shares from us. After the underwriting discount of 6% and total offering expenses of approximately $155,000 we received net proceeds of approximately $8.0 million from the sale of the Offering Shares and the Option Shares. We intend to use the proceeds from the Offering for working capital requirements and general corporate purposes.
2020 Offering and private placement transaction
On April 20, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional investors providing for the issuance and sale of 15,000,000 shares of our common stock at a price of $0.20 per share, and in a concurrent private placement transaction, the issuance of 11,250,000 warrants, ultimately consisting of 7,500,000 series A warrants and 3,750,000 series B warrants, to purchase up to 11,250,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $0.30 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $3.0 million. The securities purchase agreement granted the institutional investors the right to collectively participate in up to 50% of any future offerings of securities by the Company on the same terms as other investors, other than certain “exempt issuances” and “permitted sales” as defined therein, until April 22, 2021.
Each Warrant is exercisable six months from April 22, 2020, the date of issuance, and has a term expiring five years after such initial exercise date. The Warrants contain so-called full-ratchet anti-dilution provisions which may be triggered upon any future issuance by the Company of shares of its common stock or common stock equivalents at a per share price below the then-exercise price of the Warrant, subject to certain exceptions; provided, however, that with respect to the Series B warrants, the adjusted exercise price will not be less than $0.26.
Warrant exercises
During the fourth quarter 2020, 5,000,000 of the series A warrants and 3,500,000 of the series B warrants associated with the April 2020 offering were exercised at a price of $0.30 per share resulting in proceeds of $2.6 million. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, 1,400,000 of the series A warrants associated with the April 2020 offering were exercised at a price of $0.30 per share resulting in proceeds of $420,000. Also, subsequent to December 31, 2020, 1,500,000 of the series B warrants and 200,000 of the Series A warrants associated with the May 2016 offering were exercised at a price of $0.35 per share resulting in proceeds of $595,000.
At the Market Offering
Subsequent to December 31, 2020 we sold an aggregate of approximately 1,856,960 common shares under the ATM Program at an average price of $0.97 per common share for gross proceeds of approximately $1.8 million during the year-to-date period ended February 17, 2021. We paid a 2% cash commission on the gross proceeds in the amount of approximately $37,000 and incurred additional accounting, legal, and regulatory costs of approximately $6,000.
Results of Operations
For the results of operations discussed below, we compare the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 to the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Revenue from oxide plant lease. We recorded revenue of $5.6 million and $7.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 respectively, from the lease of our Velardeña oxide plant to Hecla. The decrease in revenue during 2020 is primarily related to a reduction in the per tonne processing fees during the first six months of 2020 relating to the Third Amendment to the Hecla Lease as discussed in Note 17 in the accompanying financial statements. In addition, during 2020 we experienced a temporary shutdown of operations during portions of April and May related to COVID-19 restrictions mandated by the Mexican government. Also, Hecla terminated the Lease Agreement in accordance with the terms of the Third Amendment one month early, effective November 30, 2020.
Oxide plant lease costs. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 we recorded $2.0 and $2.4 million, respectively, of costs related to the oxide plant lease consisting primarily of reimbursable labor and utility costs which for accounting purposes were also included in revenue from the oxide plant lease. The decrease in oxide plant lease costs during 2020 is primarily related to a temporary shutdown of operations during portions of April and May related to
COVID-19 restrictions mandated by the Mexican government. Also, Hecla terminated the Lease Agreement in accordance with the terms of the Third Amendment one month early, effective November 30, 2020.
Exploration Expense. Our exploration expense, including work at the Rodeo, Sand Canyon, Yoquivo and other properties, totaled $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our exploration expense, including work at the Sand Canyon, Yoquivo, Santa Maria and other properties, totaled $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Exploration expense for both years was incurred primarily in Mexico and includes property holding costs, costs incurred by our local exploration offices, and allocated corporate administrative expenses. The increase in exploration expense during 2020 is primarily related to exploration and mining activities at our Rodeo project, which comprised approximately $0.9 million of the total, in preparation for the commencement of processing mined material from Rodeo beginning in January 2021.
Velardeña shutdown and care and maintenance costs. We recorded $1.2 million and $1.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, for expenses related to care and maintenance at our Velardeña Properties as the result of the suspension of mining and processing activities in November 2015. The higher care and maintenance costs in 2019 are related to increased maintenance costs.
El Quevar Project Expense. As discussed above, during April 2020, we entered into the Earn-In Agreement with Barrick, pursuant to which Barrick has acquired an option to earn a 70% interest in the El Quevar project. During the earn in period Barrick has and will continue to reimburse us for certain holding and maintenance costs related to the project. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an expense of approximately $0.6 million primarily related to exploration, holding and evaluation costs for the Yaxtché deposit at the El Quevar project, net of costs reimbursed. During the year ended December 31, 2019 we recorded an expense of approximately $2.0 million primarily related to exploration, holding and evaluation costs for the Yaxtché deposit at the El Quevar project. The decrease in costs for 2020 are primarily related to the reimbursement of costs by Barrick and an increase in costs during 2019 related to a drilling program conducted during the year. For both years, additional nominal costs incurred in Argentina and not related to the El Quevar project are included in “Exploration Expense”, discussed above.
Administrative Expense. Administrative expenses totaled $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Administrative expenses, including costs associated with being a public company, are incurred primarily by our corporate activities in support of the Rodeo project, Velardeña Properties, El Quevar project and our exploration portfolio. The $3.7 million of administrative expenses we incurred during 2020 is comprised of $1.4 million of employee compensation and directors’ fees, $1.3 million of professional fees, and $1.0 million of insurance, rents, travel expenses, utilities and other office costs. The $3.6 million of administrative expenses we incurred during 2019 is comprised of $1.5 million of employee compensation and directors’ fees, $1.2 million of professional fees and $0.9 million of insurance, rents, travel expenses, utilities and other office costs.
Stock based compensation. During the year ended December 31, 2020 we incurred expense related to stock-based compensation in the amount of $0.9 million compared to $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Stock based compensation varies from period to period depending on the number and timing of shares granted, the type of grant, the market value of the shares on the date of grant and other variables.
Reclamation and accretion expense. During each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we incurred $0.2 million of reclamation expense related to the accretion of an asset retirement obligation at the Velardeña Properties.
Other Operating Income, Net. We recorded only a nominal amount of other operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisting of the sale of surplus equipment. We recorded other operating income of $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, consisting of $3.0 million for the sale of the Mogotes and Pistachon properties in Mexico and $0.2 million for the sale of surplus equipment in Argentina and property in Peru.
Depreciation, depletion and amortization. During the year ended December 31, 2020 we incurred depreciation, depletion and amortization expense of $1.0 million compared to $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Interest and Other expense, net. We recorded $0.1 million of interest and other expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily related to interest incurred on the repayment of the Autlán advanced payment and the financing of certain insurance premiums. We recorded $0.2 million of interest and other expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily related to the sale of common stock we owned in a junior mining company.
Gain (Loss) on Foreign Currency. We recorded a $0.1 million foreign currency loss for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Foreign currency gains and losses are primarily related to the effect of currency fluctuations on monetary assets net of liabilities held by our foreign subsidiaries that are denominated in currencies other than U.S. dollars.
Income Taxes. We recorded a nil amount of tax expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 related to a Mexican subsidiary.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, our aggregate cash and cash equivalents totaled $9.7 million, compared to the $4.6 million in similar assets held at December 31, 2019. The December 31, 2020 balance is due in part from the following expenditures and cash inflows for the year ended December 31, 2020. Expenditures totaled $13.6 million from the following:
● $5.0 million in exploration expenditures, including $0.9 million of exploration and mining activities at our Rodeo project along with other work at the Sand Canyon, Yoquivo, Santa Maria and other properties;
● $0.5 million in capital expenditures, including $0.3 million related to construction of the new regrind mill circuit related to the Rodeo project;
● $0.6 million in evaluation activities, care and maintenance and property holding costs at the El Quevar project;
● $1.3 million related to repayment of the Autlán deposit, including interest;
● $1.2 million in care and maintenance costs at the Velardeña Properties;
● $3.7 million in general and administrative expenses; and
● $0.3 million in Canadian income tax payments (as discussed in Note 15 in the accompanying financial statements), $0.4 million related to the remittance of value added taxes in Mexico collected previously in the fourth quarter 2019, and $0.6 million related to a net working capital increase primarily from a reduction of accounts payable and other accrued liabilities.
The foregoing expenditures were offset by cash inflows of $18.7 million from the following:
● $8.0 million, net of transaction costs, related to a public offering in July 2020 (as further described above);
● $2.7 million, net of transaction costs, related to an equity offering and private placement in April 2020 (as further described above);
● $0.9 million, net of transaction costs, related to a private placement transaction involving Barrick in April 2020 (as further described above);
● $3.6 million of net operating margin received pursuant to the oxide plant lease (defined as oxide plant lease revenue less oxide plant lease costs);
● $0.4 million, net of commitment fees and other offering related costs, from the LPC Program and the ATM Program;
● $0.5 million from the first installment related to the option agreement involving Fabled (as further described above); and
● $2.6 million from the exercise of warrants issued in prior offerings (as further described above).
In addition to the $9.7 million cash balance at December 31, 2020, in January and February 2021 an additional $1.0 million was received from the exercise of warrants issued in prior offerings and $1.8 million was received from the sale of shares under the ATM Program (as further described above). We also expect to receive approximately $10.5 million to $12.0 million in net operating margin from the Rodeo property (defined as revenues less costs of sales) during the twelve months ending December 31, 2021, assuming an average gold and silver price during that period of $1,800 and $25.00 oz respectively (the London Fix PM prices on December 31, 2020, as reported by Kitco, were $1,888 and $26.49 for gold and silver, respectively). Our forecasted cash inflows during the twelve months ending December 31, 2021 do not include the anticipated second installment of $1.5 million from the sale of the Santa Maria property to Fabled, scheduled to be paid in December 2021, as discussed above. At this time, given the uncertainties associated with the eventual outcome of exploration activities at Santa Maria initiated by Fabled, and the associated timing of the start-up of operations at Santa Maria, we are not currently including the additional installment in our liquidity analysis.
Our forecasted expenditures during the twelve months ending December 31, 2021, apart from Rodeo cost of sales already included in our forecast of net operating margin, total approximately $10.0 million as follows:
● Approximately $3.6 million on exploration activities and property holding costs related to our portfolio of exploration properties located in Mexico, Argentina and Nevada, including project assessment and evaluation costs relating to Yoquivo and other properties;
● Approximately $0.5 million on capital expenditures related to the Rodeo operation;
● Approximately $0.6 million at the Velardeña Properties for care and maintenance;
● Approximately $0.5 million at the El Quevar project to fund care and maintenance and property holding costs, net of reimbursement from Barrick;
● Approximately $3.6 million on general and administrative costs; and
● Approximately $1.2 million related to an increase in working capital primarily related to increased inventories and receivables at the Rodeo property.
Our forecasted cash resources of approximately $23.5 to $25.0 million, which includes cash on hand at December 31, 2020, cash already received from the exercise of warrants and the sale of shares under the ATM Program subsequent to December 31, 2020, and the forecasted net operating margin from the Rodeo property, are greater than our forecasted expenditures of approximately $10.0 million. The actual net operating margin received from the Rodeo property could be negatively impacted if further interruptions due to COVID-19 occur in Mexico. The actual amount of cash receipts that
we receive during the period from the Rodeo operation may also vary significantly from the amounts specified above due to, among other things: (i) unanticipated variations in grade, (ii) unexpected challenges associated with our proposed mining plan, (iii) decreases in commodity prices below those used in calculating the estimates shown above, (iv) variations in expected recoveries, (v) increases in operating costs above those used in calculating the estimates shown above, or (vi) interruptions in production at Rodeo. The actual amount of cash expenditures that we incur during the twelve-month period ending December 31, 2021 may vary significantly from the amounts specified above and will depend on a number of factors, including variations in the anticipated care and maintenance costs at the Velardeña Properties or at El Quevar, and costs for continued exploration, project assessment, and development at our other exploration properties. Likewise, if cash expenditures are greater than anticipated or if cash receipts are less than anticipated, we may need to take certain actions to maintain sufficient cash balances over the next twelve months, including drawing down current cash balances, additional asset dispositions or raising additional equity capital through sales under the ATM Program, the LPC Program or otherwise.
The condensed consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis under which an entity is considered to be able to realize its assets and satisfy its liabilities in the normal course of business. However, our continuing long-term operations are dependent upon our ability to secure sufficient funding and to generate future profitable operations. The underlying value and recoverability of the amounts shown as property, plant and equipment in our condensed consolidated financial statements are dependent on our ability to generate positive cash flows from operations and to continue to fund exploration and development activities that would lead to profitable mining and processing activities or to generate proceeds from the disposition of property, plant and equipment.
There can be no assurance that we will be successful in generating future profitable mining and processing activities or securing additional funding in the future on terms acceptable to us or at all. We believe the cash on hand, anticipated positive net operating margins from the Rodeo operation, the potential use of the ATM Program and the LPC Program, and the potential for additional asset dispositions make it probable that we will have sufficient cash to meet our financial obligations and continue our business strategy beyond one year from the filing of our condensed consolidated financial statements for the period ended December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The selection and application of accounting policies is an important process that has developed as our business activities have evolved and as the accounting rules have changed. Accounting rules generally do not involve a selection among alternatives, but involve an implementation and interpretation of existing rules, and the use of judgment, to the specific set of circumstances existing in our business. Discussed below are the accounting policies that we believe are critical to our financial statements due to the degree of uncertainty regarding the estimates or assumptions involved and the magnitude of the asset, liability, revenue or expense being reported.
Income Recognition
We record income from farm-out agreements with third parties in accordance with Auditing Standards Codification (“ASC”) 610 and ASC 606, which generally provides that income be recognized as the Company performs its obligations according to the contract. In most instances, this will result in income being recognized ratably over a period of time relating to the receipt of periodic payments as the Company satisfies its performance obligation.
Mineral Reserves
When and if we determine that a mineral property has proven and probable reserves, subsequent development costs are capitalized to mineral properties. When mineral properties are developed and operations commence, capitalized costs are charged to operations using the units-of-production method over proven and probable reserves. “Mineralized material” as used in this annual report, although permissible under SEC’s Industry Guide 7, does not indicate “reserves” by SEC standards, and therefore all development costs incurred by us are expensed when incurred. We cannot be certain
that any part of the deposits at the Velardeña Properties or the Yaxtché deposit at the El Quevar project will ever be confirmed or converted into SEC Industry Guide 7 compliant “reserves”.
Asset Retirement Obligations
We record asset retirement obligations in accordance with ASC 410, “Asset Retirement and Environmental Obligations” (“ASC 410”), which establishes a uniform methodology for accounting for estimated reclamation and abandonment costs. According to ASC 410, the fair value of a liability for an asset retirement obligation (“ARO”) is recognized in the period in which it is incurred if a reasonable estimate of fair value can be made. An offsetting asset retirement cost is capitalized as part of the carrying value of the assets with which it is associated, and depreciated over the useful life of the asset.
Long Lived Assets
Long lived assets are recorded at cost and per the guidance of ASC 360 we assess the recoverability of our long lived assets, including goodwill, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable. If the sum of estimated future net cash flows on an undiscounted basis is less than the carrying amount of the related asset, impairment is considered to exist. The related impairment loss is measured by comparing estimated future net cash flows on a discounted basis or by comparing other market indicators to the carrying amount of the asset.
Functional Currency
Our revenue and external funding are primarily denominated in U.S. dollars. Additionally, substantially all of our significant expenditures are made with reference to U.S. dollars. Accordingly, the Company and its subsidiaries use the U.S. dollar as their functional and reporting currency.
Table of Contractual Obligation
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020:
More
Less Than
1 - 3
3 - 5
Than
Contractual Obligations
Total
1 Year
Years
Years
5 Years
(in thousands of $)
Office leases (1)
-
El Quevar, Velardeña and Rodeo mining concession and surface rights payments (2)
1,070
-
(3)
(1) The office lease obligations are related to our corporate headquarters office in Golden, Colorado, which expires November 30, 2024, as well as another office lease associated with our Velardeña Properties.
(2) In 2021 and subsequent years, we expect to make annual maintenance payments of approximately $57,000 to the Mexico federal government to maintain the Velardeña Properties and Rodeo property concessions and $142,000 to maintain related surface rights under contracts with the local community ejidos and other property owners. In 2021 and subsequent years, we expect to pay approximately $15,000 per year to the Argentina federal government in order to maintain our El Quevar concessions.
(3) We cannot currently estimate the life of the Velardeña Properties, the Rodeo property or the El Quevar project. This table assumes that no annual maintenance payments will be made more than five years after December 31, 2020. If we continue to hold the Velardeña Properties concessions and the Rodeo property
concessions beyond five years, we expect that we would make annual maintenance payments of approximately $57,000 per year for the life of the Velardeña Properties and Rodeo property concessions and $142,000 to maintain related surface rights under contracts with the local community ejidos and other property owners. If we continue to hold the El Quevar concessions beyond five years, we expect that we would make annual maintenance payments of approximately $15,000 per year for the life of the El Quevar concessions.
From time to time we enter into lease or option agreements related to exploration properties that are of interest to us. These agreements typically contain escalating payments required to maintain our exploration rights to the property. Such agreements are not included in the above table because exploration success is historically low and we have the right to terminate the agreements at any time.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.