Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements (including the notes thereto) contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in this discussion and analysis includes forward-looking statements that involve risk and uncertainties. You are therefore encouraged to read the section in this annual report on Form 10-K titled, “CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS.”
Overview
We are a Delaware-incorporated entity with operating locations in Minnesota, Michigan, Florida, Texas, Ottawa, North Carolina and Mexico City.
On April 7, 2020, AVCT (formerly known as Pensare Acquisition Corp.), consummated the Computex Business Combination in which it acquired Computex, a private operating company that does business as Computex Technology Solutions. In connection with the Computex Business Combination, the Company changed its name to American Virtual Cloud Technologies, Inc. The purchase price consisted primarily of the issuance of 20,000 Units (consisting of (i) $1,000 in principal amount of the Company’s Series A convertible debentures (the “Debentures”) and (ii) a warrant to purchase 100 shares of Common Stock at an exercise price of $0.01 per whole share (the “Warrants”), assumed debt of $16.6 million and 8.2 million shares of common stock.
On December 1, 2020, we acquired Kandy from Ribbon, by acquiring certain assets, assuming certain liabilities and acquiring all of the outstanding interests of Kandy Communications LLC. The purchase price consisted of 43,778 Units substantially similar to the Units issued in the Computex Business Combination. In connection with the purchase of Kandy, the Company also sold 10,000 Units to SPAC Opportunity Partners, LLC and 1,000 Units to a director, both related parties, with plans to sell additional Units.
The consolidated financial statements of the Company include the accounts of AVCT and its wholly owned subsidiaries. The financial position, results of operations and cash flows described herein for the dates and periods prior to April 7, 2020 relate to the operations of Computex. The historical financial information of AVCT prior to the business combination (a special purpose acquisition company, or “SPAC”) has not been reflected in the Predecessor financial statements as these historical amounts have been determined to be not useful information to a user of the financial statements.
We are a leading multi-brand technology solutions provider to large global customers, providing a comprehensive and integrated set of technology solutions to our customers, through our extensive hardware, software, value-added service offerings and cloud subscription services. The breadth of our offerings enables us to offer our customers a complete technology solution.
Covid-19
Commencing in December 2019, COVID-19 began spreading throughout the world, including the first outbreak in the US in February 2020. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide. COVID-19 has disrupted and continues to significantly disrupt local, regional, and global economies and businesses. The COVID-19 outbreak is disrupting supply chains and affecting production and sales across a range of industries. The extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, impact on our customers, employees and vendors, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. At this point, the extent to which COVID-19 may impact our financial condition and/or results of operations is uncertain.
In response to COVID-19, we have put into place certain restrictions, requirements and guidelines, to protect the health of our employees and clients, including requiring certain conditions to be met before employees return to the Company’s offices. Also, to protect the health and safety of our employees, our daily execution has evolved into a largely virtual model and we continue to endeavor to find innovative ways to engage with customers and prospects as we, our customers and prospects endeavor to navigate the current environment. Between April 1, 2020 and September 1, 2020, Computex reduced the salaries of its employees and we are endeavoring to reduce other operating expenses. We plan to continue to monitor the current environment and may take further actions that may be required by federal, state or local authorities or that we determine are in the interests of our employees, customers, and partners.
Our business
Our hardware offerings are sourced from a network of leading manufacturers, and include, data storage, desktops, servers, and other hardware.
Third party software and maintenance offerings include licensing, licensing management, software solutions and other services. We offer a full suite of value-added services, which typically are delivered as part of a complete technology solution, to help our customers meet their specific needs. Our solutions range from configuration services for computer devices to fully integrated solutions such as virtualization, collaboration, security, mobility, data center optimization and cloud computing. We also offer complementary services including installations, warranty services and certain managed services such as remote network and data center monitoring. We believe our software and service offerings are important growth areas for us.
Our professional and managed services include managed IT services, virtualization, storage, networking and data center services. As part of these services, we offer customized solutions for business continuity, back-up and recovery, capacity on-demand, regulatory compliance and data center best practice methodologies as well as infrastructure as a service (“IaaS”) and software as a service (“SaaS”). Our customers utilize our solutions to optimize their current and planned investments in IT infrastructure and data centers. We believe the breadth of our service offering and our consultative approach to working with our clients distinguishes us from other providers.
Cloud subscription and software products include subscriptions to the Company’s cloud-based technology platform.
In addition, we believe our business is well-diversified across verticals, technology solutions offerings and procurement partners from whom we procure products and software for resale. Our sales teams consist of seasoned account executives and regionally focused sales support teams who work within assigned territories to provide customized solutions to our customers. Our sales teams are supported by industry leading technologists who design end to end solutions and who take projects from design, to implementation, to management. We boast an extensive network of OEMs and distributors which allow us to direct-sell a diverse selection of products and software to our ever-growing customer base, as packaged software or as licensed products and services.
We have developed an infrastructure that enables us to deliver our IT solutions and service agnostic as to technology platform and location through a flexible, customer-focused delivery model which spans three datacenter environments (customer-owned, co-location, and the cloud). By optimizing our customers’ use of secure, energy efficient and reliable data centers combined with a comprehensive suite of related IT infrastructure services, we are able to offer our customers highly customized solutions to address their needs for data center availability, data management, data security, business continuity disaster recovery and data center consolidation, as well as a variety of other related managed services.
Key trends affecting our results of operations
The following are key trends that we believe can impact our results of operations:
● The increasing need, by organizations, for third-party service providers, such as Computex Technology Solutions, to manage significant aspects of the IT environment
● The increasing need, by organizations, to reduce the number of solutions providers they do business with to improve supply chain and internal efficiencies, enhance accountability, improve supplier management practices, and reduce costs
● The lack of sufficient internal IT resources at mid-sized and large enterprises, and the scarcity of IT personnel in certain high-demand disciplines
● Disruptive technologies that are creating complexity and challenges for customers and vendors
● The increasing sophistication and incidences of IT security breaches and cyber-attacks
● The IT decision-making shift by some companies, whereby IT decision-making is shifting from IT departments to line-of-business personnel, which is changing the customer engagement model and types of consultative services required to fulfill the needs of customers
● The recognition that certain IT services provide the opportunity of funding via recurring payments over a period of time, rather than large upfront payments
● The increasing use of multi-cloud strategies, whereby cloud architectures and cloud-enabled frameworks, whether public, private, or hybrid, provide the core foundation of modern IT
● The explosive growth in remote workforce needs.
Growth Strategy
The acquisition of Kandy serves to complement the services provided by Computex by giving us the opportunity to provide a full suite of UCaaS, CPaaS, and CCaaS products to serve the rapidly growing cloud communications market. Customers today demand a highly reliable, secure, and scalable communications platform along with a world class customer experience. We offer end-to-end services spanning connectivity, managed IT solutions, managed services, and cloud communications, delivered by certified experts that provide exceptional white glove customer experiences to businesses, service providers, independent software vendors, and systems integrators. Our capabilities around adjacent technologies such as SD WAN (software-defined networking in a wide area network), SASE (secure access service edge) and cybersecurity, combined with our own software platform position us as a premier white label provider of choice for UCaaS, CPaaS and CCaaS solutions.
The acquisition of Kandy also enables us to provide carrier grade global cloud communications that address the needs of medium and large enterprises. As the velocity of public, hybrid, and private cloud communications continues, we believe we are in a position to focus on execution while competitors in our space need to concentrate on platform capabilities, global expansion and improved customer experience. Our world class, globally-deployed, carrier grade, white-labeled proprietary communications platform gives us the ability to solve customer communication needs. Our IP platform, growth trajectory, global marquee customer and partner base, should accelerate our go to market plans and enable us to expand our award-winning portfolio.
We have developed a clear go-to-market strategy that leverages our teams’ prior experiences and that utilizes multiple avenues to attack the total addressable market. Our goal is to accelerate current enterprise momentum, cross-sell into the Computex enterprise customer base, ramp up channel partner and strategic alliance sales with additional headcount, ramp up white label partner sales with additional head count, access certain enterprise customer leads and continue to grow our IT managed services. By “enterprise,” we mean a corporation or customer having over 1,000 employees.
We also plan to continue to invest in research and development, whilst also aiming to grow our international business.
Our other growth strategies include a focus on the following areas:
● Organic growth, by seeking to become our customers’ primary IT Solutions Provider
● Investment in scalable managed services
● The building of our geographic footprint
● Operational efficiencies, through investment in internal technology infrastructure and software platforms.
Results of operations
To distinguish between the different bases of accounting due to the Computex Business Combination that occurred on April 7, 2020, the tables below separate the Company’s results using a black line presentation that separates: (1) the periods prior to the closing date of April 7, 2020 (“Predecessor”) and (2) the period that started on April 7, 2020 (“Successor”). We refer to the periods before April 7, 2020 as the “Predecessor” periods and refer to the periods that started on April 7, 2020 as the “Successor” periods.
As discussed more fully above, the historical financial information of AVCT prior to the Computex Business Combination (a SPAC) has not been reflected in the Predecessor financial statements as these historical amounts have been determined not to be useful information to a user of the financial statements. Accordingly, all activity reported for periods prior to April 7, 2020 (the Predecessor period) reflect only the operations of Computex. As a result, the financial results of the Successor and Predecessor entities, presented herein are expected to be largely consistent, excluding any impact of the Computex Business Combination.
For the reasons discussed above, management believes it remains useful to review the operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020 with the operating results for the year ended December 31, 2019 (Fiscal Year 2019 or FY 2019). Accordingly, in the discussion below, for purposes of a year over year comparison, the financial information for the period January 1, 2020 through April 6, 2020 is combined with the financial information for the period April 7, 2020 through December 31, 2020 and, together, is referred to as the “S/P combined 2020 Year.” Accordingly, in addition to presenting our results of operations in our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP, the tables and certain discussions below present the non-GAAP combined results for the year ended December 31, 2020.
S/P Combined 2020 Year versus FY 2019 (in thousands)
(1) Interest expense in the Successor period includes related party interest of $6,899
Net loss
Net loss for the S/P Combined 2020 Year was $23.5 million compared with $4.4 million for FY 2019. Discussed below are the revenue and expense factors that primarily contributed to the year over year net loss change.
Hardware revenue
Hardware revenue decreased 6.0%, from $52.1 million in FY 2019 to $48.9 million in the S/P Combined 2020 Year. Though our hardware revenue was down, the margin was up 390 basis points in the S/P Combined 2020 Year compared with FY 2019. We attribute the decrease in hardware revenue to reduced demand in the energy sector, related to COVID-19 and the negative impact of a sales force transition, partially offset by increased demand in the manufacturing, logistics and public sector, also related to COVID-19 as more customers transitioned to remote work. We attribute the increase in margin to actions by the Company, beginning in the third quarter of 2019, to deliver improved margins.
Third party software and maintenance revenue
Revenues from third party software and maintenance services, which are recorded net of direct expenses, decreased 6.6%, to $5.8 million in the S/P Combined 2020 Year from $6.2 million in FY 2019. Since this revenue is recorded net, the revenue is also the gross margin. We attribute the decrease to a shift in customers’ IT spend towards mobile computing equipment and other mobile computing services as a result of increased telecommuting arrangements in response to COVID-19.
Managed and professional services revenue
Managed and professional services revenues increased 13.8% to $30.7 million in the S/P Combined 2020 Year from $27.0 million in FY 2019. We attribute this increase primarily to more demand for infrastructure assessment, cyber security and managed service monitoring services due to COVID-19, as customers continue to invest in their IT environment to allow them to seamlessly work from home. Remote workers require highly available systems and around the clock services. The additional complexity of remote work setups and the additional cybersecurity needs for a distributed workforce resulted in the higher revenue trend. Managed and professional services related to Kandy, contributed $0.3 million to the increase.
The gross margin on managed and professional services at our Computex division (which represented 99% of our managed and professional services in the S/P Combined 2020 Year) also improved, increasing approximately 310 basis points compared with FY 2019. The increased margins were primarily due to actions taken by the Company to deliver higher margins and also as a result of increased utilization of personnel driven by the higher customer demand discussed previously.
Cloud subscription and software revenue
Cloud subscription and software revenues of $1.4 million were generated from the Company’s Kandy subsidiary, which the Company acquired on December 1, 2020.
Other revenue
Other revenue, which consists primarily of freight and reimbursables, including travel, meals and entertainment, increased 76.2% or $0.3 million. By its nature, this type of revenue fluctuates depending on the revenue of the other product lines.
Total revenue, cost of revenue and gross margin
Aggregate revenues for the five product lines together was $87.6 million in the S/P Combined 2020 Year, an increase of $1.9 million, or 2.2%, compared with $85.7 million in FY 2019. The increase is primarily due to revenues from the Kandy acquisition which contributed $1.7 million to the increase.
Aggregate gross profit was also up, increasing 14.2% (or $3.5 million) in the S/P Combined 2020 Year, to $27.9 million (including $0.4 million related to Kandy), compared to $24.4 million in Fiscal 2019. Gross margin was also up, increasing 330 basis points as the 2.2% increase in aggregate revenues was accompanied by a 2.5% decrease in aggregate cost of revenues.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses (including transaction costs) for the S/P Combined 2020 Year and Fiscal 2019 consisted of the components in the following table (in thousands):
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased 44.1% in the S/P Combined 2020 Year compared with Fiscal 2019, primarily as a result of an increase in personnel-related costs, professional fees, insurance expenses and depreciation and amortization. Personnel-related expenses increased primarily as a result of the inclusion of AVCT corporate salaries in the Successor period, which were not included in the Predecessor period, an increase in commissions due to improved margins, and an increase in share-based compensation expenses related to awards issued in the Successor periods, partially offset by a reduction in salaries for employees of Computex, that was effected between April 1, 2020 and September 1, 2020. The increased insurance expenses are related to the Company’s expanded public company activities. Increased professional fees are also related to the Company’s expanded public company activities as well as to fees related to the acquisition of Kandy. The increase in depreciation and amortization was due to increased amortization expense related to intangible assets recognized as of the Computex Closing Date and the Kandy Closing Date. Meals, entertainment and travel decreased as a result of less travel and meetings with clients due to COVID-19 restrictions. To a lesser extent, the increase was also impacted by selling, general and administrative expenses related to the Kandy acquisition, which contributed $0.7 million to the increase (primarily sales and marketing).
Interest expense
Interest expense in the S/P Combined 2020 Year was up compared with Fiscal 2019, primarily as a result of interest on the Debentures which were issued in connection with the Computex Business Combination and in connection with the acquisition of Kandy. The Debentures bear interest at the rate of 10.00% per annum. Interest expense also includes amortization of the discount on the Debentures. The discount related to the Debentures that were issued in connection with the acquisition of Kandy include the impact of a beneficial conversion feature. See Note 10 for further discussion of the Debentures.
Benefit/provision for income taxes
For all periods presented, the provision for income taxes consists of provisions for state taxes, and reflect effective tax rates that differ from the federal statutory rate as a result of certain expenses being deductible for financial reporting purposes that are not deductible for tax purposes, the existence of research and development tax credits, operating loss carryforwards, and adjustments to previously recorded deferred tax assets and liabilities related to the enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act in 2017. For the Successor periods, the benefit for income taxes also reflects the impact of amortization of intangible assets recognized as of the Computex Closing Date and the Kandy Closing Date.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Historically, the Company’s primary sources of liquidity have been cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operations (when available) and cash flows from financing activities, including funding under its Credit Agreement. The Credit agreement is more fully discussed in Note 9. From time to time, the Company may also choose to access the debt and equity markets to fund acquisitions to diversity its capital sources. The Company’s current principal capital requirements are to fund working capital and make investments in line with its business strategy.
The Credit Agreement matures on June 30, 2021, and, as amended, provides for maximum borrowings of $16.5 million on the line of credit portion with a scheduled reduction of $3.5 million in availability under the line of credit as of April 1, 2021. As amended, the Credit Agreement provides for a minimum monthly liquidity (defined as unrestricted cash plus availability under the line of credit) of $3.0 million commencing January 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2020, amounts outstanding under the term loan and the line of credit with Comerica Bank were $5.7 million and $7.4 million, respectively.
In addition, at December 31, 2020, the Company had unrestricted and restricted cash of $9.9 million and $0.6 million, respectively, in its operating bank accounts, and had availability under its line of credit of $6.5 million. Total equity at December 31, 2020 was $52.5 million. However, as of December 31, 2020, the Company’s current liabilities exceeded its current assets by $18.4 million, primarily as a result of the classification of the components of the Credit Agreement as current.
On or before the maturity date of the Credit Agreement, the Company plans to seek to either negotiate an extension of the Credit Agreement or enter into a new agreement with another lender. In addition, the Company has, since December 31, 2020, raised additional capital and plans to raise an additional amount which it plans to use to fund expansion, capital expenditures and working capital for its current operations.
The Company believes that cash anticipated to be generated from future operations, as well as borrowings from lending and project financing sources and proceeds from equity and debt offerings will provide sufficient liquidity to fund operations for at least one year after the date the financial statements are issued. However, there is no assurance that future funding will be available if and when required or at terms acceptable to the Company. This projection is based on the Company’s current expectations regarding new project financing and product sales and service, cost structure, cash burn rate and other operating assumptions.
In April 2020, we received a PPP loan of $4.1 million. The PPP loan is administered by the SBA. Under the terms of the CARES Act, PPP loan recipients can apply for and be granted forgiveness for all or a portion of such loans after eight weeks, if the loan is used for eligible purposes, including to fund payroll costs, mortgage interest, rent and/or utility costs, and meet certain other requirements, including, the maintenance of employment and compensation levels. We believe that we have used the entire PPP Loan for qualifying expenses and expect to qualify for full or partial forgiveness under the program. However, we can provide no assurance that we will obtain forgiveness for any portion.
See Note 9 for additional disclosures about the Company’s debt.
Successor cash flows
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $15.1 million for the period April 7, 2020 through December 31, 2020, which was the result of an increase in receivables, due to the acquisition of Computex, and lower current liabilities at December 31, 2020 compared with April 6, 2020, as a substantial portion of the current liabilities at April 6, 2020 was converted to common stock and Debentures (and therefore reflected as increases in cash provided by financing activities). Current liabilities of $2.6 million at April 6, 2020 were converted to Debentures and $1.5 million was converted to common stock.
Investing activities
Investing activities used net cash of $0.6 million in the period April 7, 2020 through December 31, 2020, and consisted of capital expenditures of $0.9 million, partially offset by $0.3 million of cash from the Computex acquisition.
Financing activities
Financing activities provided $24.4 million in the period April 7, 2020 through December 31, 2020, and was generated from the issuance of $23.1 million in Debentures, $4.1 million in new debt and $1.5 million from the issuance of common stock, partially offset by net debt repayments of $3.2 million, redemption of shares held in trust of $1.0 million and payment of deferred financing fees of $0.2 million.
Predecessor cash flows
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $1.6 million for the period January 1, 2020 through April 6, 2020 and primarily consisted of funding for inventory and changes in unearned revenue, partially offset by funds provided by accounts receivable.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and primarily consisted of funds provided by accounts receivable, partially offset by a decreased funding related to accounts payable and accruals.
Investing activities
Investing activities used $0.1 million of cash for the period January 1, 2020 through April 6, 2020, which consisted of funding for capital expenditures.
Investing activities used $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which primarily consisted of funding for capital expenditures.
Financing activities
Financing activities provided $2.0 million of cash for the period January 1, 2020 through April 6, 2020, consisting primarily of net funds from the line of credit of $3.0 million, partially offset by debt repayments of $1.0 million.
Financing activities used $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, consisting of debt repayments, including net repayments on the line of credit.
Capital expenditures
Capital expenditures were $0.9 million during the period April 7, 2020 through December 31, 2020, and primarily were related to the purchase of computer and other equipment. For fiscal year 2021, we estimate our capital expenditures to be approximately $6.2 million, a significant portion of which we expect to spend on cloud infrastructure with the remainder to be spent on equipment to be used in our after-sales service centers.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and had not guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities or entered into any options on non-financial assets.
Critical Accounting Policies, Judgements and Estimates
This discussion of critical accounting policies, judgments and estimates should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and other disclosures included elsewhere in this annual report. The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates. We believe the accounting policies that involve the most significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements include those relating to revenue recognition, accounting for income taxes, accounting for business combinations, the recognition and impairment evaluation relating to tangible and intangible assets, including goodwill, and accounting for share-based compensation. We discuss some of these policies below. The ones not discussed below are discussed in Note 3 of the consolidated financial statements. Additional discussions regarding the ones discussed below are also included in Note 3.
Revenue recognition
Revenue from contracts with customers are not recorded until the Company has the approval and commitment from the parties, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are established, the contract has commercial substance and collectability of the consideration is probable. The Company also evaluates the following indicators, amongst others, when determining whether it is acting as a principal in the transaction (and therefore whether to record revenue on a gross basis): (i) whether the Company is primarily responsible for fulfilling the promise to provide the specified good or service, (ii) whether the Company has the inventory risk before the specified good or service has been transferred to a customer or after transfer of control to the customer and (iii) whether the Company has the discretion to establish the price for the specified good or service. If the terms of a transaction do not indicate that the Company is acting as a principal in the transaction, then the Company is acting as an agent in the transaction and therefore, the associated revenue is recognized on a net basis (that is revenue net of costs).
Revenue is recognized once control passes to the customer. The following indicators are evaluated in determining when control has passed to the customer: (i) whether the Company has a right to payment for the product or service, (ii) whether the customer has legal title to the product, (iii) whether the Company has transferred physical possession of the product to the customer, (iv) whether the customer has the significant risk and rewards of ownership of the product and (v) whether the customer has accepted the product. The Company’s products can be delivered to customers in a variety of ways, including (i) physical shipment from the Company’s warehouse, (ii) via drop-shipment by the vendor or supplier or (iii) via electronic delivery of keys for software licenses. The Company’s shipping terms typically allow for the Company to recognize revenue when the product is shipped to the customer’s location.
When an arrangement contains more than one performance obligation, the Company will allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis. The Company utilizes the observable price of goods and services when they are sold separately to similar customers in order to estimate standalone selling price.
Hardware
Revenue from the sale of hardware is recognized on a gross basis, as the Company is deemed to be acting as the principal in these transactions. The selling price to the customer is recorded as revenue and the acquisition cost is recorded within cost of revenue. The Company recognizes revenue from these transactions when control has passed to the customer, which is usually upon shipment.
In some instances, the customer agrees to buy the product from the Company, but requests delivery at a later date, commonly known as a bill-and-hold arrangement. For these transactions, the Company deems that control passes to the customer when the product is ready for delivery. The Company classifies such products as products ready for delivery when the customer is in possession of a signed agreement, the significant risk and rewards for the product has passed to the customer, the customer has the ability to direct the asset, the product has been set aside specifically for the customer and the Company cannot redirect the product for the benefit of another customer.
In drop-shipment arrangements, whereby the Company arranges for the vendor to deliver the product directly to the customer without the inventory first being held at its warehouses, the Company considers itself to be the principal and therefore, recognizes the related revenue on a gross basis.
Third party software
Revenues from most software license sales are recognized as a single performance obligation on a net basis, as the Company is deemed to be acting as an agent in these transactions. Revenues in these instances are recognized at the point the software license is delivered to the customer. Generally, software licenses are sold with accompanying third-party delivered software support, which is a product that allows customers to upgrade, at no additional cost, to the latest technology if new capabilities are introduced during the period that the software support is in effect. The Company evaluates whether the software support is a separate performance obligation by assessing whether the third-party delivered software support is critical or essential to the core functionality of the software itself. This involves considering whether the software provides its original intended functionality to the customer without the updates, whether the customer would ascribe a higher value to the upgrades versus the up-front deliverable, whether the customer would expect frequent intelligence updates to the software (such as updates that maintain the original functionality), and whether the customer chooses to not delay or always install upgrades. If the Company determines that the accompanying third-party delivered software support is critical or essential to the core functionality of the software license, the software license and the accompanying third-party delivered software support are recognized as a single performance obligation. The value of the product is primarily based on the accompanying support delivered by a third-party, and therefore the Company is acting as an agent in these transactions and therefore, recognizes the associated revenue on a net basis at the point that the associated software license is delivered to the customer.
Third party maintenance
The Company is deemed to be the agent in the sale of third-party maintenance, software support and services, as the third-party controls the service until it is transferred to the customer. In these instances, the Company recognizes the revenue on a net basis equal to the selling price to the customer less the acquisition costs. Such revenue is recognized when the customer and vendor accept the terms and conditions of the arrangement.
Managed and professional services
Professional services offered by the Company include assessments, project management, staging, configuration, customer training and integration. Managed services offerings range from monitoring and notification to a fully outsourced network management solution. In these arrangements, the Company satisfies the performance obligations and recognizes revenue over time.
Such professional services are provided under both time and materials and fixed price contracts. When services are provided on a time and materials basis, the Company recognizes revenues at agreed-upon billing rates as services are performed. When services are provided on a fixed fee basis, the Company recognizes revenues over time in proportion to the Company’s progress towards satisfaction of the performance obligation.
In arrangements for managed services, the Company’s arrangement is typically a single performance obligation comprised of a series of distinct services that are substantially the same and that have the same pattern of transfer (i.e., distinct days of service). The Company typically recognizes revenue from these services on a straight-line basis over the period services are provided, which is consistent with the timing of services rendered.
Cloud subscription and software revenue
Revenue from subscriptions to Kandy’s cloud-based technology platform is recognized on a ratable basis over the contractual subscription term beginning on the date that the platform is made available to the customer until the end of the contractual period. Payments received in advance of subscription services are recorded as deferred revenue; revenue recognized for services rendered in advance of payments received are recorded as contract assets. Usage fees, when bundled, are billed in advance and recognized on a ratable basis over the contractual subscription term, which is usually the monthly contractual billing period. Non-bundled usage fees are recognized as actual usage occurs.
When services do not meet certain service levels of commitments, customers are entitled to receive service credits, and in certain cases, refunds, each representing a form of variable consideration. Kandy historically has not experienced any significant incidents affecting the defined levels of reliability and performance as required by its subscription contracts. Therefore, the variable consideration has been insignificant and there are no reserves for such service credits as of December 31, 2020.
The Company also recognizes revenue for perpetual and term-based software licenses and has concluded that its software licenses are functional intellectual property that are distinct, as the user can benefit from the software on its own. The software license revenue is typically recognized upon transfer of control or when the software is made available for download, as this is the point at which the user of the software can direct the use of, and obtain substantially all of the remaining benefits from, the functional intellectual property.
Freight and sales tax
Freight billed to customers is included within sales on the consolidated statement of operations. The related freight charged to the Company is included within cost of revenue. Sales tax collected from customers is remitted to governmental authorities on a net basis.
Contract liabilities
Contract liabilities (or deferred or unearned revenue) are recognized when cash payments are received or due in advance of the Company’s performance obligations.
Costs of obtaining and fulfilling a contract
The Company capitalizes costs that are incremental to obtaining customer contracts, predominately sales commissions. Such deferrals are then amortized to expense, in proportion to each completed contract performance obligation, on a straight-line basis over the period during which the Company fulfills its performance obligation.
Costs associated with contracts whereby the Company has an obligation to perform services, are incurred specifically to assist the Company in rendering services to its customers and are recorded as deferred customer support contract costs at the time the costs are incurred. The costs are amortized to expense on a straight-line basis over the period during which the Company fulfills its performance obligation.
We consider revenue recognition to be a critical accounting policy and one that involves critical accounting estimates because of the materiality of this item to our financial statements and the level of judgement involved. Judgement is required in some of the factors discussed above including whether we are acting as a principal or an agent, the determination of when risk effectively passes to the customer, the determination of the price expected to be collected from the customer, the determination of whether revenue from certain software sales should be recognized as a single performance obligation or whether certain software support should be recognized as a separate performance obligation, and the assessment of whether the third-party delivered software support is critical or essential to the core functionality of the software itself.
Accounting for income taxes
Under the Financial Accounting Standard Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”) No. 740 (“ASC No. 740”), income tax expense is recorded for the amount of income tax payable or refundable for the current period and for the change in net deferred tax assets or liabilities resulting from events that are recorded for financial reporting purposes in a different reporting period than recorded in the tax return. We make significant assumptions, judgments, and estimates in the determination of our provision for income taxes and also our deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowances.
Our judgments, assumptions, and estimates relating to the current tax provision take into account current tax laws, our interpretation of current tax laws, allowable deductions, projected tax credits, and possible outcomes of current and future tax audits. We do not recognize a tax benefit unless we conclude that it is more likely than not that the benefit will be sustained on audit by the taxing authority based solely on the technical merits of the associated tax position. If the recognition threshold is met, we recognize a tax benefit measured at the largest amount of the tax benefit that, in our judgment, is greater than a 50 percent likelihood of realization. Changes in tax laws or our interpretation of tax laws and the resolution of current and future tax audits could materially impact the amounts provided for income taxes. Our assumptions, judgments, and estimates relative to the value of our net deferred tax assets take into account predictions of the amount and category of future taxable income. Actual operating results and the underlying amount and category of income in future years could render our current assumptions, judgments, and estimates inaccurate, thus materially impacting our financial position and results of operations.
Purchase price allocation
The Company accounts for business combinations in accordance with ASC 805, Business Combinations. Accordingly, tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their estimated fair values, the excess of the purchase consideration over the fair values of net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill, and transaction costs are expensed as incurred. Determining fair values of certain assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires the exercise of judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. Also, assigning useful lives to intangible assets, which determine the related amortization expense, involves subjectivity.
Share-based compensation
The Company accounts for share-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation, which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense, based on estimated fair values, for share-based awards made to employees and directors. Based on the grant date fair value of the award, the Company recognizes compensation expense over the requisite service period or performance period on a straight-line basis, and accounts for forfeitures as they occur.
Significant judgement is required in the estimation of fair values of stock awards. For the restricted stock awards with a time-based vesting condition, the fair value is determined by reference to the Company’s stock price on the grant date. A portion of the Company’s restricted stock awards are performance-based with a market condition that must be met for the award to vest. For those restricted stock awards, the fair value is estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation model, whereby the fair value of such awards is fixed at the grant date and amortized over the shorter of the remaining performance or service period. The Monte Carlo simulation valuation model utilizes the following assumptions: expected stock price volatility, expected life of the awards and a risk-free interest rate. Significant judgment is required in estimating the expected volatility of our common stock. Due to the limited trading history of the Company’s common stock, estimated volatility was based on a peer group of public companies and took into consideration the increased short-term volatility in historical data due to COVID-19.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Issued and Adopted
See Note 4 of the consolidated financial statements.