ITEM 7
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS/RISK FACTORS:
The Company, from time-to-time, may discuss forward-looking statements including assumptions concerning the Company’s operations, future results and prospects. Generally, “may,” “could,” “will,” “would,” “expect,” “believe,” “estimate,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “continue” and similar words identify forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements appearing in this Report are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements are based on our current expectations and are subject to risks and uncertainties that can cause actual results and events to differ materially from those set forth in or implied by the forward-looking statements and related assumptions contained in the entire Report. Such factors include, but are not limited to: product demand and market acceptance risks; the effect of economic conditions; weather conditions; changes in regulatory policy; the impact of competitive products and pricing; changes in foreign exchange rates; product development and commercialization difficulties; capacity and supply constraints or difficulties; availability of capital resources; general business regulations, including taxes and other risks as detailed from time-to-time in the Company’s reports and filings filed with the U.S. Security and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). It is not possible to foresee or identify all such factors. We urge you to consider these factors carefully in evaluating the forward-looking statements contained in this Report.
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for 2020, as compared to 2019 appears below. As permitted by SEC rules, we have omitted the discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for 2019 compared to 2018. See Item 7, “Management’s Discussions and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations”, in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, for this discussion.
MANAGEMENT OVERVIEW
Despite a prolonged pandemic which affected the general global business environment over most of the year, the Company’s performance in 2020 was steady, with a slight decline in the top line and an improvement in net income. While net sales were down 2%, as compared to 2019 ($458,704, as compared to $468,186), net income was up about 12% ($15,242, as compared to $13,601) due for the most part to the beneficial effect of both a business combination (specifically, a bargain purchase gain relating to the Agrinos acquisition) and the release of liabilities for uncertain tax positions (relating to acquisitions that were completed in 2017 and 2019). As the reader will note, many of the other factors (gross margin, factory performance and operating expenses) were in line with the prior year.
In summary, our results for 2020 were as follows. Net sales performance was mixed across our businesses. The top line of our U.S. Crop segment was up slightly, notwithstanding the restrictions placed on our activities by pandemic related protocols, which caused our customers and employees to operate on a virtual basis across the entire distribution channel. By contrast, sales of our U.S. Non-Crop business declined primarily due to reduced demand for our mosquito adulticide product, as customers worked down channel inventory. International sales rose with the addition of businesses that were acquired late in the year (Agrinos and AgNova) and improved performance in Mexico, partially offset by a restructuring in the supply channel in Central America and market softness in Brazil. Factory performance was in line with 2019.
As a result of the sales dynamics just described, absolute gross profit during 2020 was approximately 3% below that of 2019 ($172,590 vs. $177,354). Despite the sales driven decline, gross profit when expressed as a percentage of sales remained exactly in line with the prior year at 38%. Operating expenses increased by less than 2% ending at $154,339, as compared to $151,133 in 2019. This performance included multiple offsetting puts-and-takes. Within this category, selling expenses were down about 6%, while general and administrative increased by about 3%; however, that comparison is substantially impacted by the beneficial impact on 2019 expenses that did not recur in 2020, including: the fair value adjustments to contingent consideration associated with 2017 acquisitions ($3,866), and a break-up fee on an acquisition that did not complete ($500). On the other hand, in 2020, we did benefit from the release of environmental reserves established at the time of the 2019 acquisition of our Brazilian entity ($1,227), incurred a charge related to the change in fair value of certain liabilities associated with an acquisition ($250), offset by a profit on sale of some product registrations ($493). Expenses relating to Regulatory, R&D and Product Development rose by about 9%, primarily due to higher reregistration activity and continued work on our SIMPAS delivery system. Finally, freight rose by about 4% in light of increased sales of bulk products, such as soil fumigants. Overall, operating profit declined by about 13% (to $22,908 in 2020 from $26,221 in 2019).
During 2020, we benefitted from the recognition of a preliminary bargain purchase gain in the amount of $4,657 arising from the acquisition of Agrinos. Agrinos was acquired out of bankruptcy. This provided the Company with an opportunity to acquire Agrinos at an advantageous purchase price, which was below the preliminary fair value of the net assets acquired, resulting in the above-mentioned bargain purchase gain.
The Company also recorded a gain on change in fair value on a strategic equity investment in the amount of $717.
In spite of having a slightly higher average debt level, our interest expense dropped by about 28% (to $5,178 in 2020 from $7,209 in 2019) due both to timing of our borrowings and a drop in interest rates. This enabled us to report income before provision for income taxes of $18,447, as compared to $19,012 in 2019.
Our effective tax rate for 2020 ended at 16.7%, as compared to 27.4% in 2019. This improvement is primarily due to two factors; the bargain purchase gain (which is not taxable) and the net benefit of releasing liabilities (in the amount of $2,092) for uncertain tax positions related to current year positions and to acquisitions completed in 2017 and in 2019. All told, then, for the 2020 year we recorded net income up 12% at $15,242 (as compared to $13,601 in 2019) and earnings per diluted share of $0.51 (as compared to $0.46 in 2019).
When considering the consolidated balance sheet, long-term debt decreased to $107,442 as of December 31, 2020, from $148,766 as of December 31, 2019. The decreased level of debt was driven by the Company’s strong cash management during 2020, including a strong response from the Company’s biggest customers to our early-pay programs. The Company’s liquidity position improved with a closing borrowing capacity of $86,736 as of December 31, 2020, as compared to $26,977 as of December 31, 2019. Furthermore, inventories remain flat at $163,784, as of December 31, 2020, as compared to inventories of $163,313, this time last year. This included inventory associated with the two business acquisitions completed in the final three months of the year that amounted to approximately $8,340.
Results of Operations
2020 Compared with 2019:
Our U.S. crop business recorded net sales that were about 1% higher than those of the prior year period ($223,167 versus $220,635). After a brief period of anticipatory buying during the first few months of the pandemic, the distribution channel followed conservative procurement practices for the second and third quarters of 2020. Reduced ethanol demand, low crop commodity pricing, a strained farm economy and the COVID-19 pandemic all contributed to this approach. In the final quarter of the year, however, corn and soybean commodity price began to escalate, and Midwest purchasing patterns began to normalize, which, in turn, benefitted our soil insecticide product lines. We saw a strong performance in our soil fumigant business driven by a rebound in usage by potato growers, as pandemic-impacted restaurants and schools began to reopen. Newly acquired products, primarily for soybean, rice and corn applications, contributed to a year-over-year increase in sales and bolstered U.S. Crop gross margins as a result. Partially offsetting these increases, we recorded lower net sales of our foliar insecticide Bidrin due to low cotton commodity prices (and a concomitant decline of 11% in planted cotton acres - down 1.5 million acres to 12.2 million), unfavorable weather conditions, (drought in West Texas and hurricanes in the Southeast region) and reduced foliar pest pressure. Our cotton harvest defoliant Folex generated slightly lower sales following multiple hurricanes that struck the region destroying some harvestable acreage.
Cost of sales within the domestic crop business was slightly lower than 2019 (down to $124,827 from $125,206), gross profit improved by 3% ($98,340 in 2020 vs. $95,429 in 2019), and gross margin increased to 44% of sales as compared to 43% last year.
Sales of our U.S. non-crop business were down about 21% ($48,557 in 2020 vs. $61,590 in 2019). Our Dibrom® mosquito adulticide sales, which constitute a significant portion of overall non-crop sales, were down in 2020 as mosquito control distributors continued to work down channel inventory. Net sales of pest strips and other commercial pest control products were down significantly in 2020 as a result of widespread closure of restaurants, schools, malls and many other commercial enterprises due to pandemic restrictions. In addition, COVID protocols adversely impacted the activity of commercial pest control operators. Offsetting these factors, net sales from our OHP nursery and ornamental business were 9% higher than 2019, as demand for homeowner garden and landscape products accelerated during the second half of 2020 at retail locations around the country. Finally, our TyraTech/Envance revenues grew steadily with both direct product sales and royalty income exceeding the prior year performance.
Cost of sales in our U.S. non-crop business declined by 17% in comparison to the prior year ($26,332 in 2020 vs. $31,877 in 2019), gross profit declined by 25% ($22,225 in 2020 vs. $29,713 in 2019), and gross margin percentage declined slightly to 46% in 2020, as compared to 48% in 2019.
Net sales of our international businesses were increased by 1% in 2020 ($186,980 vs. $185,961 in 2019). During 2020, our international group successfully balanced several positive and negative factors. We enjoyed strong demand for our soil fumigants, our Counter nematicide and our bromacil herbicides, particularly in Mexico, while experiencing reduced sales of one of our traditional insecticides (Mocap) due to regulatory phase-out in the EU. We benefitted from the addition of an acquired biological products business (Agrinos) and an established Australian supplier/distributor (AgNova). However, these gains were offset in part by softer demand in Central America, primarily due to a restructuring in the supply channel, and in Brazil, primarily due to the devaluation of the Brazilian Real in comparison to last year, limited customer access (in light of coronavirus protocols), and competitive market conditions.
Cost of sales in our international business increased slightly (about 1%) to $134,955 in 2020 from $133,749 in 2019. Gross profit at approximately the same level as the prior year ($52,025 in 2020 vs. $52,212 in 2019), and gross margin held steady at 28% (as posted in both years).
On a consolidated basis, gross profit for the year decreased by 3% (ending at $172,590 in 2020, as compared to $177,354 in 2019). Gross margin percentage remained at 38%, exactly in line with the prior year.
Operating expenses in 2020 increased by $3,206 to $154,339 or 34% of sales, as compared to $151,133 or 32% in 2019. The differences in operating expenses by department are as follows:
•
Selling expenses decreased by 6% to $42,389 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $45,121 in 2019. The main drivers were the reduction in travel and entertainment expenses across all of our global operating subsidiaries, as a result of restrictions imposed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. These reductions included the favorable impact of lower foreign currency exchange rates (as they relate to the translation to U.S. Dollars of operating expenses recorded in foreign currencies at our international subsidiaries). This performance was offset, in part, by the addition of activities of the newly acquired businesses.
•
General and administrative expenses increased by 5% to $48,828 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $46,593 in 2019. The main drivers for the slight increase were associated with the additional costs for the activities of businesses acquired in the final quarter of 2020, the beneficial impact on 2019 expenses of fair value adjustments to contingent consideration associated with 2017 acquisitions ($3,866) and a break-up fee ($500) arising from an unconsummated acquisition that did not re-occur in the current year. Although, these items that were not repeated in the current year, the negative effect was partially offset by the reduction in travel and entertainment expenses in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, a reduction in environmental reserves associated with our Brazilian business ($1,227), and a gain associated with the sales of certain registration ($485). The cost reductions just described were partly offset by an expense associated with a change in the fair value of contingent consideration in the amount of $250.
•
Research, product development and regulatory expenses increased by 9% to $26,310 in 2020, as compared to $24,070 in 2019. The main drivers were increases in our product defense and product development costs, primarily resulting from increased activities in our newly acquired businesses, partially offset by the general delays in activities with third-party service providers caused by pandemic related disruption.
•
Freight, delivery and warehousing costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by 4% to $36,812, as compared to $35,349 in 2019. This is mainly due to product mix and locations of customers. When expressed as a percentage of sales, freight costs increased slightly year over year to 7.9% in 2020, as compared to 7.5% in 2019.
In July 2020, the Company made a strategic investment in Clean Seed Inc., in the amount of $1,190. Subsequent to the initial investment, the Company recorded positive fair value adjustments in the amount of $717.
At the end of 2020 the Company completed on the acquisition of Agrinos. In addition to a manufacturing plant in California, Agrinos has operating entities in a number of foreign countries including a manufacturing site in Mexico. The Company acquired Agrinos out of bankruptcy and secured an economically advantageous purchase. The Company engaged a third-party valuation specialist to assist in establishing the preliminary fair value of the assets acquired. The valuation is mainly driven by future projected cash flows. The preliminary fair value of the net assets acquired, established with the assistance of a third-party valuation specialist, indicates that this acquisition resulted in a bargain purchase gain as the fair value of the acquired net assets exceeds the purchase price consideration. Accordingly, the Company has recorded a preliminary gain in the amount of $4,657 included in operating income in 2020.
Net interest expense was $5,178 in 2020, as compared to $7,209 in 2019. Interest costs are summarized in the following table:
The Company’s average overall debt for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $170,801, as compared to $166,828 for the year ended December 31, 2019. On a gross basis, our effective interest rate decreased on our working capital revolver to 3.0%, as compared to 4.1% in 2019. This decrease was driven by decreases in the LIBOR rate. After adjustments related to capitalized interest and expenses related to the amortization of deferred liabilities, the overall effective interest rate was 3.0% for 2020 and 4.3% 2019.
Our provision for income taxes for 2020 was $3,080, as compared to $5,202 for 2019. The effective tax rate for 2020 was 16.7%, as compared to 27.4% in 2019.
The Company is subject to U.S. federal income tax as well as to income tax in multiple state jurisdictions. Federal income tax returns of the Company are subject to Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) examination for the 2017 through 2019 tax years. State income tax returns are subject to examination for the 2016 through 2019 tax years. The Company has other foreign income tax returns subject to examination.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company recorded net losses on its equity investments of $125 and $209, respectively.
Net income attributable to American Vanguard was $15,242 or $0.51 per diluted share in 2020 as compared to $13,601 or $0.46 per diluted share in 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company generated $89,198 of cash from operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $9,569 in the prior year. Included in the $89,198 are net income of $15,242, plus non-cash depreciation, amortization of intangibles and other assets and discounted future liabilities, in the amount of $23,849, amortization of deferred loan fees of $300, revision of contingent consideration of $250, provision for bad debts in the amount of $1,002. In addition, stock-based compensation of $6,561, loss from equity method investments of $125, change in investment fair value of $717, change in value of deferred income taxes of $969, change in reserves for uncertain tax positions of $2,092, a bargain purchase gain in the amount of $4,657 and other items amounting to $128, resulted in net cash provided by operating activities of $40,960, as compared to $43,686 for the same period of 2019.
During 2020, the Company decreased working capital by $37,160, as compared to the position at December 31, 2019. Included in this change: accounts receivables decreased by $15,559, inventories decreased by $7,421, income taxes increased by $287, and prepaid expenses decreased by $140. Deferred revenue increased by $36,803, as compared to December 31, 2019, driven by individual customer decisions to make early payments in return for early cash incentive programs. Our accounts payable balances decreased by $8,124, program accruals decreased by $2,517 and other payables and accrued expenses decreased by $775.
With regard to our program accrual, the year-over-year change is primarily driven by the mix of sales and customers in 2020, as compared to the prior year. The Company accrues programs in line with the growing season upon which specific products are targeted. Most of our programs relate to domestic sales. Typically, domestic crops have a growing season that ends on September 30th of each year. During 2020, the Company made accruals in the amount of $66,622 and made payments in the amount of $68,880. During 2019, the Company made accruals in the amount of $63,579, acquired certain liabilities in the amount of $7,247 as part of an acquisition, and made payments in the amount of $60,476.
Because the estimate for the program accrual is a material component of the presentation of the Company’s overall financial performance, the Company believes that the process it uses is critical in setting the accrual at the appropriate level. The Company’s process for developing the estimate involves a detailed review of each related transaction and includes the input of a significant number of senior employees to enable the Company to set the accrual using consistently applied judgements, subject to the particular circumstances of any individual transaction.
Cash used for investing activities amounted to $35,795 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $54,837 in 2019. The Company spent $23,356 in business and product acquisitions including intangible assets, goodwill, working capital and fixed assets as well as patent application costs. The Company spent $1,190 on an equity investment. In addition, in 2020, $11,249 was spent on capital expenditures primarily focused on continuing to invest in manufacturing infrastructure. In 2019, the Company spent $41,852 in business and product acquisitions including intangible assets, goodwill, working capital and fixed assets as well as patent application costs, and $12,985 on capital expenditures primarily focused on our manufacturing facilities.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, financing activities used $43,213, principally making repayments on the Company’s senior credit facility, as compared to providing $46,406 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This included net repayments of $41,624 on our credit facility in 2020, as compared to net borrowings of $51,900 in 2019. During the year, we paid dividends to stockholders amounting to $1,168, as compared to $2,323 in 2019. Finally, the Company did not repurchase common stock at market in 2020, as compared to repurchases of $2,604 in prior year.
The Company has various loans in place that together constitute the long-term loan balances shown in the consolidated balance sheets as at December 31, 2020 and 2019. These are summarized in the following table:
The Company’s main bank is Bank of the West, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the French bank, BNP Paribas. Bank of the West has been the Company’s bank for more than 30 years and is the syndication manager for the Company’s loans.
The revolving line of credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) is a senior secured lending facility among AMVAC, the Company’s principal operating subsidiary, as borrower, and affiliates (including the Company, AMVAC CV and AMVAC BV), as guarantors and/or borrowers, on the one hand, and a group of commercial lenders led by Bank of the West as agent, swing line lender and Letter of Credit issuer on the other hand, consisting of a line of credit of up to $250,000, an accordion feature of up to $100,000 and a maturity date of June 30, 2022. The Credit Agreement contains two key financial covenants; namely, borrowers are required to maintain a Consolidated Funded Debt Ratio of no more than 3.25-to-1 and a Consolidated Fixed Charge Covenant Ratio of at least 1.25-to-1. The Company’s borrowing capacity varies with its financial performance, measured in terms of EBITDA as defined in the Credit Agreement, for the trailing twelve-month period. Under the Credit Agreement, revolving loans bear interest at a variable rate based, at borrower’s election with proper notice, on either (i) LIBOR plus the “Applicable Rate” which is based upon the Consolidated Funded Debt Ratio (“Eurocurrency Rate Loan”) or (ii) the greater of (x) the Prime Rate, (y) the Federal Funds Rate plus 0.5%, and (z) the Daily One-Month LIBOR Rate plus 1.00%, plus, in the case of (x), (y) or (z) the Applicable Rate (“Alternate Base Rate Loan”). Interest payments for Eurocurrency Rate Loans are payable on the last day of each interest period (either one, two, three or six months, as selected by the borrower) and the maturity date, while interest payments for Alternate Base Rate Loans are payable on the last business day of each month and the maturity date. The interest rate on December 31, 2020 was 2.75%.
As of April 22, 2020, AMVAC, as borrower, and certain affiliates amended the Credit Agreement., The Credit Agreement, as amended, has the same term and loan commitments, however the maximum permitted consolidated funded debt ratio (the “CFD Ratio”) has been increased from 3.25-to-1 to the following schedule: 4.00-to-1 through September 30, 2020, stepping down to 3.75-to-1 through December 31, 2020, 3.5-to-1 through March 31, 2021 and 3.25-to-1 thereafter. In addition, to the extent that it completes acquisitions totaling $15 million or more in any 90-day period, AMVAC may step-up the CFD Ratio by 0.5-to-1, not to exceed 4.25-to-1, for the next three full consecutive quarters. Finally, to the extent that a proposed acquisition is at least $30 million but less than $50 million, the consent of the Lead Agent is required. Larger acquisitions continue to require the consent of a majority of the Lenders.
At December 31, 2020, according to the terms of the Credit Agreement, as amended, and based on our performance against the most restrictive covenant listed above, the Company had the capacity to increase its borrowings by up to $86,736. This compares to an available borrowing capacity of $26,977 as of December 31, 2019. The level of borrowing capacity is driven by three factors: (1) our financial performance, as measured in EBITDA for trailing twelve-month period, (2) the inclusion of proforma EBITDA related to acquisitions completed during the preceding twelve months and (3) the leverage covenant (being the number of times EBITDA the Company may borrow under its credit facility agreement). The Company was in compliance with all the debt covenants as of December 31, 2020.
We believe that the combination of our cash flows from future operations, current cash on hand and the availability under the Company’s credit facility will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements and will provide us with adequate liquidity to meet our anticipated operating needs for at least the next 12 months from the issuance of the Annual Report. Although operating activities are expected to provide cash, to the extent of growth in the future, our operating and investing activities will use cash and, consequently, this growth may require us to access some or all of the availability under the credit facility. It is also possible that additional sources of finance may be necessary to support additional growth.
Substantially all of the Company’s assets are pledged as collateral under the Credit Agreement, as amended.
Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The following summarizes our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020, and the effects such obligations are expected to have on cash flows in future periods:
(1)
Under the terms of the credit facility, all debt outstanding is due when the agreement expires on June 30, 2022.
(2)
Estimated interest liability has been calculated using the average effective rate for 2020 for each category of debt over the remaining term of the debt and taking into account scheduled repayments. The revolving line has been assumed to be constant (i.e. $107,900) throughout the remaining term. All our debt is linked to LIBOR rates.
(3)
The Company elected to pay the transition tax related to the Tax Reform Act over an eight-year period. Total amount has been adjusted to reflect 2017 income tax overpayment applied to transition tax.
There were no significant other off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
In addition to the above contractual obligations, $3,222 of unrecognized tax benefits and $4,195 of accrued penalties and interest have been recorded as long-term liabilities as of December 31, 2020. We are uncertain as to if or when such amounts may be settled, or any tax benefits realized.
Recently Issued Accounting Guidance
Please refer to Notes of Consolidated Financial Statements - Description of Business, Basis of Consolidation, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for recently issued and adopted accounting standards.
Foreign Exchange
The Company faces market risk to the extent that changes in foreign currency exchange rates affect our non-U.S. dollar functional currency foreign subsidiaries’ revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities. We currently do not engage in hedging activities with respect to such exchange rate risks.
Assets and liabilities outside the U.S. are located in regions where we have subsidiaries or joint ventures: Central America, South America, North America, Europe Asia, and Australia. Our investments in foreign subsidiaries and joint ventures with a functional currency other than the U.S. dollar are generally considered long-term. Accordingly, we do not hedge these net investments.
Inflation
Management believes inflation has had minimal impact on the Company's operations during the past two years. The Company is working diligently with its critical raw material suppliers to control inflationary pressures, conducting contract negotiations with focus on the following: reducing or delaying price increases due to higher environmental costs from suppliers mainly in China and India, managing the tariff impacts by sourcing and leveraging alternate geographies where possible, and lastly, monitoring strengths of the U.S. dollar vs other currencies in order to secure benefits and balance tariff effects. The Company recognizes there is long-term pressure on demand for raw materials in the developing world and is utilizing its expertise to minimize inflationary pressure. The Company has been able to push back on many of the proposed price increases for actives and intermediates that are shipped to our U.S. factories, to either avoid, minimize or forestall them.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Certain of the Company’s policies require the application of judgment by management in selecting the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates. These judgments are based on historical experience, terms of existing contracts, commonly accepted industry practices and other assumptions that the Company believes are reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions are reviewed periodically, and the effects of revisions are reflected in the consolidated financial statements in the period that revisions are determined to be necessary. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different outcomes or conditions.
The Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates include:
Principles of Consolidation-The Company’s consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its subsidiaries. Less than wholly owned subsidiaries, including joint ventures, are consolidated when it is determined that the Company has a controlling financial interest, which is generally determined when the Company holds a majority voting interest. When protective rights, substantive rights or other factors exist, further analysis is performed in order to determine whether or not there is a controlling financial interest. The consolidated financial statements reflect the assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses of consolidated subsidiaries and the non-controlling parties’ ownership share is presented as a non-controlling interest. All significant intercompany accounts and transactions are eliminated.
Revenue Recognition and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts- Revenues from sales are recognized at the time control is transferred to the customer. This is typically the case when the customer has made the fixed commitment to purchase the goods, the products are shipped per the customer’s instructions, the sales price can be identified, and collection is probable. The Company has adopted procedures to ensure that revenues are recognized when earned. The procedures are subject to management’s review and from time-to-time certain revenues are excluded until it is clear that the title has passed and there is no further recourse to the Company. We also have some arrangements whereby revenues are recognized over time for certain products that are deemed to have no alternative use accompanied by an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date. From time-to-time, the Company may offer a program to eligible customers, in good standing, that provides extended payment terms on a portion of the sales on selected products. The Company analyzes these extended payment programs in connection with its revenue recognition policy to ensure all revenue recognition criteria are satisfied at the time of sale. The Company also earns royalty income from its licensing arrangements which qualify as functional licenses rather than symbolic licenses. Upon signing a new licensing agreement, we typically receive up-front fees, which are generally characterized as non-refundable royalties. These fees are recognized as revenue upon the execution of the license agreements. Minimum royalty fees are recognized once the Company has an enforceable right for payment. Sales-based royalty fees are typically recognized when the sales occur. We calculate and accrue estimated royalties based on the agreement terms and correspondence with the licensees regarding actual sales. Allowance for doubtful accounts is established based on estimates of losses related to customer receivable balances. Estimates are developed using either standard quantitative measures based on historical losses, adjusted for current economic conditions, or by evaluating specific customer accounts for risk of loss.
The Company maintains an allowance to cover its Current Expected Credit Losses ("CECL") on its trade receivables, other receivables and contract assets arising from the failure of customers to make contractual payments. The Company estimates credit losses expected over the life of its trade receivables, other receivables and contract assets based on historical information combined with current conditions that may affect a customer’s ability to pay and reasonable and supportable forecasts. In most instances, the Company’s policy is to write-off trade receivables when they are deemed uncollectible. The vast majority of the Company's trade receivables, other receivables and contract assets are less than 365 days. Under the CECL impairment model, the Company develops and documents its allowance for credit losses on its trade receivables based on multiple portfolios. The determination of portfolios is based primarily on geographical location, type of customer and aging.
Deferred Revenue - From time to time, the Company receives pre-payments from customers which are recorded as deferred revenue on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets. The Company does not recognize revenue on any such payments unless and until the customer places and binding purchase order, the goods are shipped, and control is transferred to the customer.
Accrued Program Costs- The Company offers various discounts to customers based on the volume purchased within a defined time period, other pricing adjustments, some grower volume incentives or other key performance indicator driven payments made to distributors, retailers or growers, usually at the end of a growing season. The Company describes these payments as “Programs.” Programs are a critical part of doing business in both the U.S. crop and non-crop chemicals marketplaces. These discount Programs represent variable consideration. Revenues from sales are recorded at the net sales price, which is the transaction price, and includes estimates of variable consideration. Variable consideration includes amounts expected to be paid to its customers using the expected value method. Each quarter management compares individual sale transactions with Programs to determine what, if any, estimated program liabilities have been incurred. Once this initial calculation is made for the specific quarter, sales and marketing management, along with executive and financial management, review the accumulated Program balance and, for volume driven payments, make assessments of whether or not customers are tracking in a manner that indicates that they will meet the requirements set out in agreed upon terms and conditions attached to each Program. Following this assessment, management will make adjustments to the accumulated accrual to properly reflect the Company’s best estimate of the liability at the balance sheet date. Programs are paid out predominantly on an annual basis, usually in the final quarter of the financial year or the first quarter of the following year.
Inventories - The Company values its inventories at lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined by the first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) or average cost method, including, as appropriate, material, labor, factory overhead and subcontracting services. The Company writes down its inventory to the net realizable value following assessments of slow moving and obsolete inventory and other annual adjustments to ensure that our standard costs continue to closely reflect manufacturing cost.
Property, Plant and Equipment and Depreciation- Property, plant and equipment includes the cost of land, buildings, machinery and equipment, office furniture and fixtures, automobiles, construction projects and significant improvements to existing plant and equipment. Interest costs related to significant construction projects are capitalized at the Company’s current weighted average effective interest rate. Expenditures for minor repairs and maintenance are expensed as incurred. When property or equipment is sold or otherwise disposed of, the related cost and accumulated depreciation are removed from the respective accounts and the gain or loss realized on disposition is reflected in earnings. All plant and equipment assets are depreciated using the straight-line method, utilizing the estimated useful property lives. Once placed into service, building lives range from 10 to 30 years; machinery and equipment lives range from 3 to 15 years.
Leases -The Company has operating leases for warehouses, manufacturing facilities, offices, cars, railcars and certain equipment. On January 1, 2019, the Company adopted the accounting and adoption guidance in ASC 842, Leases, for its operating leases resulting in the recognition of operating lease right-of-use (ROU) assets and lease liabilities on the effective date. The Company measures ROU assets throughout the lease term at the carrying amount of the lease liability, plus initial direct costs, plus (minus) any prepaid (accrued) lease payments, less the unamortized balance of lease incentives received. The lease liabilities are measured at the present value of the unpaid lease payments at the lease commencement date. Leases that include both lease and non-lease components are accounted for as a single lease component for each asset class, except for warehouses. The minimum payments under operating leases are recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term in the consolidated statements of operations. Operating lease expenses related to variable lease payments are recognized in cost of sales or as operating expenses in a manner consistent with the nature of the underlying lease and as the events, activities, or circumstances in the lease agreement occur. Leases with a term of less than 12 months are not recognized on the consolidated balance sheets, and the related lease expenses are recognized in the consolidated statements of operations on a straight-line basis over the lease term. The accounting for leases requires management to exercise judgment and make estimates in determining the applicable discount rate, lease term and payments due under a lease. Most of our leases do not provide an implicit interest rate, nor is it available to us from our lessors. As an alternative, we use our estimated incremental borrowing rate, which is derived from information available at the lease commencement date, including publicly available data, in determining the present value of lease payments. We also estimated the fair value of the lease and non-lease components for some of our warehouse leases based on market data and cost data. The lease term includes the non-cancellable period of the lease plus any additional periods covered by either an option to extend (or not terminate) that the Company is reasonably certain to exercise. The Company has leases with a lease term ranging from 1 year to 20 years. The operating leases of the Company do not contain major restrictions or covenants such as those relating to dividends or additional financial obligations. Finance leases are immaterial to the consolidated financial statements.
Intangible Assets-The primary identifiable intangible assets of the Company relate to assets associated with its product and business acquisitions. All of the Company’s intangible assets have finite lives and are amortized. The estimated useful life of an identifiable intangible asset to the Company is based upon a number of factors including the effects of demand, competition, and expected changes in the marketability of the Company’s products.
Business Combinations-The Company uses its best estimates and assumptions to assign fair value to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date. The Company’s estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. During the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, the Company may record adjustments to the fair value of these tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill or an adjustment to the gain from a bargain purchase. In addition, uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances are initially recorded in connection with a business combination as of the acquisition date. The Company continues to collect information and reevaluates these estimates and assumptions quarterly and records any adjustments to the Company’s preliminary estimates to goodwill provided that the Company is within the measurement period. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the fair value of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to the Company’s consolidated statement of operations.
In the event that the Company acquires an entity in which the Company previously held a non-controlling investment, the difference between the fair value and carrying value of the investment as of the date of the acquisition is recorded as a gain or loss and recorded within net income (loss) on equity method investments in the consolidated statement of operations.
Certain of our acquisition agreements include contingent earn-out arrangements, which are generally based on the achievement of future income thresholds. The fair values of these earn-out arrangements are included as part of the purchase price of the acquired companies on their respective acquisition dates. For each transaction, we estimate the fair value of contingent earn-out payments as part of the initial purchase price and record the estimated fair value of contingent consideration as a liability on the consolidated balance sheets.
We review and re-assess the estimated fair value of contingent consideration on a quarterly basis, and the updated fair value could be materially different from the initial estimates or prior quarterly amounts. Changes in the estimated fair value of our contingent earn-out liabilities are reported in operating results.
Asset Acquisitions-If an acquisition of an asset or group of assets does not meet the definition of a business, the transaction is accounted for as an asset acquisition rather than a business combination. An asset acquisition does not result in the recognition of goodwill and transaction costs are capitalized as part of the cost of the asset or group of assets acquired. The Company uses its best estimates and assumptions to assign fair value to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date. The acquisitions costs are allocated to the assets acquired on a relative fair value basis. Certain of our acquisition agreements include contingent earn-out arrangements, which are recognized only when the contingency is resolved, and the consideration is paid or becomes payable.
Impairment-The carrying values of long-lived assets other than goodwill are reviewed for impairment annually and/or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such assets may not be recoverable. The Company evaluates recoverability of an asset group by comparing the carrying value to the future undiscounted cash flows that it expects to generate from the asset group. If the comparison indicates that the carrying value of an asset group is not recoverable, measurement of the impairment loss is based on the fair value of the asset.
The Company reviews goodwill for impairment utilizing either a qualitative or quantitative assessment. If the Company decides that it is appropriate to perform a qualitative assessment and concludes that the fair value of a reporting unit more likely than not exceeds its carrying value, no further evaluation is necessary. If the Company performs a quantitative assessment, the Company compares the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying values and recognizes an impairment charge for the amount that the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value. The Company annually tests goodwill for impairment at the beginning of the fourth quarter, or earlier if triggering events occur.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments-The accounting standard for fair value measurements provides a framework for measuring fair value and requires expanded disclosures regarding fair value measurements. Fair value is defined as the price that would be received for an asset or the exit price that would be paid to transfer a liability in the principal or most advantageous market in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. This accounting standard established a fair value hierarchy, which requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs, where available. The following summarizes the three levels of inputs required:
•
Level 1 - Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
•
Level 2 - Observable inputs other than quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and liabilities, quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in inactive markets, or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities.
•
Level 3 - Inputs that are generally unobservable and typically reflect management’s estimate of assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability.
The carrying amount of the Company’s financial instruments, which principally include cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, accounts receivable, long-term investments, accounts payable and accrued expenses approximates fair value because of the relatively short maturity of such instruments. The carrying amount of the Company’s short-term and long-term borrowings, which are considered Level 2 liabilities, approximates fair value based upon current rates and terms available to the Company for similar debt.
We measure our contingent earn-out liabilities in connection with acquisitions at fair value on a recurring basis using significant unobservable inputs classified within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy. We may use various valuation techniques depending on the terms and conditions of the contingent consideration including a Monte-Carlo simulation. This simulation uses probability distribution for each significant input to produce hundreds or thousands of possible outcomes and the results are analyzed to determine probabilities of different outcomes occurring.
Foreign Currency Translation-Certain international operations use the respective local currencies as their functional currency, while other international operations use the U.S. Dollar as their functional currency. The Company considers the U.S. dollar as its reporting currency. Translation adjustments for subsidiaries where the functional currency is its local currency are included in other comprehensive income (loss). Foreign currency transaction gains (losses) resulting from exchange rate fluctuation on transactions denominated in a currency other than the functional currency are reported in earnings. Assets and liabilities of the foreign operations denominated in local currencies are translated at the rate of exchange at the balance sheet date. Revenues and expenses are translated at the weighted average rate of exchange during the period. Translations of intercompany loans of a long-term investment nature are included as a component of translation adjustment in other comprehensive income (loss).
Income taxes-Income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits reflect management’s best estimate of current and future taxes to be paid. The Company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and a number of foreign jurisdictions. The Company assessed the ability to realize deferred tax assets and determined that based on the available evidence, including a history of taxable income and estimates of future taxable income, it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized. Significant management judgment is required in determining the provision for income taxes and deferred tax assets and liabilities. In the event that actual results differ from these estimates, we will adjust these estimates in future periods, which may result in a change in the effective tax rate in a future period. Accounting for income taxes involves uncertainty and judgment on how to interpret and apply tax laws and regulations within the Company’s annual tax filings. Such uncertainties from time to time may result in a tax position that may be challenged and overturned by a tax authority in the future, which could result in additional tax liability, interest charges and possibly penalties. The Company classifies interest and penalties as a component of income tax expense.