ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions, that are based on the beliefs of our management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K entitled “Risk factors.”
Overview
We are a commercial-stage medical device company that designs, manufactures and sells image-guided, catheter-based systems that are used by physicians to treat patients with peripheral artery disease, or PAD. Patients with PAD have a build-up of plaque in the arteries that supply blood to areas away from the heart, particularly the pelvis and legs. Our mission is to significantly improve the treatment of vascular disease through the introduction of products based on our Lumivascular platform, the only intravascular image-guided system available in this market.
We design, manufacture, and sell a suite of products in the United States and select international markets. We are located in Redwood City, California. Our current Lumivascular platform consists of products include our Lightbox imaging console, the Ocelot family of catheters, which are designed to allow physicians to penetrate a total blockage in an artery, known as a chronic total occlusion, or CTO, and the Pantheris family of catheters, our image-guided atherectomy family of catheters which is designed to allow physicians to precisely remove arterial plaque in PAD patients. We received CE Marking for our original Ocelot product in September 2011 and received from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, 510(k) clearance in November 2012. We received 510(k) clearance from the FDA for commercialization of Pantheris in October 2015. We received an additional 510(k) clearance for an enhanced version of Pantheris in March 2016 and commenced sales of Pantheris in the United States and select European countries promptly thereafter. In May 2018, we received 510(k) clearance from the FDA for our current next-generation version of Pantheris. In April 2019, we received 510(k) clearance from the FDA for our Pantheris SV, a version of Pantheris targeting smaller vessels, and commenced sales in July 2019. The Pantheris SV has a smaller diameter and longer length that we believe will optimize it for its targeted use.
In September 2020, we received 510(k) clearance of Tigereye, a next-generation CTO crossing system utilizing Avinger’s proprietary image-guided technology platform. Tigereye is a product line extension of Avinger’s Ocelot family of image-guided CTO crossing catheters. Its design elements include an upgrade of the image capture rate to provide high definition, real-time intravascular imaging similar to the company’s Pantheris image-guided atherectomy system and a user-controlled deflectable tip designed to assist in steerability within the lumen. Tigereye also features a new distal tip configuration with faster rotational speeds designed to penetrate challenging lesions. The Tigereye catheter has a working length of 140 cm and 5 French sheath compatibility for treatment of lesions in the peripheral vessels both above and below the knee. The product became available in October 2020 for first cases in the U.S on a limited basis and launched commercially in January 2021.
Current treatments for PAD, including bypass surgery, can be costly and may result in complications, high levels of post-surgery pain, and lengthy hospital stays and recovery times. Minimally invasive, or endovascular, treatments for PAD include stenting, angioplasty, and atherectomy, which is the use of a catheter-based device for the removal of plaque. These treatments all have limitations in their safety or efficacy profiles and frequently result in recurrence of the disease, also known as restenosis. We believe one of the main contributing factors to high restenosis rates for PAD patients treated with endovascular technologies is the amount of vascular injury that occurs during an intervention. Specifically, these treatments often disrupt the membrane between the outermost layers of the artery, which is referred to as the external elastic lamina, or EEL.
We believe our Lumivascular platform is the only technology that offers real-time visualization of the inside of the artery during PAD treatment through the use of optical coherence tomography, or OCT, a high resolution, light-based, radiation-free imaging technology. Our Lumivascular platform provides physicians with real-time OCT images from the inside of an artery, and we believe Ocelot and Pantheris are the first products to offer intravascular visualization during CTO crossing and atherectomy, respectively. We believe this approach will significantly improve patient outcomes by providing physicians with a clearer picture of the artery using radiation-free image guidance during treatment, enabling them to better differentiate between plaque and healthy arterial structures. Our Lumivascular platform is designed to improve patient safety by enabling physicians to direct treatment towards the plaque, while avoiding damage to healthy portions of the artery.
During the first quarter of 2015, we completed enrollment of patients in VISION, a clinical trial designed to support our August 2015 510(k) submission to the FDA for our Pantheris atherectomy device. VISION was designed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of Pantheris to perform atherectomy using intravascular imaging and successfully achieved all primary and secondary safety and efficacy endpoints. We believe the data from VISION allows us to demonstrate that avoiding damage to healthy arterial structures, and in particular disruption of the external elastic lamina, which is the membrane between the outermost layers of the artery, reduces the likelihood of restenosis, or re-narrowing, of the diseased artery. Although the original VISION study protocol was not designed to follow patients beyond six months, we worked with 18 of the VISION sites to re-solicit consent from previous clinical trial patients in order for them to evaluate patient outcomes through 12 and 24 months following initial treatment. Data collection for the remaining patients from participating sites was completed in May 2017, and we released the final 12- and 24-month results for a total of 89 patients in July 2017.
During the fourth quarter of 2017, we began enrolling patients in INSIGHT, a clinical trial designed to support a submission to the FDA to expand the indication for our Pantheris atherectomy device to include in-stent restenosis. Patient enrollment began in October 2017 and is expected to continue through 2021. Patient outcomes will be evaluated at thirty days, six months and one year following treatment. We plan to submit a 510(k) application with the FDA seeking a specific indication for treating in-stent restenosis with Pantheris once the trial is fully enrolled and follow-up data through six months are available and analyzed.
We continue development efforts on the next-generation of the Lightbox imaging console, the Lightbox 3, which is being designed to provide enhanced real-time video imaging capabilities in a much smaller form factor and at a lower cost. We anticipate filing a 510(k) submission for the Lightbox 3 during 2021.
We focus our direct sales force, marketing efforts and promotional activities on interventional cardiologists, vascular surgeons and interventional radiologists. We also work on developing strong relationships with physicians and hospitals that we have identified as key opinion leaders. Although our sales and marketing efforts are directed at these physicians because they are the primary users of our technology, we consider the hospitals and medical centers where the procedure is performed to be our customers, as they typically are responsible for purchasing our products. We are designing additional future products to be compatible with our Lumivascular platform, which we expect to enhance the value proposition for hospitals to invest in our technology. Pantheris qualifies for existing reimbursement codes currently utilized by other atherectomy products, further facilitating adoption of our products.
We have assembled a team with extensive medical device development and commercialization experience in both start-up and large, multi-national medical device companies. We assemble all of our products at our manufacturing facility but certain critical processes, such as coating and sterilization, are performed by outside vendors. We expect our current manufacturing facility in California, will be sufficient through at least 2021. We generated revenues of $7.9 million in 2018, $9.1 million in 2019 and $8.8 million in 2020. The growth experienced in 2019 was largely due to our next-generation Pantheris and the launch of Pantheris SV. The decline in 2020 was primarily due to the adverse effects of COVID-19 on our customers as hospitals deferred elective procedures.
Recent Developments
COVID-19 Update
As a result of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, experienced a significant decline in sales in the second quarter of 2020, particularly as individuals, as well as hospitals and other medical providers, deferred elective procedures in response to COVID-19. Starting in the third quarter of 2020, we experienced a rebound of sales as practitioners began to once again perform elective procedures. While certain jurisdictions are easing restrictions on performing elective procedures, we cannot be certain that other jurisdictions in the United States will do so in the near future. Furthermore, some jurisdictions have experienced and continue to experience a resurgence in COVID-19 cases, which has prompted certain hospitals and other medical providers in such areas to again defer elective procedures or further prolong or reinstate existing restrictions on such procedures. If other jurisdictions experience a resurgence in COVID-19 cases, these jurisdictions may also prolong restrictions on elective procedures. This situation has created a significant amount of volatility in the medical industry which makes future developments and results difficult to predict. Consequently, it is unclear whether any reduction in sales is temporary and whether such sales may be recoverable in the future. In addition to the effects on sales, we have also experienced delays in site initiation and patient enrollment for our clinical studies. If we are unable to successfully complete these or other clinical studies, our business and results of operations could be harmed.
We have undertaken and continue to evaluate further action to manage our available cash and other resources to help mitigate the effects of COVID-19 on our business, including by adjusting production to match demand for our products and reducing discretionary costs. During the second quarter of 2020 we reduced base salaries for all of our non-manufacturing employees by 20% and reduction of hours worked by our manufacturing workers by 20%. While some measures, including salaries and hours worked, have returned to prior levels, we will continue to employ certain actions to manage our resources in the foreseeable future. In addition, there can be no assurance that such strategies will be successful in effectively managing our resources and mitigating the negative impact of the COVID-19 on our business and operating results. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic and responses thereto have resulted in reduced consumer and investor confidence, instability in the credit and financial markets, volatile corporate profits, and reduced business and consumer spending, which could increase the cost of capital and/or limit the availability of capital to the Company in the future.
On March 27, 2020, the President of the United States signed the Coronavirus Aid Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act into law. The CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions relating to refundable payroll tax credits, deferment of employer side social security payments, net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property.
We applied for and, on April 23, 2020, received loan proceeds of $2.3 million (the “Loan”) pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) under the CARES Act, (see Financing and Equity below for more details).
On June 5, 2020, the President of the United States signed the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act (the “PPPFA”) into law. The PPPFA gives borrowers of a PPP loan more flexibility and time to spend the loan proceeds and allows the funds to be used on broader categories of expenses while still qualifying for loan forgiveness. We applied for forgiveness of the PPP loan during the fourth quarter of 2020. While we believe that we have complied with the requirements to obtain forgiveness, there can be no assurance that any or all of the PPP loan amount will be forgiven.
We also continue to evaluate and may still pursue additional programs under the CARES Act or other potential legislation, but there is no guarantee that we will meet any eligibility requirements to participate in such programs or, even if we are able to participate, that such programs will provide meaningful benefit to our business.
Nasdaq Delisting Notice
As previously reported, on March 10, 2020, Avinger, Inc. (the “Company”) received a letter from the Listing Qualifications Department (the “Staff”) of The Nasdaq Stock Market, LLC (“Nasdaq”) notifying the Company that the Company was not in compliance with Nasdaq Listing Rule 5550(a)(2) (the “Minimum Bid Price Requirement”), as the minimum bid price for the Company’s listed securities was less than $1.00 for the previous 30 consecutive business days. The Company initially had a period of 180 calendar days, or until September 8, 2020, to regain compliance with the Minimum Bid Price Requirement.
Also as previously reported, on April 20, 2020, the Company received notification from Nasdaq indicating that Nasdaq filed an immediately effective rule change with the SEC on April 16, 2020, pursuant to which the compliance periods for bid price and market value of publicly held shares requirements were tolled through June 30, 2020. As a result, the Company had until November 20, 2020 to regain compliance with Nasdaq’s Minimum Bid Price Requirement.
The Company did not regain compliance with the Minimum Bid Price Requirement by November 20, 2020. In accordance with Nasdaq Listing Rule 5810(c)(3)(A), the Company provided written notice to Nasdaq of its intent to cure the deficiency and, on November 24, 2020, the Company received notice that Nasdaq granted the Company an additional 180 calendar days, or until May 19, 2021, to regain compliance.
On January 26, 2021, the Company received a letter from Nasdaq notifying the Company that the Staff had determined that the closing bid price of the Company’s common stock had been at $1.00 per share or greater for at least 10 consecutive business days and, accordingly, that the Company had regained compliance with the Minimum Bid Price Requirement for continued listing on the Nasdaq Stock Market and that the matter is now closed. While the Company has regained compliance with the Minimum Bid Price Requirement, there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to maintain compliance with the Minimum Bid Price Requirement in the future.
Financing and Equity
On June 19, 2019, the Company’s Board of Directors approved an amendment to the Company’s amended and restated certificate of incorporation to effect an additional 1-for-10 reverse stock split of the Company’s common stock. The reverse stock split became effective on June 21, 2019. The par value of the common stock and convertible preferred stock was not adjusted as a result of the reverse stock split. All common stock, stock options, and restricted stock units, and per share amounts in this document have been retroactively adjusted for all periods presented to give effect to the reverse stock splits.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our net loss and comprehensive loss was $19.0 million and $19.5 million, respectively. We have not been profitable since inception, and as of December 31, 2020, our accumulated deficit was $367.3 million. Since inception, we have financed our operations primarily through private and public placements of our preferred and common securities and, to a lesser extent, debt financing arrangements.
In September 2015, we entered into a Term Loan Agreement, or Loan Agreement, with CRG Partners III L.P. and certain of its affiliated funds, collectively CRG, under which we were able to borrow up to $50.0 million on or before March 29, 2017, subject to certain terms and conditions. We borrowed $30.0 million on September 22, 2015 and an additional $10.0 million on June 15, 2016 under the Loan Agreement. Contemporaneously with the execution of the Loan Agreement, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with CRG, pursuant to which CRG purchased 870 shares of our common stock on September 22, 2015 at a price of $5,596.40 per share, which represents the 10-day average of closing prices of our common stock ending on September 21, 2015. Pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement, we filed a registration statement covering the resale of the shares sold to CRG and must comply with certain affirmative covenants during the time that such registration statement remains in effect.
On February 14, 2018, we entered into a Series A preferred stock Purchase Agreement (the “Series A Purchase Agreement”) with CRG, pursuant to which it agreed to convert $38.0 million of the outstanding principal amount of its senior secured term loan (plus the back-end fee and prepayment premium applicable thereto) under the Loan Agreement into a newly authorized Series A preferred stock. As discussed in the section of this report titled “Dividend Policy,” the holders of Series A preferred stock are entitled to receive annual accruing dividends at a rate of 8%, payable in additional shares of Series A preferred stock or cash, at our option. The shares of Series A preferred stock have no voting rights and rank senior to all other classes and series of the Company’s equity in terms of repayment and certain other rights.
We entered into several amendments to the Term Loan Agreement (the “Amendments”) with CRG since September 2015, the most recent of which, was completed on January 22, 2021. The Amendments terms, among other things: (1) extended the interest-only period through December 31, 2023; (2) extended the period during which the Company may elect to pay a portion of interest in payment-in-kind, or PIK, interest payments through December 31, 2023 so long as no default has occurred and is continuing; (3) permitted the Company to make its entire interest payments in PIK interest payments for through December 31, 2023 so long as no default has occurred and is continuing; (4) extended the maturity date to December 31, 2025; (5) reduced the minimum liquidity requirement to $3.5 million at all times; (6) eliminated the minimum revenue covenant for 2018, 2019 and 2020; (7) reduced the minimum revenue covenant to $8 million for 2021, $10 million for 2022; (8) added minimum revenue covenants for of $12 million for 2023, $14.5 million for 2024 and $17 million for 2025; (9) changed the date under the on-going stand-alone representation regarding no “Material Adverse Change” to December 31, 2020; (10) amended the on-going stand-alone representation and stand-alone event of default regarding Material Adverse Change such that any adverse change in or effect upon the revenue of the Company and its subsidiaries due to the outbreak of COVID-19 will not constitute a Material Adverse Change; and (11) provided CRG with board observer rights.
On March 2, 2020, we entered into Amendment No. 3 to the Term Loan Agreement (the “Amendment No. 3 Loan Agreement”) with CRG. Under its terms, the Amendment No. 3 Loan Agreement, among other things: (1) extended the period during which the Company may elect to pay its entire interest payments in PIK interest payments through June 30, 2021; and (2) reduced the minimum revenue covenants to $10 million for 2020, $12 million for 2021, and $15 million for 2022. On May 12, 202, we entered into Amendment No. 4 to the Term Loan Agreement (the “Amendment No. 4 Loan Agreement”) with CRG which, among other things, waived the Company’s requirement to comply with the minimum revenue covenant for 2020.
On March 7, 2019, we filed a universal shelf registration statement (the “Shelf Registration Statement”) to offer up to $50.0 million of our securities. We have established, and may in the future establish, “at-the-market” programs pursuant to which we may offer and sell shares of our common stock pursuant to the Shelf Registration Statement. Under the Shelf Registration Statement, on August 26, 2019, we completed a public offering of 3,813,559 shares of common stock at an offering price of $1.18 per share. As a result, we received net proceeds of approximately $3.8 million after underwriting discounts, commissions, legal and accounting fees and the conversion price of the outstanding shares of Series B preferred stock, issued in our February 2018 offering, was reduced to $1.18 per share as a result.
On January 31, 2020, we completed a public offering of 6,428,572 shares of common stock at an offering price of $0.70 per share. As a result, we received net proceeds of approximately $3.9 million after underwriting discounts, commissions, legal and accounting fees, and other ancillary expenses. Due to anti-dilution provisions, the conversion price of the outstanding shares of Series B preferred stock, which was issued in our February 2018 offering, was reduced to $0.70 per share.
On April 23, 2020, we received loan proceeds of $2.3 million pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program under the CARES Act. The Loan, which was in the form of a promissory note, dated April 20, 2020, between the Company and Silicon Valley Bank as the lender, matures on April 20, 2022 and bears interest at a fixed rate of 1% per annum, payable monthly commencing in six months. Under the terms of the PPP and the PPPFA, the principal may be forgiven if the Loan proceeds are used for qualifying expenses as described in the CARES Act, such as payroll costs, benefits mortgage interest, rent, and utilities. No assurance can be provided that the Company will obtain forgiveness of the Loan in whole or in part. The Company may be required to repay some or all of the Loan due to changes or different interpretations of the PPP requirements that continue to evolve.
The Promissory Note evidencing the PPP Loan contains customary representations, warranties, and covenants for this type of transaction, including customary events of default relating to, among other things, payment defaults and breaches of representations and warranties or other provisions of the Promissory Note. The occurrence of an event of default may result in, among other things, the Company becoming obligated to repay all amounts outstanding. We continue to evaluate and may still apply for additional programs under the CARES Act, there is no guarantee that we will meet any eligibility requirements to participate in such programs or, even if we are able to participate, that such programs will provide meaningful benefit to our business.
On April 30, 2020, we completed a public offering of 12,600,000 shares of common stock at an offering price of $0.25 per share. On May 6, 2020 we issued an additional 1,890,000 shares of common stock at the same offering price pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriter’s over-allotment option in connection with the aforementioned offering. As a result, we received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $3.0 million after underwriting discounts, commissions, legal and accounting fees, and other ancillary expenses. Due to anti-dilution provisions, the conversion price of the outstanding shares of Series B preferred stock, which was issued in our February 2018 offering, was reduced to $0.25 per share.
On June 26, 2020, we completed a public offering of 20,000,000 shares of common stock at an offering price of $0.27 per share. On July 9, 2020 we issued an additional 3,000,000 shares of common stock at the same offering price pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriter’s over-allotment option in connection with the aforementioned offering resulting in $0.7 million of additional net proceeds. As a result, we received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $5.5 million including the overallotment option and after underwriting discounts, commissions, legal and accounting fees, and other ancillary expenses.
On August 6, 2020, under the Shelf Registration Statement, we completed a public offering of 15,789,474 shares of common stock at an offering price of $0.38 per share. On August 11, 2020 we issued an additional 2,368,421 shares of common stock at the same offering price pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriter’s over-allotment option in connection with the aforementioned offering. As a result, we received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $6.2 million after underwriting discounts, commissions, legal and accounting fees, and other ancillary expenses.
On August 25, 2020, under the Shelf Registration Statement, we completed a public offering of 11,063,830 shares of common stock at an offering price of $0.47 per share. On September 1, 2020 we issued an additional 1,000,000 shares of common stock at the same offering price pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriter’s over-allotment option in connection with the aforementioned offering. As a result, we received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $5.1 million after underwriting discounts, commissions, legal and accounting fees, and other ancillary expenses.
On February 2, 2021, under the Shelf Registration Statement, we completed a bought deal offering of 10,000,000 shares of common stock at an offering price of $1.44 per share. As a result, we received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $13.0 million after underwriting discounts, commissions, legal and accounting fees, and other ancillary expenses.
Components of our Results of Operations
Revenues
All of our revenues are currently derived from sales of our various PAD catheters in the United States and select international markets, Lightbox consoles, as well as related services. We expect our revenues to increase in 2021 due to the availability of our Tigereye launch in late 2020 and easing of restrictions on elective procedures due to the diminishing impact of COVID-19. No single customer accounted for more than 10% of our revenues during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Revenues may fluctuate from quarter to quarter due to a variety of factors including capital equipment purchasing patterns that are typically increased towards the end of the calendar year and decreased in the first quarter. In addition, during the first quarter, our results can be harmed by adverse weather and by resetting of annual patient healthcare insurance plan deductibles, both of which may cause patients to delay elective procedures. In the third quarter, the number of elective procedures nationwide is historically lower than other quarters throughout the year, which we believe is primarily attributable to the summer vacations of physicians and their patients.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin
Cost of revenues consists primarily of costs related to manufacturing overhead, materials and direct labor. We expense all warranty costs and inventory provisions as cost of revenues. We periodically write-down inventory for estimated excess, obsolete and non-sellable inventories based on assumptions about future demand, past usage, changes to manufacturing processes and overall market conditions. A significant portion of our cost of revenues currently consists of manufacturing overhead costs. These overhead costs include the cost of quality assurance, material procurement, inventory control, facilities, equipment and operations supervision and management. We expect overhead costs as a percentage of revenues to become less significant as our production volume increases. Cost of revenues also includes depreciation expense for production equipment, depreciation and related maintenance expense for placed Lightboxes held by customers and certain direct costs such as those incurred for shipping our products.
We calculate gross margin as gross profit divided by revenues. Our gross margin has been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, primarily production volumes, manufacturing costs, product yields, headcount, charges for excess and obsolete inventories and cost-reduction strategies. We intend to use our design, engineering and manufacturing capabilities to further advance and improve the efficiency of our manufacturing processes, which we believe will reduce costs and increase our gross margin. In the future, we may seek to manufacture certain of our products outside the United States to further reduce costs. Our gross margin will likely fluctuate from quarter to quarter as we continue to introduce new products and sales channels, and as we adopt new manufacturing processes and technologies.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development, or R&D, expenses consist primarily of engineering, product development, clinical and regulatory affairs, consulting services, materials, depreciation and other costs associated with products and technologies in development. These expenses include employee compensation, including stock-based compensation, supplies, materials, quality assurance expenses allocated to R&D programs, consulting, related travel expenses and facilities expenses. Clinical expenses include clinical trial design, clinical site reimbursement, data management, travel expenses and the cost of manufacturing products for clinical trials. We expect R&D expenses to vary over time depending on the level and timing of our new product development efforts, as well as our clinical development, clinical trial and other related activities.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative, or SG&A, expenses consist primarily of compensation for personnel, including stock-based compensation, selling and marketing functions, physician education programs, business development, finance, information technology and human resource functions. Other SG&A expenses include commissions, training, travel expenses, educational and promotional activities, marketing initiatives, market research and analysis, conferences and trade shows, professional services fees, including legal, audit and tax fees, insurance costs and general corporate expenses. We expect SG&A expenses to increase as we expand our commercial efforts whilst navigating through the effects of COVID-19.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net consists primarily of interest incurred on our outstanding indebtedness and non-cash interest related to the amortization of debt discount and issuance costs associated with our various debt agreements.
Other Income, net
Other income, net primarily consists of gains and losses resulting from the remeasurement of foreign exchange transactions and in 2019, sublease income.
Results of Operations:
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues. Revenues decreased $0.4 million, or 4%, to $8.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease reflects the effects of COVID-19 prompting hospitals and other medical providers to defer elective procedures. This decline was partially offset by increases in revenue from sales of Pantheris SV product, which was released commercially in July 2019.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin. Cost of revenues decreased $0.1 million, or 2%, to $6.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily attributable to the decrease in revenues for the same period.
Gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to 30% compared to 31% in the prior year. The decrease in gross margin was primarily a result of the decline in revenues due to COVID-19 and higher excess and obsolete charges on inventory. Stock-based compensation expense within cost of revenues totaled $0.1 million for both the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Research and Development Expenses. R&D expenses remained flat in comparison to the year ended December 31, 2019. We experienced higher project spending for next generation products, including the Lightbox 3 imaging console, offset by decreases in compensation expense. Stock-based compensation expense within R&D totaled $0.5 million for both the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. SG&A expenses decreased $2.2 million, or 13%, to $14.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in compensation costs resulting from expense reduction measures, decreased variable compensation and lower stock-based compensation. Stock-based compensation expense within SG&A totaled $0.9 million and $1.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Interest Expense, net. Interest expense, net increased $0.5 million, or 39%, to a net expense of $1.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the higher CRG loan balance from interest being compounded and lower interest income as compared to the prior year period, due to the decline in the money market interest rates during the period.
Other income, net. Other income, net primarily consists of gains and losses resulting from the remeasurement of foreign exchange transactions and other miscellaneous income and expenses. During the year ended December 31, 2019, this also consisted of sublease income. Our subleasing arrangement of a portion of the Company’s facilities was concluded during 2019. Consequently, the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted only of net gains due to remeasurement of foreign exchange transactions resulting in a decrease of approximately $1.0 million or 95%.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $22.2 million and an accumulated deficit of $367.3 million, compared to cash and cash equivalents of $10.9 million and an accumulated deficit of $348.3 million as of December 31, 2019. The Company expects to incur losses for the foreseeable future. The Company believes that its cash and cash equivalents of $22.2 million at December 31, 2020, together with the approximately $13.0 million net proceeds from the February 2021 equity financing (see Equity Financings below), and expected revenues, debt and financing activities and funds from operations will be sufficient to allow the Company to fund its current operations through 2022. We do not know when or if our operations will generate sufficient cash to fund our ongoing operations. Additional debt financing, if available, may involve covenants restricting our operations or our ability to incur additional debt. Any additional debt financing or additional equity that we raise may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders and require significant debt service payments, which divert resources from other activities. Additional financing may not be available at all, or if available, may not be in amounts or on terms acceptable to us. If we are unable to obtain additional financing, we may be required to delay the development, commercialization and marketing of our products and we may be required to significantly scale back our business and operations.
In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic and responses thereto have resulted in reduced consumer and investor confidence, instability in the credit and financial markets, volatile corporate profits, restrictions on elective medical procedures, and reduced business and consumer spending, which could increase the cost of capital and/or limit the availability of capital to the Company. While we have taken certain actions to manage our available cash and other resources to mitigate the effects of COVID-19 on our business, there can be no assurance that such strategies will be successful in mitigating the negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our liquidity and capital resources.
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through net proceeds from the issuance of our preferred stock and debt financings, our “at-the-market” program, our initial public offering, or IPO, our follow-on public offerings and warrant issuances. The warrants issued pursuant to the Series B Purchase Agreement entered into in connection with the Series B preferred stock follow-on in February 2018, or the Series B Offering, prohibited us from entering into certain transactions involving the issuance of securities for a price determined by reference to the trading price of our common stock or otherwise subject to modification following the date of issuance, in each case for a period of three years from the closing date of the Series B Offering (and excluding purchases pursuant to the Series B Purchase Agreement, which may be made on the 120 day anniversary of the closing date of the offering).
Equity Financings
On March 7, 2019, we filed a universal shelf registration statement (the “Shelf Registration Statement”) to offer up to $50.0 million of our securities. We have established, and may in the future establish, “at-the-market” programs pursuant to which we may offer and sell shares of our common stock pursuant to the Shelf Registration Statement. Due to the SEC’s “baby shelf rules,” which prohibit companies with a public float of less than $75 million from issuing securities under a shelf registration statement in excess of one-third of such company’s public float in a twelve-month period, we are only able to issue a limited number of shares using the Shelf Registration Statement at this time. Under the Shelf Registration Statement, on August 26, 2019, we completed a public offering of 3,813,559 shares of common stock at an offering price of $1.18 per share. As a result, we received net proceeds of approximately $3.8 million after underwriting discounts, commissions, legal and accounting fees. Due to anti-dilution provisions, the conversion price of the outstanding shares of Series B preferred stock, which was issued in our February 2018 offering, was reduced to $1.18 per share.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we received proceeds of approximately $8.0 million from the issuance of 1,998,079 shares of common stock related to warrant exercises associated with the Series C preferred stock.
On January 31, 2020, we completed a public offering of 6,428,572 shares of common stock at an offering price of $0.70 per share. As a result, we received net proceeds of approximately $3.9 million after underwriting discounts, commissions, legal and accounting fees, and other ancillary expenses. Due to anti-dilution provisions, the conversion price of the outstanding shares of Series B preferred stock, which was issued in our February 2018 offering, was reduced to $0.70 per share.
On April 30, 2020, we completed a public offering of 12,600,000 shares of common stock at an offering price of $0.25 per share. On May 6, 2020 we issued an additional 1,890,000 shares of common stock at the same offering price pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriter’s over-allotment option in connection with the aforementioned offering. As a result, we received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $3.0 million after underwriting discounts, commissions, legal and accounting fees, and other ancillary expenses. Due to anti-dilution provisions, the conversion price of the outstanding shares of Series B preferred stock, which was issued in our February 2018 offering, was reduced to $0.25 per share.
On June 26, 2020, we completed a public offering of 20,000,000 shares of common stock at an offering price of $0.27 per share. On July 9, 2020 we issued an additional 3,000,000 shares of common stock at the same offering price pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriter’s over-allotment option in connection with the aforementioned offering resulting in $0.7 million of additional net proceeds. As a result, we received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $5.5 million including the overallotment option and after underwriting discounts, commissions, legal and accounting fees, and other ancillary expenses.
On August 6, 2020, under the Shelf Registration Statement, we completed a public offering of 15,789,474 shares of common stock at an offering price of $0.38 per share. On August 11, 2020 we issued an additional 2,368,421 shares of common stock at the same offering price pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriter’s over-allotment option in connection with the aforementioned offering. As a result, we received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $6.2 million after underwriting discounts, commissions, legal and accounting fees, and other ancillary expenses.
On August 25, 2020, under the Shelf Registration Statement, we completed a public offering of 11,063,830 shares of common stock at an offering price of $0.47 per share. On September 1, 2020 we issued an additional 1,000,000 shares of common stock at the same offering price pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriter’s over-allotment option in connection with the aforementioned offering. As a result, we received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $5.1 million after underwriting discounts, commissions, legal and accounting fees, and other ancillary expenses.
On February 2, 2021, under the Shelf Registration Statement, we completed a bought deal offering of 10,000,000 shares of common stock at an offering price of $1.44 per share. As a result, we received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $13.0 million after underwriting discounts, commissions, legal and accounting fees, and other ancillary expenses.
CRG Loan
On March 2, 2020, the Company and CRG further amended the Loan Agreement to change the date upon which cash payments for interest will commence from the first quarter of 2020 to the third quarter of 2021. No cash payments for principal will be made until the final two years of the loan, which matures in June 2023. On May 12, 2020, the Company and CRG entered into another amendment to waive the Company’s requirement to comply with the minimum required revenue covenant for 2020 and granted to Company the ability to optionally prepay in whole or in part the outstanding principal amount of the Loans for the Redemption Price. The total CRG Loan amount, shown as borrowings on the balance sheet as of December 31, 2020, is $10.6 million. However, upon maturity of the debt in December 2025, the Company will be obligated to pay $19.4 million under the CRG Loan, which includes future interest to be accrued but not paid in cash as well as a $2.2 million back-end fee which is being accreted to the maturity date. Refer to Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Footnote 13 for additional details.
PPP Loan
On April 23, 2020, we received loan proceeds of $2.3 million pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program under the CARES Act. The Loan, which was in the form of a promissory note, dated April 20, 2020, between the Company and Silicon Valley Bank as the lender, matures on April 20, 2022 and bears interest at a fixed rate of 1% per annum, payable monthly commencing one month after the Small Business Association (“SBA”) delivers conclusions on the amount of the loan to be forgiven. The conclusion from the SBA will be delivered once an audit of our application for forgiveness along with ancillary materials provided has been completed. Under the terms of the PPP, the principal may be forgiven if the Loan proceeds are used for qualifying expenses as described in the CARES Act and the PPPFA, such as payroll costs, benefits mortgage interest, rent, and utilities. No assurance can be provided that the Company will obtain forgiveness of the Loan in whole or in part. In addition, details of the PPP continue to evolve regarding which companies are qualified to receive loans pursuant to the PPP and on what terms, and the Company may be required to repay some or all of the Loan due to these changes or different interpretations of the PPP requirements. We submitted our application for forgiveness to the SBA in December 2020.
The Promissory Note evidencing the PPP Loan contains customary representations, warranties, and covenants for this type of transaction, including customary events of default relating to, among other things, payment defaults and breaches of representations and warranties or other provisions of the Promissory Note. The occurrence of an event of default may result in, among other things, the Company becoming obligated to repay all amounts outstanding. We continue to evaluate and may still apply for additional programs under the CARES Act or other legislation passed into law from time to time, however, there is no guarantee that we will meet any eligibility requirements to participate in such programs or, even if we are able to participate, that such programs will provide meaningful benefit to our business.
Cash Flows
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $14.8 million, consisting primarily of a net loss of $19.0 million and an increase in net operating assets of approximately $0.6 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $4.7 million. Non-cash charges largely related to stock-based compensation of $1.5 million, non-cash interest expense and other charges of $1.5 million, depreciation and amortization of $0.9 million and provisions for excess and obsolete inventory of $0.5 million. The increase in net operating assets was primarily due to the increase in inventory and a decrease in accrued compensation.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $17.3 million, consisted primarily of a net loss of $19.5 million and an increase in net operating assets of $2.0 million, offset by non-cash charges of $4.2 million. Non-cash charges largely related to stock-based compensation of $2.1 million, non-cash interest expense of $1.3 million, and depreciation and amortization of $0.9 million. The increase in net operating assets was primarily due to decreases in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other current liabilities and increases in inventory and accounts receivable; partially offset by an increase in accrued compensation.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $65,000 consisting of proceeds from the sale of property and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $70,000 consisting of purchases of property and equipment of $88,000, partially offset by proceeds from the sale of property and equipment.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 of $26.0 million primarily relates to 23.6 million of proceeds from the issuance of common stock in our public offerings, net of various issuance costs and proceeds of $2.3 million from borrowings pursuant to the PPP under the CARES Act.
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2019 of $11.9 million primarily related to proceeds of $8.0 million from warrant exercises and net proceeds of $3.8 million from the issuance of common stock in a public offering, net of various issuance costs.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We currently have no off-balance sheet arrangements, such as structured finance, special purpose entities, or variable interest entities.
Contractual Obligations
Our principal obligations consist of the operating lease for our facilities, our Loan Agreement with CRG, our PPP Loan and non-cancelable purchase commitments. The following table sets out, as of December 31, 2020, our contractual obligations due by period (in thousands):
The total CRG Loan amount, shown as borrowings on the balance sheet as of December 31, 2020, is $10.6 million. The contractual obligation in the table above of $19.4 million under the CRG Loan takes the most recent amendment into account when determining future obligations which includes future interest to be accrued but not paid in cash as well as a $2.2 million back-end fee to be paid in December 2025 upon maturity of the CRG Loan which is being accreted. Refer to Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Footnote 13 for details.
Under the terms of the PPP, the principal may be forgiven if the Loan proceeds are used for qualifying expenses as described in the CARES Act and the PPPFA, such as payroll costs, benefits mortgage interest, rent, and utilities. No assurance can be provided that the Company will obtain forgiveness of the Loan in whole or in part.
CRG
For more information, see Part II, Item 7 “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Lease Agreements
Through November 30, 2019, we maintained our principal executive offices, comprising 44,200 square feet in two buildings in Redwood City, California, under a lease agreement that was originally to expire in November 2019. On April 1, 2019, we entered into an amendment to the lease which extended the lease term for an additional period of five years subsequent to the original expiration of November 30, 2019. As amended, the lease will expire on November 30, 2024. Under the terms of the amendment, we are obligated to pay approximately $5.8 million in base rent payments through November 2024, beginning on December 1, 2019. Our facility houses our research and development, sales, marketing, manufacturing, finance and administrative activities.
On October 19, 2017, we entered into an agreement to sublease one of our facilities. The sublease commenced on December 1, 2017, and expired on November 15, 2019 (which was 15 days prior to the expiration of the facility lease). In addition to the base rent, the sublessee paid for the Landlord’s operating expenses and property taxes due and payable with respect to the subleased facility. We recorded $1.1 million of sublease payments received in other income on the statement of operations and comprehensive loss for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions for the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 of our financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Revenue Recognition
The Company’s revenues are derived from (1) sale of Lightbox consoles, (2) sale of disposables, which consist of catheters and accessories, and (3) sale of customer service contracts and maintenance. The Company sells its products directly to hospitals and medical centers as well as through distributors. The Company accounts for a contract with a customer when there is a legally enforceable contract between the Company and the customer, the rights of the parties are identified, the contract has commercial substance, and collectability of the contract consideration is probable. The Company’s revenues are measured based on consideration specified in the contract with each customer, net of any sales incentives and taxes collected from customers that are remitted to government authorities. For all sales, the Company uses either a signed agreement or a binding purchase order as evidence of an arrangement. The Company’s revenue recognition policies generally result in revenue recognition at the following points:
1.
Lightbox console sales: Provided all other criteria for revenue recognition have been met, the Company recognizes revenue for Lightbox console sales directly to end customers when delivery and acceptance occurs, which is defined as receipt by the Company of an executed form that the installation process is complete.
2.
Sales of disposables: Disposable revenues consist of sales of the Company’s catheters and accessories and are recognized when the product has shipped, risk of loss and title has passed to the customer and collectability is reasonably assured.
3.
Service revenue: Service contract revenue consists of preventative maintenance, upgrades, and service contracts. Service contracts are recognized ratably over the term of the service period and maintenance contract revenue is recognized as work is performed. To date, service revenue has been insignificant.
The Company offers its customers the ability to purchase or lease the Lightbox console. In addition, the Company provides a Lightbox under a limited commercial evaluation program to allow accounts to install and utilize the Lightbox for a limited trial period. When a Lightbox is placed under a lease agreement or under a commercial evaluation program, the Company retains title to the equipment and it remains capitalized on its balance sheet under property and equipment. Depreciation expense on these placed Lightboxes is recorded to cost of revenues on a straight-line basis. The costs to maintain these placed Lightboxes are charged to cost of revenues as incurred.
The Company evaluates its lease and commercial evaluation program agreements and accounts for these contracts under the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 842, Leases and ASU No. 2014 09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606). The guidance requires arrangement consideration to be allocated between a lease deliverable and a non-lease deliverable based upon the relative selling-price of the deliverables.
The Company assessed whether the embedded lease is an operating lease or sales-type lease. Based on the Company’s assessment of the guidance and given that any payments under the lease agreements are dependent upon contingent future sales, it was determined that collectability of the minimum lease payments is not reasonably predictable. Accordingly, the Company concluded the embedded lease did not meet the criteria of a sales-type lease and accounts for it as an operating lease. The Company recognizes revenue allocated to the lease as the contingent disposable product purchases are delivered and are included in revenues within the statement of operations and comprehensive loss.
For sales through distributors, the Company recognizes revenue when control of the product transfers from the Company to the distributor. The distributors are responsible for all marketing, sales, training and warranty in their respective territories. The standard terms and conditions contained in the Company’s distribution agreements do not provide price protection or stock rotation rights to any of its distributors. In addition, its distributor agreements do not allow the distributor to return or exchange products, and the distributor is obligated to pay the Company upon invoice regardless of its ability to resell the product.
Inventories
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined using the first-in, first-out method for all inventories. The Company’s policy is to write down inventory that has expired or become obsolete, inventory that has a cost basis in excess of its expected net realizable value, and inventory in excess of expected requirements. At each balance sheet date, management evaluates inventories for excess quantities, and obsolescence. This evaluation by management includes analysis of historical sales levels by product, projections of future demand, the risk of technological or competitive obsolescence for products, general market conditions, as well as the feasibility of reworking or using excess or obsolete products or components in the production or assembly of other products that are not obsolete or for which there are not excess quantities in inventory. To the extent that management determines there are excess or obsolete inventory, management adjusts the carrying value to estimated net realizable value. When quantities on hand exceed sales forecasts, a write-down is recorded for such excess inventories with a corresponding charge to cost of revenues. The estimate of excess quantities is subjective and primarily dependent on the estimates of future demand for a particular product. Changes in assumptions of product demand could have a significant impact on the amount of write-down recorded. Inventory used in clinical trials is expensed at the time of production and recorded as research and development expense.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation for the Company includes amortization related to all stock options and restricted stock units (“RSUs”), based on the grant-date estimated fair value. The fair value of stock options is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the vesting period of the award. The Company measures the fair value of RSUs using the closing stock price of a share of the Company’s common stock on the grant date and is recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the vesting period of the award. As allowed under ASU No. 2016-09, Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting, we account for forfeitures as they occur.