ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Business Overview
We develop, market, sell, and support software and integrated solutions for video and audio content creation, management and distribution. We are a leading technology provider that powers the media and entertainment industry. We do this by providing an open and efficient platform for digital media, along with a comprehensive set of tools and workflow solutions. Our solutions are used in production and post-production facilities; film studios; network, affiliate, independent and cable television stations; recording studios; live-sound performance venues; advertising agencies; government and educational institutions; corporate communications departments; and by independent video and audio creative professionals, as well as aspiring professionals. Projects produced using our tools, platform, and ecosystem include feature films, television programming, live events, news broadcasts, sports productions, commercials, music, video, and other digital media content. With over one million creative users and thousands of enterprise clients relying on our technology platforms and solutions around the world, Avid enables the industry to thrive in today’s connected media and entertainment world.
Our mission is to empower media creators with innovative technology and collaborative tools to entertain, inform, educate, and enlighten the world. Our clients rely on Avid to create prestigious and award-winning feature films, music recordings, television shows, live concerts, sporting events, and news broadcasts. Avid has been honored for technological innovation with 18 Emmy Awards, one Grammy Award, two Oscars, and the first ever America Cinema Editors Technical Excellence Award. In 2018, Avid was named the recipient of the prestigious Philo T. Farnsworth Award by the Television Academy to honor Avid’s 30 years of continuous, transformative technology innovations, including products that have improved and accelerated the editing and post production process for television.
Operations Overview
Our strategy for connecting creative professionals and media enterprises with audiences in a powerful, efficient, collaborative, and profitable way leverages our Avid MediaCentral Platform - the open, extensible, and customizable foundation that streamlines and simplifies content workflows by integrating all Avid or third-party products and services that run on top of it. The platform provides secure and protected access, and enables fast and easy creation, delivery, and monetization of content.
We work to ensure that we are meeting customer needs, staying ahead of industry trends, and investing in the right areas through a close and interactive relationship with our customer base. The Avid Customer Association was established to be an innovative and influential media technology community. It represents thousands of organizations and over 30,000 professionals from all levels of the industry including inspirational and award-winning thought leaders, innovators, and storytellers. The Avid Customer Association fosters collaboration between Avid, its customers, and other industry colleagues to help shape our product offerings and provide a means to shape our industry together.
A key element of our strategy is our transition to a recurring revenue-based model through a combination of subscription offerings and long-term agreements. We started offering subscription licensing options for some of our products and solutions in 2014 and by the end of 2020 had approximately 296,000 paid subscriptions. These licensing options offer choices in pricing and deployment to suit our customers’ needs. Our subscription offerings to date have primarily been sold to creative professionals, though we expect to increase subscription sales to media enterprises going forward as we expand offerings and move through customer upgrade cycles, which we expect will further increase recurring revenue on a longer-term basis. Our long-term agreements are comprised of multi-year agreements with large media enterprise customers to provide specified products and services, including SaaS offerings, and channel partners and resellers to purchase minimum amounts of products and service over a specified period of time.
Another key aspect of our strategy has been to implement programs to increase operational efficiencies and reduce costs. We are making significant changes in business operations to better support the company’s strategy and overall performance. We are optimizing our go-to-market strategy, simplifying our strategy to address specific customer markets to help maximize our
commercial success, which we expect will improve effectiveness, while increasing efficiency and driving growth of our pipeline and ultimately revenue.
A summary of our revenue sources for the year ended December 31, 2020 is as follows (in thousands):
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
We have operations in numerous countries, which exposes us to risks associated with public health crises such as the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) that was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. COVID-19 adversely impacted our business operations and results of operations for the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020, as described in more detail in Results of Operations below. We expect the evolving COVID-19 pandemic to continue to have an adverse impact on our business and results of operations, as the ongoing pandemic is likely to continue to depress economic activity and reduce the demand for our products and services, as well as disrupt supply chains. Although the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, and resulting economic impacts, remain uncertain, we expect that our business operations and results of operations, will be adversely impacted through 2021, and possibly longer. These economic impacts are the result of, but not limited to:
•the postponement or cancellation of film and television productions, major sporting events, and live music events;
•delays in purchasing and projects by our enterprise customers and channel partners;
•disruption to the supply chain caused by distribution and other logistical issues, including disruptions arising from government restrictions; and
•decreased productivity due to travel restrictions, work-from-home policies or shelter-in-place orders.
We are focused on navigating the challenges presented by COVID-19, with a primary focus on preserving our liquidity and managing our cash flows by taking preemptive action to enhance our ability to meet our short-term liquidity needs. To address actual and expected reductions in net revenues, we have reduced our discretionary spending, revisited our investment strategies, and reduced payroll costs, including through temporary employee furloughs and pay cuts. In addition, in May 2020 we received $7.8 million of funding under the U.S. government’s Paycheck Protection Program, or PPP, in the form of a low-interest loan that may be forgiven under certain conditions. We may be required to take additional steps to preserve our liquidity depending on the duration and severity of the pandemic and its impact on our operations and cash flows. For further discussion of these issues, see “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We regularly reevaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to the following: revenue recognition and allowances for sales returns and exchanges; stock-based compensation; income tax assets and liabilities; and restructuring charges and accruals. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other factors we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the amounts of revenues and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
We believe the following critical accounting policies most significantly affect the portrayal of our financial condition and involve our most difficult and subjective estimates and judgments.
Revenue Recognition
We enter into contracts with customers that include various combinations of products and services, which are typically capable of being distinct and are accounted for as separate performance obligations. We account for a contract when (i) it has approval and commitment from both parties, (ii) the rights of the parties have been identified, (iii) payment terms have been identified, (iv) the contract has commercial substance, and (v) collectability is probable. We recognize revenue upon transfer of control of promised products or services to customers, which typically occurs upon shipment or delivery depending on the terms of the underlying contracts, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products or services.
See Note P to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for disaggregated revenue schedules and further discussion regarding revenue and deferred revenue performance obligations and the timing of revenue recognition.
We often enter into contractual arrangements that have multiple performance obligations, one or more of which may be delivered subsequent to the delivery of other performance obligations. These arrangements may include a combination of products, support, training, and professional services. We allocate the transaction price of the arrangement based on the relative estimated standalone selling price, or SSP, of each distinct performance obligation.
Our process for determining SSP for each performance obligation involves significant management judgment. In determining SSP, we maximize observable inputs and consider a number of data points, including:
• the pricing of standalone sales (in the limited instances where available);
• the pricing established by management when setting prices for deliverables that are intended to be sold on a standalone basis;
• contractually stated prices for deliverables that are intended to be sold on a standalone basis;
• other pricing factors, such as the geographical region in which the products are sold and expected discounts based on the customer size and type.
Determining SSP for performance obligations which we never sell separately also requires significant judgment. In estimating the SSP in these circumstances, we consider the likely price that would have resulted from established pricing practices had the deliverable been offered separately and the prices a customer would likely be willing to pay.
We only include estimated amounts in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. We reduce transaction prices for estimated returns and other allowances that represent variable consideration under ASC 606, which we estimate based on historical return experience and other relevant factors, and record a corresponding refund liability as a component of accrued expenses and other current liabilities. Other forms of contingent revenue or variable consideration are infrequent.
While not a common practice for us, in the event we grant the customer the option to acquire additional products or services in an arrangement, we consider if the option provides a material right to the customer that it would not receive without entering into the contract (e.g., an incremental discount compared to the range of discounts typically given for similar products or services). If a
material right is deemed to exist, we account for the option as a distinct performance obligation and recognize revenue when those future products or services are transferred or when the option expires.
We also record as revenue all amounts billed to customers for shipping and handling costs and record the actual shipping costs as a component of cost of revenues. Reimbursements received from customers for out-of-pocket expenses are recorded as revenues, with related costs recorded as cost of revenues. We present revenues net of any taxes collected from customers and remitted to government authorities.
Our contracts rarely contain significant financing components as payments from customers are due within a short period from when our performance obligations are satisfied.
We are applying the practical expedient for the deferral of sales commissions and other contract acquisition costs, which are expensed as incurred, because the amortization period would be one year or less.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation at fair value. The vesting of stock options and restricted stock awards may be based on time, performance, market conditions, or a combination of time, performance, and market conditions. In the future, we may grant stock awards, options, or other equity-based instruments allowed by our stock-based compensation plans, or a combination thereof, as part of our overall compensation strategy.
We generally use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock option grants with time-based vesting. The Black-Scholes option pricing model relies on a number of key assumptions to calculate estimated fair values. Our assumed dividend yield of zero is based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends, we have no present intention to pay cash dividends, and our current credit agreement limits our ability to pay dividends. Our expected stock-price volatility assumption is based on actual historic stock volatility for periods equivalent to the expected term of the award. The assumed risk-free interest rate is the U.S. Treasury security rate with a term equal to the expected life of the option. The assumed expected life is based on company-specific historical experience, considering the exercise behavior of past grants and models the pattern of aggregate exercises. The fair values of restricted stock and restricted stock unit awards with time-based vesting are based on the intrinsic values of the awards at the date of grant as these awards have a purchase price of $0.01 per share.
We have also issued stock option grants or restricted stock unit awards with vesting based on market conditions. Performance-based restricted stock units will vest based on achievement of our relative total shareholder return against the Russell 2000 Index over a three-year period. The fair values and derived service periods for all grants that include vesting based on market conditions are estimated using the Monte Carlo simulation method. For stock option grants that include vesting based on performance conditions, the fair values are estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. For restricted stock unit awards that include vesting based on performance conditions, the fair values are estimated based on the intrinsic values of the awards at the date of grant as these awards have a purchase price of $0.01 per share.
Income Tax Assets and Liabilities
We record deferred tax assets and liabilities based on the net tax effects of tax credits, operating loss carryforwards, and temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes compared to the amounts used for income tax purposes. We regularly review our deferred tax assets for recoverability with consideration for such factors as historical losses, projected future taxable income, and the expected timing of the reversals of existing temporary differences. A valuation allowance is recorded when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Management believes the remaining deferred tax assets, based largely on the history of U.S. tax losses, warrant a valuation allowance based on the weight of available negative evidence. We also determined that a full valuation allowance is warranted on a portion of our foreign deferred tax assets.
Our assessment of the valuation allowance on our U.S. and foreign deferred tax assets could change in the future based on our levels of pre-tax income and other tax-related adjustments. Reversal of the valuation allowance in whole or in part would result in a non-cash reduction in income tax expense during the period of reversal. To the extent some or all of our valuation allowance is
reversed, future financial statements would reflect an increase in non-cash income tax expense until such time as our deferred tax assets are fully utilized.
The amount of income taxes we pay is subject to our interpretation of applicable tax laws in the jurisdictions in which we file. We have taken and will continue to take tax positions based on our interpretation of such tax laws. There can be no assurance that a taxing authority will not have a different interpretation of applicable law and assess us with additional taxes. Should we be assessed with additional taxes, it could have a negative impact on our results of operations or financial condition.
We account for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in our financial statements by applying a two-step process to determine the amount of tax provision or benefit to be recognized. First, the tax position must be evaluated to determine the likelihood that it will be sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. If the tax position is deemed more likely than not to be sustained, the tax position is then assessed to determine the amount of provision or benefit to recognize in the financial statements. The amount of provision or benefit that may be recognized is the largest amount that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Our provision for income taxes includes the effects of any resulting tax reserves, referred to as unrecognized tax benefits, that are considered appropriate as well as the related net interest and penalties.
Restructuring Charges and Accruals
Based on our policies for the calculation and payment of severance benefits, we account for employee-related restructuring charges as an ongoing benefit arrangement in accordance with ASC Topic 712, Compensation - Nonretirement Postemployment Benefits. Severance-related charges are accrued when it is determined that a liability has been incurred, which is when the expected severance payments are probable and can be reasonably estimated.
Restructuring charges require significant estimates and assumptions, including severance period assumptions. Our estimates involve a number of risks and uncertainties, some of which are beyond our control, including future real estate market conditions and our ability to successfully enter into subleases or termination agreements with terms as favorable as those assumed when arriving at our estimates. We monitor these estimates and assumptions on at least a quarterly basis for changes in circumstances and any corresponding adjustments to the accrual are recorded in our statement of operations in the period when such changes are known.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table sets forth certain items from our consolidated statements of operations as a percentage of net revenues for the periods indicated:
Net Revenues
Our net revenues are derived mainly from sales of video and audio products and solutions for digital media content production, management and distribution, and related professional services and maintenance contracts. We also sell individual licenses for our software products through our webstore. We commonly sell large, complex solutions to our customers that, due to their strategic nature, have long lead times where the timing of order execution and fulfillment can be difficult to predict. In addition, the rapid evolution of the media industry is changing our customers’ needs, businesses, and revenue models, which is influencing their short-term and long-term purchasing decisions. As a result of these factors, the timing and amount of product revenue recognized related to orders for large, complex solutions, as well as the services associated with them, can fluctuate from quarter to quarter and cause significant volatility in our quarterly and annual operating results. See the risk factors discussed in Part I - Item 1A under the heading “Risk Factors” of this Form 10-K.
The following table sets forth the percentage of our net revenues attributable to geographic regions for the periods indicated:
Video Products and Solutions Revenues
2020 Compared to 2019
Video products and solutions revenues decreased $54.0 million, or 41.1%, for 2020, compared to 2019. The decrease in video revenues was primarily due to customers shifting from perpetual Media Composer licenses to subscription-based licenses. In addition, there was a decrease in revenue due to overall lower sales as a result of COVID-19.
2019 Compared to 2018
Video products and solutions revenues decreased $1.1 million, or 0.8%, for 2019, compared to 2018. The decrease in video revenues was due to customers shifting from perpetual Media Composer licenses to subscription-based licenses.
Audio Products and Solutions Revenues
2020 Compared to 2019
Audio products and solutions revenues decreased $12.7 million, or 16.6%, for 2020, compared to 2019. The decrease in audio revenues was primarily due to lower sales as a result of COVID-19,which negatively impacted revenues for the reasons discussed above under “Executive Overview - Impact of COVID-19 on our Business.”
2019 Compared to 2018
Audio products and solutions revenues increased $3.4 million, or 4.7%, for 2019, compared to 2018. The increase in audio revenues was primarily due to Pro Tools subscription increases and higher Control Surface sales and the S1 and S4 product launches in Q4.
Services Revenues
2020 Compared to 2019
Services revenues are derived primarily from maintenance contracts, subscription services, as well as professional services and training. The $15.4 million, or 7.5%, increase in services revenues in 2020 was primarily due to strong growth in our subscription services, partially offset by lower professional services revenue due to the negative effects of COVID-19.
2019 Compared to 2018
The $3.8 million, or 1.8%, decrease in services revenues for 2019, compared to 2018, was primarily due to a decline in maintenance from the end of sale of maintenance on certain legacy storage systems at the end of 2018 and a decline in professional services revenue from exiting lower margin work.
Revenue Backlog
At December 31, 2020, we had revenue backlog of approximately $435.5 million, of which approximately $231.3 million is expected to be recognized in the next 12 months, compared to $440.2 million of revenue backlog at December 31, 2019. Revenue backlog, as we define it, consists of firm orders received and includes both (i) orders where the customer has paid in advance of our performance obligations being fulfilled, and (ii) orders for future product deliveries or services that have not yet been invoiced by us. Revenue backlog associated with arrangement consideration paid in advance primarily consists of deferred revenue related to (i) the undelivered portion of annual support contracts and (ii) Implied Maintenance Release PCS performance obligations. Revenue backlog associated with orders for future product deliveries and services where cash has not been received primarily consists of (i) product orders received but not yet shipped, (ii) professional services not yet rendered, and (iii) future years of multi-year support agreements not yet billed. Our definition of backlog includes contractual commitments with customers that specify minimum future purchases, however, since these contractual arrangements do not specify which specific products and services must be purchased to fulfill these commitments, they do not meet the definition of an unfulfilled remaining performance obligation under GAAP.
Orders included in revenue backlog may be reduced, canceled, or deferred by our customers. The expected timing of the recognition of revenue backlog as revenue is based on our current estimates and could change based on a number of factors, including (i) the timing of delivery of products and services, (ii) customer cancellations or change orders, or (iii) changes in the estimated period of time Implied Maintenance Release PCS is provided to customers. As there is no industry standard definition of revenue backlog, our reported revenue backlog may not be comparable with other companies. Revenue backlog as of any particular date should not be relied upon as indicative of our net revenues for any future period.
Cost of Revenues, Gross Profit, and Gross Margin Percentage
Cost of revenues consists primarily of costs associated with:
•procurement of components and finished goods;
•assembly, testing, and distribution of finished products;
•warehousing;
•customer support related to maintenance;
•royalties for third-party software and hardware included in our products;
•amortization of technology; and
•providing professional services and training.
Amortization of technology included in cost of revenues represents the amortization of developed technology assets acquired as part of acquisitions and is described further in the Amortization of Intangible Assets section below.
Gross Margin Percentage
Gross margin percentage, which is net revenues less costs of revenues divided by net revenues, fluctuates based on factors such as the mix of products sold, the cost and proportion of third-party hardware and software included in the systems sold, the offering of product upgrades, price discounts and other sales-promotion programs, the distribution channels through which products are sold, the timing of new product introductions, sales of aftermarket hardware products such as disk drives, and currency exchange-rate fluctuations. Our total gross margin percentage for 2020, compared to 2019, increased due to a shift toward more higher margin subscription offerings and positive supply chain initiatives.
2020 Compared to 2019
The products gross margin percentage for 2020 decreased (6.9)% from 2019, due to a change in mix in products sold as well as the decrease in overall revenue due to COVID-19. The services gross margin percentage increased 2.3% from 2019 due to an increase in our high margin subscription business.
2019 Compared to 2018
The products gross margin percentage for 2019 increased to 47.1% from 46.0% for 2018. The change was primarily due to cost savings resulting from our programs to reduce costs and increase operational efficiencies.
Operating Expenses and Operating Income
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development, or R&D, expenses include costs associated with the development of new products and the enhancement of existing products, and consist primarily of employee salaries and benefits, facilities costs, depreciation, costs for consulting and temporary employees, and prototype and other development expenses. R&D expenses decreased $5.3 million, or 8.5%, during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019. The table below provides further details regarding the changes in components of R&D expense.
2020 Compared to 2019
The decrease in personnel-related expenses for 2020, compared to 2019, was primarily due to a decrease in salary expense as a result of our temporary furloughs and pay cuts and reduced travel expenses as a result of COVID-19. The decrease in all other expense categories for 2020 compared to the same periods in 2019 were primarily due to our initiatives to increase operational efficiencies and reduce costs as a response to COVID-19.
2019 Compared to 2018
The decreases in all R&D expense categories, except personnel-related, for 2019, compared to 2018, were primarily the result of our programs to increase operational efficiencies and reduce costs. The increase in personnel-related expense was due to an increase in salary expense.
Marketing and Selling Expenses
Marketing and selling expenses consist primarily of employee salaries and benefits for selling, marketing, and pre-sales customer support personnel, commissions, travel expenses, advertising and promotional expenses, web design costs, and facilities costs. Marketing and selling expenses decreased $12.3 million, or 12.3%, during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019. The table below provides further details regarding the changes in components of marketing and selling expense.
2020 Compared to 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net foreign-exchange losses, which are included in marketing and selling expenses, were $0.4 million, compared to losses of $0.6 million for 2019. The foreign-exchange losses result from foreign currency denominated transactions and the revaluation of foreign currency denominated assets and liabilities. The decrease in personnel-related expenses for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to decreases in salary expense as a result of our temporary furloughs and pay cuts and reduced travel expenses as a result of COVID-19. The decrease in all other expense categories for 2020 compared to 2019 were primarily due to our initiatives to increase operational efficiencies and reduce costs as a response to COVID-19.
2019 Compared to 2018
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net foreign-exchange losses, which are included in marketing and selling expenses, were $0.6 million, compared to losses of $0.5 million for 2018. The foreign-exchange losses result from foreign currency denominated transactions and the revaluation of foreign currency denominated assets and liabilities. The decrease in personnel-related expenses for 2019 compared to 2018, was primarily due to decreases in incentive-based compensation accrual and decreased travel expenses as a result of our smart spending initiative. The increase in consulting and outside services for 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily the result of increased webstore fees due to higher transactions on our webstore. The decrease in advertising and promotions expenses for 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily the result of our programs to increase operational efficiencies and reduce costs.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative, or G&A, expenses consist primarily of employee salaries and benefits for administrative, executive, finance, and legal personnel, audit, legal, and strategic consulting fees, and insurance, information systems, and facilities costs. Information systems and facilities costs reported within G&A expenses are net of allocations to other expenses categories. G&A expenses decreased $6.3 million, or 11.8%, during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019. The table below provides further details regarding the changes in components of G&A expense.
2020 Compared to 2019
The decrease in personnel-related expenses for 2020, compared to 2019, was primarily due to a decrease in salary expense as a result of our temporary furloughs and pay cuts and reduced travel expenses as a result of COVID-19. The decrease in all other expense categories for 2020 compared to the same periods in 2019, were primarily due to our initiatives to increase operational efficiencies and reduce costs as a response to COVID-19.
2019 Compared to 2018
The decrease in consulting and outside services expenses for 2019, compared to 2018, was primarily the result of decreases in litigation expenses and contractors costs. The decrease in personnel-related expenses for 2019 compared to 2018 was due to decreases in incentive-based compensation accrual. The decrease in facilities and information technology was primarily the result of our cost efficiency program.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Intangible assets result from acquisitions and include developed technology, customer-related intangibles, trade names, and other identifiable intangible assets with finite lives. These intangible assets are amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of such assets, which are generally two years to 12 years. Amortization of developed technology is recorded within cost of revenues. Amortization of customer-related intangibles, trade names, and other identifiable intangible assets is recorded within operating expenses.
As of June 30, 2019, intangible assets were fully amortized. See Note G, Intangible Assets and Goodwill, to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of the Form 10-K for further information regarding our identifiable intangible assets.
Restructuring Costs, Net
In February 2016, we committed to a restructuring plan that encompassed a series of measures intended to allow us to more efficiently operate in a leaner, more directed cost structure. These included reductions in our workforce, consolidation of facilities, transfers of certain business processes to lower cost regions, and reductions in other third-party services costs. In October 2020, we committed to a restructuring plan in order to reorganize the business to better support the company’s strategy and overall performance. We have also implemented programs to increase operational efficiencies and reduce costs as a result of COVID-19.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $4.9 million of severance costs for 93 positions that were eliminated during 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded $0.6 million of severance costs for 54 positions that were eliminated during 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, we recorded $3.6 million of severance costs for 84 positions that were eliminated during 2018 and the first quarter of 2019, $1.1 million of leasehold improvement write-off resulting from the consolidation of our facilities in Burlington, Massachusetts, and $0.1 million of facilities restructuring related adjustments.
Interest and Other Expense, Net
Interest and other expense, net, generally consists of interest income and interest expense.
2020 Compared to 2019
The decrease in interest expense for 2020 compared to 2019 was due to the repayment of our outstanding convertible notes on June 15, 2020 as well as savings on our term loan interest under our credit facility due to the decrease in the LIBOR rate over 2020. See Note Q, Long-Term Debt and Credit Agreement, to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information.
2019 Compared to 2018
The increase in interest expense for 2019 compared to 2018, was due to the additional $100.0 million term loan we obtained in 2019 and fees related to the refinancing. See Note Q, Long-Term Debt and Credit Agreement, to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate, which represents our tax provision as a percentage of income before tax, was 11.0%, (201.0)%, and (13.5)%, respectively, for 2020, 2019, and 2018.
The increase in our 2020 provision was primarily driven by a non-recurring benefit in our 2019 provision. Our 2019 provision included the removal of valuation allowances on some of our foreign net operating loss carryforwards. During the year ended December 31, 2019 we determined that our Irish subsidiary had reached a level of sustained profitability sufficient enough to release a significant portion of the valuation allowance on its net operating loss carryforward. Accordingly, we recorded a $6.0 million benefit related to a valuation allowance against the Irish net operating loss carryforward deferred tax asset. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2019 we completed a legal entity reorganization that reduced the number of our German subsidiaries. This reorganization allowed us to remove a valuation allowance on the net operating loss carryforward deferred tax asset of one of the surviving German entities. Accordingly, we recorded a benefit of $1.5 million, which is net of a reserve for a related uncertain tax position. The year over year increase driven by the non-recurring combined benefit was partially offset by a decrease in the provision due to release of a reserve for an uncertain tax position in our Israel subsidiary due to an audit settlement and changes in the jurisdictional mix of earnings.
The decrease in our 2019 provision was driven by the removal of valuation allowances on our Irish and German net operating loss carryforwards, as noted above, which totaled a combined benefit of $7.5 million. The combined benefit was partially offset by an increase in the provision due to changes in the jurisdictional mix of earnings including the now ongoing taxability of our earnings in Ireland and Germany which results in a non-cash tax expense.
We have significant accumulated deferred tax assets including the tax effects of net operating losses and tax credit carryovers. The realization of the net deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of sufficient future taxable income in the applicable tax jurisdictions. We regularly review our deferred tax assets for recoverability with consideration for such factors as historical losses, projected future taxable income, the expected timing of the reversals of existing temporary differences, and tax planning strategies. ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes, requires us to record a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Management believes the remaining deferred tax assets, based largely on the history of U.S. tax losses, warrant a valuation allowance based on the weight of available negative evidence. We have also determined that a full valuation allowance is warranted on a portion of our foreign deferred tax assets.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Act, or CARES Act, includes several income tax provisions such as net operating loss, or NOL, carryback and carryforward benefits and other tax deduction benefits. As noted previously, the U.S. deferred tax asset has a full valuation; accordingly, these NOL and other benefit provisions had no impact on our financial statements for the period ended December 31, 2020. The CARES Act accelerates the alternative minimum tax, or AMT, credit refund originally enacted by the Tax Cut and Jobs Act in 2017. As of December 31, 2020, we have received the cash from the IRS associated with this refund receivable which had been recorded as a long-term asset at December 31, 2019.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity and Sources of Cash
Our principal source of liquidity is cash and cash equivalents, which totaled $79.9 million as of December 31, 2020. We have generally funded operations in recent years through the use of existing cash balances, supplemented from time to time with the proceeds of long-term debt and borrowings under our credit facilities.
Our cash requirements vary depending on factors such as the growth of the business, changes in working capital, capital expenditures, and obligations under our cost efficiency program. We expect to operate the business and execute our strategic initiatives principally with funds generated from operations, remaining net proceeds from the term loan borrowings under the Credit Agreement, and draws of up to a maximum of $70.0 million under the Credit Agreement’s revolving credit facility. We anticipate that we will have sufficient internal and external sources of liquidity to fund operations and anticipated working capital and other expected cash needs for at least the next 12 months from the filing of our annual report as well as for the foreseeable future.
One key aspect of our strategy has been to implement programs to increase operational efficiencies and reduce costs. We are making significant changes in business operations to better support the company’s strategy and overall performance. We are optimizing our go-to-market strategy, simplifying our strategy to address specific customer markets to help maximize our commercial success, which we expect will improve effectiveness, while increasing efficiency and driving growth of our pipeline and ultimately revenue. We believe these collective efforts will continue to improve our efficiency as an organization, increasing gross margins and overall profitability.
Financing Agreement
On February 26, 2016, we entered into the Financing Agreement , or the Financing Agreement, with the lenders party thereto. Pursuant to the Financing Agreement, the lenders agreed to provide us with (a) a term loan in the aggregate principal amount of $100.0 million, or the Term Loan, and (b) a revolving credit facility of up to a maximum of $5.0 million in borrowings outstanding at any time, or the Credit Facility. On November 9, 2017, we entered into an amendment to the Financing Agreement which increased the aggregate principal amount of the term loan to $115.0 million and increased the commitments under the revolving credit facility to $10.0 million. On May 10, 2018, we entered into a further amendment to the Financing Agreement that extended the maturity of the Financing Agreement to May 2023, and increased the aggregate principal amount of the term loan to $137.7 million and increased the commitments under the revolving credit facility to $22.5 million.
On April 8, 2019, we entered into an amendment to the Financing Agreement. The amendment provided for an additional delayed draw term loan commitment in the aggregate principal amount of $100.0 million, or the Delayed Draw Funds, for the purpose of funding the purchase of a portion of the Notes in a tender offer. On May 2, 2019, we received the Delayed Draw Funds under the Financing Agreement. We used $72.7 million of the Delayed Draw Funds for the purchase of a portion of the Notes, $0.6 million for the Notes interest payment, and $6.0 million for the payment of refinancing fees. On June 18, 2019, we repaid $20.7 million of the Delayed Draw Funds. The $79.3 million Delayed Draw Funds borrowed would have matured on May 10, 2023 under the Financing Agreement.
On May 19, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the Financing Agreement which increased the leverage ratio that the Company was required to maintain such that following the effective date of this amendment, the Company was required to maintain a leverage ratio of no greater than 6.00:1.00 for each of the quarters ending June 30, 2020 and September 30, 2020, 5.75:1.00 for each of the quarters ending December 31, 2020 and March 31, 2021, 5.25:1.00 for the quarter ending June 30, 2021, 5.00:1.00 for the quarter ending September 30, 2021, 4.50:1.00 for the quarter ending December 31, 2021, 4.30:1.00 for the quarter ending March 31, 2022, 4.00:1.00 for each of the quarters ending June 30, 2022 and September 30, 2022, and 3.75:1.00 for each of the quarters ending December 31, 2022 and March 31, 2023. The amendment also reset the prepayment premium to 1.5% of the principal amount of the loans prepaid through the end of 2020, 0.5% of the principal amount of the loans prepaid through the end of 2021, and 0.0% thereafter.
Effective with the May 19, 2020 amendment to the Financing Agreement, interest accrued on outstanding borrowings at a rate of either the LIBOR Rate (as defined in the Financing Agreement) plus 6.25% or a Reference Rate (as defined in the Financing
Agreement) plus 5.75%, at the option of the Company. Prior to the effective date of such Amendment, the applicable margin with respect to the LIBOR Rate was 6.25% and the applicable margin with respect to the Reference Rate was 5.25%.
Credit Agreement (New Credit Facility)
On January 5, 2021, we entered into the Credit Agreement, or the Credit Agreement, among us, the Lenders party thereto, and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as the administrative agent, or the Agent. Pursuant to the Credit Agreement, the Lenders agreed to provide us with (a) a term loan in the aggregate principal amount of $180.0 million, or the New Term Loan and (b) a revolving credit facility of up to a maximum of $70.0 million in borrowings outstanding at any time, or the New Credit Facility. We borrowed the full amount of the New Term Loan, or $180.0 million, on the closing date, but did not borrow any amount under the New Credit Facility on the closing date. The borrowings under the New Term Loan and cash on hand were used to repay outstanding borrowings under the Financing Agreement in connection the termination of the Financing Agreement, as described above. Prior to the maturity of the New Credit Facility, any amounts borrowed under the New Credit Facility may be repaid and, subject to the terms and conditions of the Credit Agreement, reborrowed in whole or in part without penalty.
Financial terms and prepayments. Under the Credit Agreement, interest accrues on outstanding borrowings under the New Term Loan and the New Credit Facility at a rate of the Adjusted LIBO Rate, the Adjusted EURIBO Rate or the Alternate Base Rate (each as defined in the Credit Agreement), at the option of the Company, plus a spread of 2.00% to 3.25% for Adjusted LIBO Rate and Adjusted EURIBO Rate loans, with a 0.25% LIBOR floor, and 1.00% to 2.25% for Alternate Base Rate loans, in each case depending on our leverage ratio. In addition, we must pay to the Lenders, on a quarterly basis, a commitment fee at a rate of 0.20% to 0.50%, depending on our leverage ratio, on the average daily amount equal to (1) the total revolving commitments under the New Credit Facility less (2) total amount of the outstanding borrowings under the New Credit Facility during the immediately preceding quarter. During the term of the New Credit Facility, we are entitled to reduce the maximum amounts of the Lenders’ commitments under the New Credit Facility. We may prepay all or any portion of the borrowings under the Credit Agreement prior to the stated maturity, subject to the payment of certain break funding amounts, if applicable. In addition, subject to exceptions we will be required to prepay the Term Loan with proceeds we receive from specified events, including sales of assets, insurance proceeds and condemnation awards and the incurrence of certain indebtedness. The New Term Loan requires quarterly principal payments commencing in March 2021 equal to 5.0% of the original principal amount of the New Term Loan in years 1 and 2, 7.5% of the original principal amount of the New Term Loan in year 3, and 10% of the original principal amount of the New Term Loan in years 4 and 5, with the remaining aggregate principal amount due at maturity.
Collateral and guarantees. We and our subsidiary, Avid Technology Worldwide, Inc., or Avid Worldwide, granted a security interest on substantially all of our assets to secure the obligations of all obligors under the New Term Loan and the New Credit Facility. Avid Worldwide provided a guarantee of all our obligations under the Credit Agreement. Our future subsidiaries (other than certain foreign and immaterial subsidiaries) are also required to become a party to the applicable security agreements and guarantee the obligations under the Credit Agreement.
Representations and restrictive covenants. The Credit Agreement contains representations, warranties and restrictive covenants that are customary for an agreement of this kind, including, for example, covenants that restrict us from incurring additional indebtedness, granting liens, making investments and restricted payments, making acquisitions, entering into swap agreements, paying dividends, making payments of or amending the terms of certain subordinated indebtedness, engaging in sale and leaseback transactions, and engaging in transactions with affiliates.
Events of default. The Credit Agreement contains customary events of default under which our payment obligations may be accelerated. These events of default include, among others, failure to pay amounts payable under the Credit Agreement when due, breach of representations and warranties, failure to perform covenants, a change of control, default or acceleration of material indebtedness, certain judgments and certain impairments to the collateral.
Financial covenants. The Credit Agreement contains two financial covenants. The Company is required to maintain a maximum total net leverage ratio, generally defined as the ratio of (x) consolidated total indebtedness minus liquidity maintained in the United States up to $25 million to (y) consolidated EBITDA, not to exceed 4.00 to 1:00 for the fiscal quarters ending March 31, 2021 through June 30, 2021; 3.75 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarters ending September 30, 2021 through December 31, 2021; 3.50 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarters ending March 31, 2022 through June 30, 2022; 3.25 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarters ending September
30, 2022 through December 31, 2022; and 3.00 to 1.00 for fiscal quarters ending on or after March 31, 2023. The Company is also required to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio not less than 1.20 to 1.00 at the end of each fiscal quarter ending on or after March 31, 2021. The Credit Agreement’s fixed charge coverage ratio is generally defined as the ratio of (x) consolidated EBITDA minus unfinanced capital expenditures, cash tax expense and certain restricted payments to (y) consolidated fixed charges.
Our ability to satisfy the maximum total net leverage covenant and the minimum fixed charge coverage ratio covenant in the future is dependent on our ability to increase bookings and billings above levels experienced over the last 12 months. In recent quarters, we have experienced volatility in bookings and billings resulting from, among other things, (i) our transition towards subscription and recurring revenue streams and the resulting decline in traditional upfront product sales, (ii) dramatic changes in the media industry and the impact it has on our customers, (iii) the impact of new and anticipated product launches and features, (iv) volatility in currency rates, and (v) in the three most recent quarters, the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
In the event bookings and billings in future quarters are lower than we currently anticipate, we may be forced to take remedial actions which could include, among other things (and where allowed by the Lenders), (i) further cost reductions, (ii) seeking replacement financing, (iii) raising additional debt or equity funding or (iv) disposing of certain assets or businesses. Such remedial actions, which may not be available on favorable terms or at all, could have a material adverse impact on our business. If we are not in compliance with the maximum total net leverage ratio or the minimum fixed charge coverage ratio and are unable to obtain an amendment or waiver, such noncompliance may result in an event of default under the Credit Agreement, which could permit acceleration of the outstanding indebtedness under the Credit Agreement and require us to repay such indebtedness before the scheduled due date. If an event of default were to occur, we might not have sufficient funds available to make the payments required. If we are unable to repay amounts owed, the Lenders may be entitled to foreclose on and sell substantially all of our assets that secure our borrowings under the Credit Agreement.
2.00% Convertible Senior Notes
On June 15, 2015, we issued $125.0 million aggregate principal amount of our 2.00% Convertible Senior Notes due 2020, or the Notes. In connection with the offering of the Notes, on June 9, 2015, we entered into a capped call derivative transaction with a third party, or the Capped Call.
On April 11, 2019, we announced the commencement of a cash tender offer, or the Offer, for any and all of our outstanding Notes. On May 9, 2019, as of the expiration of the Offer, Notes with an aggregate principal amount of $74.0 million were validly tendered. We accepted for purchase all Notes that were validly tendered at the expiration of the Offer at a purchase price equal to $982.50 per $1,000 principal amount of Notes, and settled the Offer on May 13, 2019 for $72.7 million in cash. We recorded $74.0 million extinguishment of debt, $0.6 million of equity reacquisition, and $2.9 million loss on the extinguishment of debt. In connection with the Offer, the number of options under the Capped Call was reduced to 28,867 to mirror the remaining principal outstanding for the Notes, and an immaterial partial unwind cash payment was received in May 2019.
On June 15, 2020, the maturity date of the Notes, we fully repaid the outstanding principal and unpaid interest on the Notes. In connection with such repayment, the Capped Call was unwound.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
On May 11, 2020, we received $7.8 million of proceeds in connection with its incurrence of a loan under the Paycheck Protection Program, or PPP. The loan has a fixed interest rate of 1% and matures in two years. Interest payments are deferred for six months. On November 17, 2020 we applied to the SBA for the PPP loan to be forgiven in full. We believe we used the proceeds of the PPP loan for purposes consistent with the PPP. While we currently believe that our use of the loan proceeds will meet the conditions for forgiveness of the loan, we cannot assure that we will be eligible for forgiveness of the loan, in whole or in part. Any PPP loan balance remaining following forgiveness by the SBA will be fully repaid on or before the maturity date of the loan.
The CARES Act allowed employers to defer the deposit and payment of the employer's share of Social Security payroll taxes that would otherwise have been owed from the date of enactment of the legislation through December 31, 2020. The legislation requires that the deferred taxes be paid over a two-year period, with half the amount required to be paid by December 31, 2021,
and the other half by December 31, 2022. As of December 31, 2020, we have recorded the payment deferral within “Accrued compensation and benefits” and “Other long-term liabilities” on the balance sheet.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities aggregated $39.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The improvement compared to prior years was primarily attributable to lower operating expenses as the result of our programs to increase operational efficiencies and reduce costs.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the net cash flow used in investing activities reflected $5.7 million used for the purchase of property and equipment. Our purchases of property and equipment largely consist of computer hardware and software to support R&D activities, and leasehold improvements.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash flows used in financing activities were primarily the result of the repayment of our Notes, partially offset by borrowings under the PPP loan.
CONTRACTUAL AND COMMERCIAL OBLIGATIONS
The following table outlines our contractual payment obligations as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
Other contractual arrangements that may result in cash payments consisted of the following at December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
As described above, all outstanding borrowings under the Financing Agreement were repaid in January 2021, in connection with the termination of the Financing Agreement and the entry into the Credit Agreement.
Any portion of the PPP Loan that is not forgiven, must be repaid by May 2022. See more details in Note Q, Long-Term Debt and Credit Agreement, to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
We entered into a long-term agreement to purchase a variety of information technology solutions from a third party in the second quarter of 2020, which included an unconditional commitment to purchase a minimum of $32.2 million of products and services over the initial five years of the agreement. We have purchased $3.0 million of products and services pursuant to this agreement as of December 31, 2020.
We have letters of credit that are used as security deposits in connection with our leased Burlington, Massachusetts headquarters office space. In the event of default on the underlying leases, the landlords would, at December 31, 2020, be eligible to draw against the letters of credit to a maximum of $1.3 million in the aggregate. The letters of credit are subject to aggregate reductions provided that we are not in default of the underlying leases and meet certain financial performance conditions. In no case will the letters of credit amounts for the Burlington leases be reduced to below $1.2 million in the aggregate throughout the lease periods.
In addition, we have letters of credit in connection with security deposits for other facility leases totaling $0.6 million in the aggregate, as well as letters of credit totaling $1.9 million that otherwise support our ongoing operations. These letters of credit have various terms and expire during 2021 and beyond, while some of the letters of credit may automatically renew based on the terms of the underlying agreements.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We do not engage in off-balance sheet financing arrangements or have any variable-interest entities. At December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncement
See Note B, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of the Form 10-K for a description of recently adopted accounting standards.
Recently Accounting Pronouncement to be Adopted
See Note B, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of the Form 10-K for a description of certain issued accounting standards that have not been adopted and may impact our financial statements in future reporting periods.