ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and other parts of this annual report contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements can be identified by words such as “anticipates,” “expects,” “believes,” “plans,” “predicts,” and similar terms. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and our actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include but are not limited to those discussed in the subsection entitled Forward-Looking Statements and Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition below. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and notes thereto included in this report.
Discussion and Analysis
Our plan of operation is to identify a business opportunity for which purpose it will require a minimum of $25,000 in funding over the next 12 months to sustain operations through that process. Should a business opportunity be identified, we will need additional funding to complete any definitive transaction. We anticipate that funding in this instance will be in the form of unsecured debt or equity financing from stockholders, creditors and third parties. Despite our confidence that funding will be available for a suitable business opportunity, we have no such financing arranged. Therefore, we will require financial support from our stockholders and creditors until the Company is able to generate sufficient cash flow to maintain operations. There is substantial doubt that the Company will be able to maintain operations unless it can complete a financing in order to pursue a merger or acquisition of an operating business in the near term.
Results of Operations
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company satisfied continuous public disclosure requirements and continued to finance its operations with loans that originated from CaiE and a shareholder of the Company.
Our operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are summarized in the following table.
Net Income (Loss)
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $477,596 as compared to net income of $112,252 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The net loss over the twelve month period ended December 31, 2020, can be attributed to debt settlements, and the increases in general administrative expenses, professional fees, and foreign exchange loss, offset by a decrease in interest expenses. Net loss over the twelve month period ended December 31, 2020, is attributed to a loss on debt settlements based on a settlement price per share that was lower than the market price per share on the settlement dates, an increase in professional fees and general administrative expenses attributed to costs related to the debt settlements, while the increase in foreign exchange loss is due to volitility in foreign currencies against the US dollar that impacts the cost of expenses payable in foreign currencies, offset by a decrease in interest expense. Net income over the twelve month period ended December 31, 2019, is attributed to the write-down of certain amounts due to related parties, certain amounts included in accounts payable, and accrued liabilities.
We did not generate revenue during this period and expect to continue to incur losses over the next twelve months until such time as we are able to secure a business opportunity that generates income.
Capital Expenditures
The Company expended no amounts on capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, the Company has experienced significant changes in liquidity, capital resources, and stockholders’ deficit.
The Company had assets of $4,994 as of December 31, 2020, that consisted solely of cash and a working capital deficit of $2,051,060, as compared to assets of $2,346 as of December 31, 2019, that consisted solely of cash and a working capital deficit of $2,213,713 as of December 31, 2019. Net stockholders' deficiency in the Company was $2,051,060 at December 31, 2020, as compared to a net stockholders' deficiency in the Company of $2,213,713 at December 31, 2019.
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the twelve month period ended December 31, 2020 was $37,352 as compared to net cash used in operating activities of $35,279 for the twelve month period ended December 31, 2019. Net cash used in operating activities in the current period can be attributed primarily to a number of items that are book expense items which do not affect the total amount relative to actual cash used such as loss on debt settlement, interest, foreign exchange gain, and amortization of discount on convertible loan. Balance sheet accounts that actually affect cash, but are not income statement related items that are added or deducted to arrive at net cash used in operating activities, include accounts payable, accrued liabilities, and amounts due to related parties.
We expect to continue to use net cash in operating activities over the next twelve months or until such time as the Company can generate sufficient revenue to transition to providing net cash from operations.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, was $nil.
We do not expect to use net cash in investing activities until such time as a transaction is concluded through merger, acquisition or development of viable business opportunity.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $40,000, as compared to $36,810 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net cash provided from financing activities over the prior year can be attributed to an increase in the amount loaned by CaiE over the comparative periods and a shareholder loan in the current period.
We expect to continue to use net cash provided by financing activities to maintain operations.
The Company’s current assets are insufficient to conduct its plan of operation over the next twelve (12) months as it will need at least $25,000 to sustain operations while seeking to identify a suitable business opportunity and will need to address amounts owed to CaiE Foods, a portion of which is due on March 31, 2021. While the Company will look to its stockholders and creditors to provide debt or equity financing to secure those amounts necessary, it has no definitive commitments or arrangements for financial support. The Company’s inability to secure funding will have a material adverse effect on its ability to sustain operations.
The Company does not intend to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
The Company had no lines of credit or other bank financing arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
The Company had no commitments for future capital expenditures at December 31, 2020.
The Company has no defined benefit plan or contractual commitment with any of its officers or directors.
The Company has no current plans for the purchase or sale of any plant or equipment.
The Company has no current plans to make any changes in the number of employees.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources that are material to stockholders.
Future Financings
We will continue to rely on debt or equity sales of our common stock and the foreberance of existing creditors to continue our business even though we have secured no commitments to date for future financial support.
Critical Accounting Policies
In Note 2 to the audited financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, included in our Form 10-K, the Company discusses those accounting policies that are considered to be significant in determining the results of operations and its financial position. The Company believes that accounting principles utilized by it conform to accounting principles generally accepted in the United States.
The preparation of financial statements requires Company management to make significant estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. On an on-going basis, the Company evaluates estimates. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and other facts and circumstances that are believed to be reasonable, and the results form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities. The actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Going Concern
As at December 31, 2020, the Company had an accumulated deficit of $23,972,524 and negative cash flows from operating activities, which conditions raise substantial doubt about its ability to secure funding from outside sources to continue operations. Management believes that it will be able to secure sufficient funding to sustain itself though there can be no assurance that their efforts will prove successful.
Forward-Looking Statements and Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition
The statements contained in this section titled Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and elsewhere in this current report, with the exception of historical facts, are forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements reflect current expectations and beliefs regarding future results of operations, performance, and achievements subject to risks and uncertainties based upon assumptions and beliefs that may not materialize, including but are not limited to, statements concerning:
• our financial performance and business plan;
• the sufficiency of existing capital resources;
• our ability to raise capital to fund cash requirements;
• uncertainties related to future business prospects;
• the volatility of the stock market; and
• general economic conditions.
We wish to caution readers that our operating results are subject to various risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those discussed or anticipated. We also wish to advise readers not to place any undue reliance on the forward-looking statements contained in this report, which reflect our beliefs and expectations only as of the date of this report. We assume no obligation to update or revise these forward-looking statements to reflect new events or circumstances or any changes in our beliefs or expectations, other than as required by law.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please see Note 2 to our financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.