ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Introduction
Avanos is a medical technology company focused on delivering clinically superior breakthrough medical device solutions to improve patients’ quality of life. We are committed to addressing some of today’s most important healthcare needs, such as reducing the use of opioids while helping patients move from surgery to recovery. We develop, manufacture and market clinically superior solutions in more than 90 countries.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to provide investors with an understanding of our recent performance, financial condition and prospects and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this annual report on Form 10-K. The following will be discussed and analyzed:
•Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic
•The CARES Act
•Restructuring Activities
•Results of Operations and Related Information
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
•Legal Matters
•Information Concerning Forward-Looking Statements
Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 global pandemic caused disruption in global supply and distribution channels and dramatically changed the way companies do business. From the beginning of this global health crisis, our first priority has been the safety and well being of our employees.
We continue to monitor the developments associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and its effects on our employees, customers, supply chain and distribution channels. The ongoing impact of the pandemic depends on a number of factors including the severity and duration of the pandemic and the extent and severity of the impact on our customers, which is uncertain and unpredictable. Our future results of operations and cash flows may suffer adverse effects from delays in payments on outstanding accounts receivable, potential manufacturing, distribution and supply chain disruptions and uncertain demand, and effects of any actions we may take to address financial and operational challenges our customers may face. Other risks and uncertainties that we face include, but are not limited to:
•postponement or cancellation of elective medical procedures and their uncertain return which adversely impacts our business;
•potential temporary or prolonged office, production facility or distribution center closures;
•the health of our employees and ability to meet staffing needs;
•potential new or continued governmental actions that may limit employees’ ability to work;
•civil unrest relating to government, corporate and societal responses to the pandemic;
•volatility in economic conditions and the financial markets, and
•other unanticipated effects that remain unknown.
We are actively managing our response to the COVID-19 pandemic in collaboration with our customers, government agencies, vendors, suppliers and business partners and assessing the potential effects to our financial position, results of operations and cash flows. For further information regarding the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our company, see “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this report.
We have incurred $7.9 million of incremental COVID-19 related expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020. We may continue to incur additional expense through 2021 and perhaps beyond. Some of these additional expenses may be considered unusual and excluded from our calculation of “Adjusted Operating Profit” as described later in “Results of Operations and Related Information.”
The CARES Act
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was enacted on March 27, 2020. The CARES Act allows for the carryback of U.S. net operating losses, which were expected to be used in future years, to prior years resulting in a $25.1 million benefit that was recognized in the year ended December 31, 2020. Consequently, we recorded incremental income tax receivables of approximately $49.0 million as of December 31, 2020.
Restructuring Activities
Our restructuring expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 are summarized in the table below:
Post-Divestiture Restructuring Plan
In conjunction with the Divestiture, we began a multi-phase restructuring plan (the “Plan”) intended to align our organizational structure (“Organizational Alignment”), information technology platform (“IT Transformation”) and supply chain and distribution channels (“Cost Transformation”) to be more appropriate for the size and scale of our remaining Medical Devices business. Organizational Alignment and IT Transformation are substantially complete. However, in the year-ended December 31, 2020, employee severance and retention that was previously accrued for Organizational Alignment was partially reversed due to employee attrition.
The Cost Transformation phase was initiated in June 2019, and is intended to optimize the Company’s procurement, manufacturing, and supply chain operations. We expect to incur between $11.0 million and $13.0 million to execute the Cost Transformation phase, primarily consulting and other expenses that will be expensed as incurred. The Company also expects to spend up to $7.0 million of incremental capital through 2021 in support of the Cost Transformation. The Company expects to complete the Cost Transformation by the end of 2021. Plan-to-date, we have incurred $5.1 million of costs that were expensed as incurred and $2.0 million of costs that were capitalized.
Integration of Business Acquisitions
During the third quarter of 2019, we initiated activities to integrate the asset and business acquisitions completed in 2019 and 2018 into our operations, and where appropriate, re-align our organization accordingly. This includes Cool Systems, Inc. (“Game Ready”), which was acquired in 2018 along with the 2019 acquisitions that are described in Note 5, “Business Acquisitions.” Costs incurred were primarily for employee retention, severance and benefits and lease termination costs. The integration of our acquisitions was substantially complete as of December 31, 2020.
2020 Restructuring
In the fourth quarter of 2020, we initiated activities to reduce the size of our senior leadership team, consolidate certain operations within our pain management franchise, exit unprofitable lines of business and reduce the size of our office space to align with expected requirements following the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect to incur up to $30.0 million of costs, primarily for costs associated with operating lease right-of-use asset impairments or lease terminations, impairment of intangible and other assets and employee severance and benefits. We expect to substantially complete this restructuring by the end of 2021.
Business Acquisitions
In the year ended December 31, 2019, we completed the acquisition of substantially all the assets of Endoclear, LLC and Summit Medical Products, Inc. In addition, we also completed the acquisition of NeoMed, Inc. (collectively, the “Acquisitions”). The purchase price for the Acquisitions was $57.5 million, net of cash acquired, plus future contingent payments of $7.3 million. See “Business Acquisitions” in Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this report.
Results of Operations and Related Information
Use of Non-GAAP Measures
In this section, we present “Adjusted Gross Profit” and “Adjusted Operating Profit (Loss)” which are profitability measures that are not calculated in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”) and is therefore referred to as a non-GAAP financial measure. We provide these non-GAAP measures because we use them to measure our operational performance and provide greater insight into our ongoing business operations. These measures are not intended to be, and should not be, considered separately from, or an alternative to, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures. A reconciliation of the non-GAAP measures to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures are provided under “Adjusted Gross Profit” and “Adjusted Operating (Loss) Profit,” respectively.
Net Sales
Our net sales are summarized in the following table for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (in millions):
______________________________
(a)Volume includes incremental sales from acquisitions.
(b)Other includes rounding.
Product Category Descriptions
Chronic care is a portfolio of products that include (i) digestive health products such as our Mic-Key enteral feeding tubes, Corpak patient feeding solutions and our recently acquired NeoMed neonatal and pediatric feeding solutions and (ii) respiratory health products such as closed airway suction systems and other airway management devices under the Ballard, Microcuff and recently acquired Endoclear brands.
Pain management is a portfolio of non-opioid pain solutions including (i) acute pain products such as On-Q and ambIT surgical pain pumps and Game Ready cold and compression therapy systems and (ii) interventional pain solutions, which provides minimally invasive pain relieving therapies, such as our Coolief pain relief therapy.
Net Sales - 2020 Compared to 2019
Net sales increased by 3% to $714.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to volume. Incremental volume from the NeoMed and Summit acquisitions contributed 4% of the volume growth. Organic volume came from strong pandemic-related demand for respiratory health products including closed-suction catheters and oral care kits along with strong demand for digestive health products, led by Corpak and NeoMed products. Higher volume in respiratory and digestive health was offset by lower volume in acute pain and interventional due to fewer or delayed elective procedures caused by the ongoing pandemic.
Net Sales - 2019 Compared to 2018
Net sales increased by 7% to $697.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to volume. Incremental volume from the NeoMed, Summit and Game Ready acquisitions contributed 7% of the volume growth. Volume growth also came from organic growth in interventional pain products, digestive health and respiratory health, but was mostly offset by lower volume in acute pain which was affected this year by an industry-wide drug shortage, pre-fill disruption and consolidation of IV infusion customers.
Net Sales by Geographic Region
The factors causing organic volume growth were consistent throughout our geographic regions. Net sales by region is presented in the table below (in millions):
Adjusted Gross Profit
Our adjusted gross profit and gross profit margin is summarized in the table below for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (in millions):
Adjusted Gross Profit - 2020 vs. 2019
Adjusted Gross profit margin decreased to 56% for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the impact of product mix caused by the pandemic, write-off of obsolete inventory and higher costs associated with our COVID-19 efforts.
Gross Profit - 2019 vs. 2018
Adjusted Gross profit margin decreased to 60% for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to higher distribution expenses due to the recent IT implementation as well as recent acquisitions with a lower margin.
Adjusted Operating Profit (Loss)
The results of the S&IP business is reported in “Income from discontinued operations, net of tax” in the consolidated income statement for the periods from January 1, 2018 to April 30, 2018 are excluded from the operating (loss) profit presented in the table below. In accordance with GAAP, only costs specifically identifiable and attributable to a business to be disposed may be allocated to discontinued operations. Accordingly, for the periods from January 1, 2018 to April 30, 2018, our operating losses were driven by certain costs that were historically presented as a component of the S&IP business but were included in continuing operations. These costs, on a pre-tax basis, were $37.0 million in the period from January 1, 2018 to April 30, 2018.
A reconciliation of adjusted operating profit (loss), a non-GAAP measure, to operating profit (loss) is provided in the table below (in millions):
The items noted in the table above are described below:
On a GAAP basis, operating loss improved compared to the prior year due to higher sales and lower post-divestiture transition costs, partially offset by incremental expenses associated with restructuring activities undertaken in response to the effects the COVID-19 pandemic has had on our business.
Items impacting operating results include:
COVID-19 related expenses: As a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, we have incurred incremental expenses for additional personal protective equipment for our manufacturing employees, sanitation at our facilities and other costs. We incurred $7.9 million of COVID-19 related costs in the year ended December 31, 2020.
2020 Restructuring charges: As previously described under “Restructuring Activities,” we incurred $27.6 million of costs for restructuring activities that we initiated in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Restructuring and IT charges: As previously described under “Restructuring Activities,” we have incurred $2.2 million, $20.2 million and $15.7 million of costs, respectively, related to the Plan for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. These costs are primarily for consulting and other services along with employee severance and benefits.
Post-divestiture transition costs: We incurred $14.9 million, $56.3 million, and $9.2 million of transition costs associated with the divestiture of our former S&IP business in the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Acquisition and integration-related costs: We incurred $12.5 million, $13.1 million and $1.3 million of costs in connection with the acquisition and integration activities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, acquisition and integration-related costs includes $0.5 million and $9.1 million, respectively, of restructuring costs that are previously described under “Integration of Business Acquisitions.” The acquisitions of EndoClear, Summit and NeoMed are previously described under “Business Acquisitions.”
Litigation and legal: We incurred $27.5 million, $22.5 million and $15.6 million of expenses for certain litigation matters in the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, which are included in “Other expense, net.” In 2020, costs include incremental amounts associated with a $25.0 million payment to amicably resolve our dispute with Kimberly-Clark described in “Commitments and Contingencies” in Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this report.
Intangibles Amortization: Intangibles amortization is related primarily to intangibles acquired in prior business acquisitions and was $19.4 million, $20.0 million and $20.0 million, respectively, in the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Our non-GAAP measures excludes certain items, as applicable, for the relevant time periods as indicated in the “Operating Profit” table above. The excluded items include:
•Incremental expenses associated with altering operations in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
•Expenses associated with restructuring activities, including IT-related charges.
•Expenses associated with post-divestiture transition activities.
•The gain on sale and associated expenses related to the divestiture of the S&IP business.
•Certain acquisition and integration charges related to the acquisitions of Game Ready, NeoMed, Summit Medical and Endoclear LLC.
•Expenses associated with certain litigation matters.
•The amortization of intangible assets associated with prior business acquisitions.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $15.6 million, $15.0 million and $26.4 million in the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Interest expense in December 31, 2020 includes an early extinguishment loss of $1.3 million incurred upon redemption of our Senior Secured Notes on October 15, 2020. During 2018, we paid $339.0 million to retire our senior secured term loan, resulting in an early extinguishment loss of $4.8 million which was included in interest expense. Accordingly, interest expense was lower in 2020 and 2019 compared to 2018. In the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, $0.1 million, $1.8 million and $1.5 million, respectively, of interest was capitalized on long-term capital projects. Interest expense consists of interest accrued and amortization of debt discount and issuance costs on our long-term debt. See “Debt” in Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this report for further discussion of our indebtedness.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our overall effective tax rate was a 55% benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a benefit of 28% in 2019 and 53% in 2018. The primary drivers in the change in our effective tax rate were the CARES Act in 2020 and the effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017. See “Income Taxes” in Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this report for further details regarding our income taxes.
Unaudited Quarterly Financial Data
__________________________________________________
(a)Operating loss in the year ended December 31, 2020 includes $7.9 million of incremental costs incurred due to the COVID-19 pandemic, $27.6 million of costs associated with restructuring activities that were initiated in the fourth quarter of 2020, $2.2 million of post-divestiture restructuring charges, $14.9 million of post-divestiture transition costs, $12.5 million of acquisition and integration-related charges, and $27.5 million of legal costs, which includes incremental costs associated with a $25.0 million payment to amicably resolve our dispute with Kimberly-Clark as described in “Commitments and Contingencies” in Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this report.
(b)Operating loss in 2019 includes $56.3 million of post divestiture transition charges, $20.2 million of post divestiture restructuring and IT charges , $13.1 million related to acquisition and integration activities, and $22.5 million of legal expenses for certain litigation matters.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash on hand provided by operating activities and amounts available under our revolving credit facility. Our operating cash flow has historically been sufficient to meet our working capital requirements and fund capital expenditures. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we may see a delay in collection of accounts receivable. However, we anticipate that our current cash position and our ability to generate cash flows from domestic and international operations will provide sufficient liquidity to manage the business and fund working capital requirements during this uncertainty without using our available borrowing capacity. In addition, with our borrowing capacity, we expect to have the ability to fund capital expenditures and other investments necessary to grow our business for the foreseeable future for both our domestic and international operations.
As of December 31, 2020, $67.1 million of our $111.5 million of cash and cash equivalents was held by foreign subsidiaries. We consider the undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries to be indefinitely reinvested and currently do not have plans to repatriate such earnings. See further discussion below in “Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates” under “Income Taxes.” We do not expect restrictions on repatriation of cash held outside of the United States to have a material effect on our overall liquidity, financial condition or results of operations for the foreseeable future.
Cash and equivalents decreased by $93.8 million to $111.5 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to $205.3 million last year. The decrease was driven by the retirement of our Senior Unsecured Notes (the “Notes”) for $249.8 million partially offset by $180.0 million of net line of credit facility proceeds, which were primarily used to retire the Notes.
Cash and equivalents decreased by $179.2 million to $205.3 million as of December 31, 2019 compared to $384.5 million as of December 31, 2018. The decrease was driven by $74.5 million used in operations, $57.5 million used to acquire assets and businesses and $50.6 million of capital expenditures.
Long-Term Debt
As of December 31, 2020, total debt was $180.0 million on our Revolving Credit Facility that matures on October 30, 2023.
To the extent we remain in compliance with certain financial covenants in our credit agreement, we have the ability to access our Revolving Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2020, we had $180.0 million outstanding and letters of credit of $1.3 million issued under the Revolving Credit Facility.
The Senior Unsecured Notes (“Notes”) were to mature on October 15, 2022. On October 15, 2020, we redeemed the Notes pursuant to a provision for early redemption without paying a premium at any time on or after October 15, 2020. The redemption resulted in an early-extinguishment loss of $1.3 million, which was charged to interest expense on the redemption date. The Notes were redeemed using $69.8 million of cash and $180.0 million drawn from our Revolving Credit Facility.
For further information regarding our debt arrangements, see “Debt” in Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this report.
Obligations
__________________________________________________
(a)Our debt consists of borrowing outstanding on our Revolving Credit Facility as of December 31, 2020, and the interest payments assumes no principal repayments until the maturity date of the Revolving Credit Facility at the rate of interest in effect as of December 31, 2020.
(b)Open purchase orders represent amounts that we anticipate will become payable in the next year for goods and services that we have negotiated for delivery. The table does not include payments that are discretionary or for which timing is uncertain.
(c)Other commitments are primarily lease executory costs and uncertain tax positions. See “Income Taxes” in Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this report.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of net sales and expenses during the reporting period. The critical accounting policies we used in the preparation of the consolidated and financial statements are those that are important both to the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations and require significant judgments by management with regard to estimates used. The critical judgments by management relate to distributor rebate accruals, future cash flows associated with impairment testing for goodwill and long-lived assets, loss contingencies and deferred income taxes and potential tax assessments.
Use of Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP, which requires that we make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of net sales and expenses during the reporting periods. Estimates are used in accounting for, among other things, certain amounts included in discontinued operations, certain amounts included in assets and liabilities held for sale, distributor rebate accruals, future cash flows associated with impairment testing for goodwill and long-lived assets, loss contingencies, and deferred tax assets and potential income tax assessments. Our estimates are subject to uncertainties associated with the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Actual results could differ from these estimates, and the effect of the change could be material to our financial statements. Changes in these estimates are recorded when known.
Revenue Recognition
Sales revenue is recognized at the time of product shipment or delivery of our products to unaffiliated customers, depending on shipping terms. Accordingly, control of the products transfers to the customer in accordance with the transaction’s shipping terms. Sales revenue is recognized for the amount of considerations that we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for our products. Sales are reported net of returns, rebates, incentives, each as described below, and freight allowed. Taxes imposed by governmental authorities on our revenue-producing activities with customers, such as sales taxes and value-added taxes, are excluded from net sales.
Our contracts provide for forms of variable consideration including rebates. We provide for rebates to distributors for estimated historical differences between list prices and average end-user customer prices and the quantity of products expected to be sold to specific end-user customers. We maintain a liability for the estimated rebates.
Loss Contingencies
The outcome of loss contingencies, legal proceedings, indemnification matters and claims brought against us is subject to uncertainty. An estimated loss contingency is accrued by a charge to earnings if it is probable that an asset has been impaired or a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. Determination of whether to accrue a loss requires evaluation of the probability of an unfavorable outcome and the ability to make a reasonable estimate. Changes in these estimates could affect the timing and amount of accrual of loss contingencies.
Income Taxes
We recognize tax benefits in our financial statements when our uncertain tax positions are more likely than not to be sustained upon audit. The amount we recognize is measured as the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement.
We recognize deferred tax assets for deductible temporary differences, operating loss carry-forwards and tax credit carry-forwards. We record valuation allowances to reduce deferred tax assets to amounts that are more likely than not to be realized. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider both positive and negative evidence related to the likelihood of realization of the deferred tax assets. The weight given to the positive and negative evidence is commensurate with the extent to which the evidence may be objectively verified. As such, it is generally difficult for positive evidence regarding projected future taxable income exclusive of reversing taxable temporary differences to outweigh objective negative evidence of recent financial reporting losses. This assessment, which is completed on a taxing jurisdiction basis, takes into account a number of types of evidence, including the nature, frequency, and severity of current and cumulative financial reporting losses, sources of future taxable income, taxable income in prior carryback year(s) and tax planning strategies.
If it is determined that we would be able to realize deferred tax assets in the future in excess of our net recorded amount, an adjustment to the net deferred tax asset would increase income in the period that such determination was made. Likewise, should we determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of the net deferred tax assets in the future, an adjustment to the net deferred tax asset would decrease income in the period such determination was made. We regularly evaluate the need for valuation allowances against its deferred tax assets.
As of December 31, 2020, we have accumulated undistributed earnings generated by our foreign subsidiaries of approximately $32.1 million. Certain earnings were previously subject to tax due to the one-time transition tax of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017. Any additional impacts due with respect to the previously-taxed earnings, if repatriated, would generally be limited to foreign withholding tax, U.S. state income tax and the tax effect of certain foreign exchange adjustments. We intend, however, to indefinitely reinvest these earnings and expect future U.S. cash generation to be sufficient to meet U.S. cash needs. At this time, the determination of deferred tax liabilities on the amount of financial reporting over tax basis is not practicable.
Legal Matters
A description of legal matters can be seen in “Commitments and Contingencies” in Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this report.
Information Concerning Forward-Looking Statements
This annual report on Form 10-K and other materials we have filed or furnished or will file or furnish with the SEC (as well as information included in our oral or other written statements) contain, or will contain, certain “forward-looking statements,” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, regarding business strategies, market potential, future financial performance and other matters. Forward-looking statements include all statements that do not relate solely to historical or current facts, and can generally be identified by the use of words such as “may,” “believe,” “will,” “expect,” “project,” “estimate,” “anticipate,” “plan” or “continue” and similar expressions, among others. The matters discussed in these forward-looking statements are based on the current plans and expectations of our management and are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected, anticipated or implied in the forward-looking statements. These factors include, but are not limited to:
•general economic conditions particularly in the United States,
•fluctuations in global equity and fixed-income markets,
•risks related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic,
•the competitive environment,
•the loss of current customers or the inability to obtain new customers,
•litigation and enforcement actions,
•price fluctuations in key commodities,
•fluctuations in currency exchange rates,
•disruption in supply of raw materials or the distribution of finished goods,
•changes in governmental regulations that are applicable to our business,
•changes in asset valuations including write-downs of assets such as inventory, accounts receivable or other assets for impairment or other reasons, and
•the other matters described under “Risk Factors” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
Where, in any forward-looking statement, an expectation or belief as to future results or events is expressed, such expectation or belief is based on the current plans and expectations of our management and expressed in good faith and believed to have a reasonable basis, but there can be no assurance that the expectation or belief will result or be achieved or accomplished.