Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this annual report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements based upon our current beliefs, plans and expectations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” or in other parts of this annual report.
Overview
We are a world leader in sourcing, producing and distributing fresh avocados, serving retail, wholesale and foodservice customers. We source, produce, pack and distribute avocados to our customers and provide value-added services including ripening, bagging, custom packing and logistical management. In addition, we provide our customers with merchandising and promotional support, insights on market trends and training designed to increase their retail avocado sales.
We have two operating segments, which are also reporting segments. These reporting segments are Marketing and Distribution and International Farming. Our Marketing and Distribution reporting segment primarily sources fruit from growers and then distributes the fruit through our global distribution network. Our International Farming segment owns and operates avocado orchards (principally located in Peru) that supply our Marketing and Distribution segment with a stable supply of avocados. Substantially all of the avocados produced by our International Farming segment are sold to our Marketing and Distribution segment. Our International Farming segment represents the operations of Grupo Arato, which was accounted for under the equity method of accounting until we consolidated the entity on September 20, 2018.
Recent developments
IPO
In October 2020, we completed our IPO of common stock, in which we sold 7,450,000 shares and 1,750,000 shares were sold by certain selling stockholders. The shares began trading on the Nasdaq Global Select Market on October 1, 2020 at a public offering price of $12.00 per share. Net proceeds were $78.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and issuance costs. We intend to use the proceeds for working capital and other general corporate purposes.
Moruga impairment
During the second quarter of fiscal year 2020, industry-wide production information regarding the 2019-2020 blueberry harvest in Peru became available. As a result, we tested our investment in Moruga for impairment and concluded that the estimated fair value of the investment in Moruga was less than the carrying value of the investment and we concluded that the impairment is other-than-temporary. We recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $21.2 million to reduce the carrying balance of the investment to its estimated fair value of $22.2 million during the second quarter of fiscal year 2020 (see Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information).
COVID-19 pandemic impact
The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains and created significant volatility and disruption of financial markets. Government imposed closures and shelter-in-place orders across our key global markets have created volatility in supply and demand conditions. We have successfully implemented contingency plans throughout our operations in the U.S., Mexico and Peru in response to these dynamic market conditions. We believe that we are well positioned for the future as we continue to navigate the crisis and prepare for an eventual return to a more normal operating environment.
The COVID-19 pandemic began to have an adverse impact on our operating results during March, resulting in cancelled orders and altered customer buying patterns. The effects of the pandemic were most pronounced with our foodservice customer base. However, we have managed the COVID-19 pandemic thus far with minimal disruption to our overall business. In response to the COVID-19 disruptions, we have implemented a number of measures to protect the health and safety of our workforce. These measures include restrictions on non-essential business travel, the institution of work-from-home policies wherever feasible and the implementation of strategies for workplace safety at our facilities. We are unsure of the degree to which the pandemic will impact our future performance. The extent of the impact will depend on numerous factors, including the duration and spread of the pandemic and related government restrictions, which are uncertain and cannot be predicted.
Results of Operations
The operating results of our businesses are significantly impacted by the price and volume of avocados we farm, source and distribute. In addition, our results have been, and will continue to be, affected by quarterly and annual fluctuations due to a number of factors, including but not limited to pests and disease, weather patterns, changes in demand by consumers, food safety advisories, the timing of the receipt, reduction, or cancellation of significant customer orders, the gain or loss of significant customers, the availability, quality and price of raw materials, the utilization of capacity at our various locations and general economic conditions.
Our financial reporting currency is the U.S. dollar and the functional currency of our subsidiaries is the U.S. Dollar and substantially all of our sales are denominated in U.S. dollars. A significant portion of our purchases of avocados are denominated in the Mexican Peso and a significant portion of our growing and harvesting costs are denominated in Peruvian Soles. Fluctuations in the exchange rates between the U.S. Dollar and these local currencies usually do not have a significant impact on our gross margin because the impact affects our pricing by comparable amounts. Our margin exposure to exchange rate fluctuations is short-term in nature, as our sales price commitments are generally limited to less than one
month and orders can primarily be serviced with procured inventory. Over longer periods of time, we believe that the impact exchange rate fluctuations will have on our cost of goods sold will largely be passed on to our customers in the form of higher or lower prices.
Prior to September 21, 2018, we owned a 50% interest in Grupo Arato, during which time it was accounted for under the equity method. On September 20, 2018, we acquired the remaining 50% interest in Grupo Arato, at which time we ceased accounting for this investment under the equity method and consolidated Grupo Arato within the consolidated financial statements.
Net sales
Our net sales are generated predominantly from the shipment of fresh avocados to retail, wholesale and foodservice customers worldwide. Our net sales are affected by numerous factors, including mainly the balance between the supply of and demand for our produce and competition from other fresh produce companies. Our net sales are also dependent on our ability to supply a consistent volume and quality of fresh produce to the markets we serve.
Net sales decreased $21.0 million or 2% in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 primarily due to a 12% decrease in average per unit sales prices partially offset by an 11% increase in volume. Average price decreases were concentrated in the second half of fiscal year 2020 primarily due to strong industry supply relative to prior year in California and Peru related to weather conditions.
Net sales increased $23.4 million or 3% in fiscal year 2019 compared to fiscal year 2018 primarily due to an increase in the average sales price per pound of 18% compared to fiscal year 2018. The increase in average sales price per pound was partially offset by a 13% decrease in volume of avocados sold due primarily to lower industry supply conditions. We attribute much of the increase in price to the strong consumer demand throughout the year and limited industry supply. Industry supply was negatively impacted by weather-related events in Peru and California, while the percentage growth in exportable production from Mexico was lower than prior years. The increase in International Farming net sales is due to the full year impact of consolidating Grupo Arato. Grupo Arato sells virtually all of its fruit to our Marketing and Distribution segment, and its third-party revenues are primarily derived from packing services provided to avocado and blueberry growers in Peru.
Gross profit
Costs of sales is composed primarily of avocado procurement costs from independent growers and packers, logistic costs, packaging costs, labor, costs associated with cultivation (the cost of growing crops), harvesting and depreciation. Avocado procurement costs from third-party suppliers can vary significantly between and within fiscal years and correlate closely with market prices for avocados. While we have long-standing
relationships with our growers and packers, we predominantly purchase fruit on a daily basis at market rates. As such, the cost to procure products from independent growers can have a significant impact on our costs.
Logistics costs include land and sea transportation and expenses related to port facilities and distribution centers. Land transportation costs consist primarily of third-party trucking services to support North American distribution, while sea transportation cost consists primarily of third-party shipping of refrigerated containers from supply markets in South and Central America to demand markets in North America, Europe and Asia. Variations in containerboard prices, which affect the cost of boxes and other packaging materials, and fuel prices can have an impact on our product cost and our profit margins. Variations in the production yields, and other input costs also affect our cost of sales.
In general, changes in our volume of products sold can have a disproportionate effect on our gross profit. Within any particular year, a significant portion of our cost of products are fixed, particularly in our International Farming segment. Accordingly, higher volumes processed through packing and distribution facilities or produced on company-owned farms directly reduce the average cost per pound of fruit grown on company owned orchards, while lower volumes directly increase the average cost per pound of fruit grown on company owned orchards.
Gross profit decreased fiscal year 2020 over fiscal year 2019 as a result of lower gross margin percentage partially offset by higher sales volumes. Our gross margin percentage decreased 310 basis points primarily due to higher third-party fruit costs during first quarter of fiscal year 2020 compared to the same period of last year. The market conditions experienced during the early part of fiscal year 2019 were non-recurring in nature, as customer prices remained steady despite significant declines in fruit costs incurred due to the instability of supply from Mexico. In addition, gross profit in the International Farming segment was negatively impacted by lower sales pricing during the second half of fiscal year 2020 due to larger industry volumes from California and Peru relative to prior year.
Fiscal year 2019 performance benefited from increased profit on the sale of avocados sourced from third-party growers that was due to improved efficiency in several key areas across our product sourcing, production and distribution footprint, which helped to complement the favorable market supply conditions and continued strong consumer demand. Fiscal year 2019 gross margins and margin percentage also benefited from growth in and the full year impact of consolidating Grupo Arato into our International Farming segment, which on average generates a significantly higher gross margin percentage than our historical Marketing and Distribution business.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses primarily include the costs associated with selling, advertising and promotional expenses, professional fees, general corporate overhead and other related administrative functions.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $8.0 million or 17% in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 primarily due to higher stock-based compensation expense due to an award that vested during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2020 in connection with the successful completion of our IPO. We also incurred higher professional fees as well as organizational costs associated with the establishment of farming operations in Guatemala.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $12.9 million or 37% in fiscal year 2019 compared to fiscal year 2018 primarily due to an increase in accrued management bonuses (approximately $5.5 million due to operating income growth), the full year impact of consolidating Grupo Arato (approximately $7.1 million) and higher professional fees.
Equity method investees
Equity method income is primarily generated by earnings or losses from our investments in Henry Avocado, Moruga and Shanghai Mr Avocado Ltd.
Equity method income increased $0.6 million or 18% in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 due to earnings increases from Moruga due to the timing of blueberry harvests in Peru, partially offset by a decrease in earnings from Henry Avocado.
During the second quarter of fiscal year 2020, industry wide production information regarding the 2019-2020 blueberry harvest in Peru became available, indicating that there is greater competition and expansion by competitors than what we were previously expecting. We believe that the increase in supply due to expansion will result in a reduction in pricing over the long-term. As a result of this factor, among others, we lowered our long-term revenue and profitability forecasts of Moruga during the second quarter of fiscal year 2020, and concluded that the reduction in the forecasted revenues was an indicator of impairment. As a result, we tested our investment in Moruga for impairment and concluded that the estimated fair value of the investment in Moruga was less than the carrying value of the investment. Due to the change in long-term pricing and revenue expectations, we concluded that the impairment is other-than-temporary. We recorded an impairment charge of $21.2 million to reduce the carrying balance of the investment to its estimated fair value of $22.2 million during the second quarter of fiscal year 2020 (see Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information).
Equity method income decreased fiscal year 2019 over fiscal year 2018 due to the acquisition and subsequent consolidation of our investment in Grupo Arato (approximately $8.4 million). In fiscal year 2018, earnings from our investment in Grupo Arato were accounted for as equity method income through September 2018. In September 2018, we acquired the remaining outstanding capital stock of Grupo Arato, which resulted in a remeasurement gain of $62 million recorded during fiscal year 2018.
Interest expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest on borrowings under working capital facilities that we maintain and interest on other long-term debt used to make capital and equity investments.
Interest expense decreased $3.6 million or 35% in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 due to a combination of lower interest rates and lower average debt balances. A substantial portion of our debt has variable interest rates that are based on LIBOR, which has declined significantly since fiscal year 2019. Average debt balances were lower reflecting principal payments of existing long-term debt as well as prepayments of term debt that were made in fiscal year 2019.
Interest expense increased $4.9 million or 91% in fiscal year 2019 compared to fiscal year 2018 due to higher average debt balances, principally as a result of the full year impact of the additional borrowings that were used to finance the Grupo Arato acquisition in September 2018.
Other (expense) income, net
Other (expense) income, net consists of interest income, currency exchange gains or losses, interest rate derivative gains or losses and other miscellaneous income and expense items.
Other expense decreased $2.9 million or 81% in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 primarily due to foreign currency gains resulting from the weakening of the Mexican peso exchange rate relative to the US dollar and higher interest income due to higher average cash balances, partially offset by higher losses on interest rate contracts driven by market movements in short-term interest rates during fiscal year 2020.
Other (expense) income, net decreased $4.5 million or 491% in fiscal year 2019 compared to fiscal year 2018 primarily due to unrealized losses on interest rate contracts intended to fix interest rates on long-term debt resulting from declining short-term interest rates as well as foreign currency exchange losses that resulted from a weaker US dollar relative to the Mexican peso over the course of the year. These impacts were partially offset by higher interest income resulting from higher bank balances and the non-recurrence of debt extinguishment costs incurred in fiscal year 2018 in relation to debt refinancing performed subsequent to the Grupo Arato acquisition.
Provision for income taxes
The provision for income taxes consists of the consolidation of the tax provisions, computed on a separate entity basis, in each country in which we have operations. We recognize the effects of tax legislation in the period in which the law is enacted. Our deferred tax assets and liabilities are remeasured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years we estimate the related temporary differences to reverse. Realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon future earnings, the timing and amount of which are uncertain.
We recognize a tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon settlement. Interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits are recognized within provision for income taxes.
The provision for income taxes decreased $9.3 million or 38% in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019. The effective tax rate increased by 8.9% in fiscal year 2020 over fiscal year 2019. The higher effective tax rate was primarily due to the (i) nondeductible impairment of Moruga in fiscal year 2020, (ii) nondeductible executive compensation incurred as a result of the IPO in fiscal year 2020, and (iii) tax benefit related to net operating loss (“NOL”) carryback provisions of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES Act”) enacted in March 2020. The NOL carryback provisions allow the Company to carryback its fiscal year 2018 NOL to offset taxable income on a previously filed tax return. The result is a revaluation of deferred tax assets due to the utilization of NOLs at a higher tax rate in the carryback period.
The provision for income tax increased $8.1 million or 50% in fiscal year 2019 compared to fiscal year 2018. The effective tax rate increased 7.0% in fiscal year 2019 compared to fiscal year 2018. The higher effective tax rate was primarily due to non-recurring items in fiscal 2018 including the (i) favorable impact of remeasuring net deferred tax assets and liabilities at newly enacted tax rates and (ii) net tax benefit related to the application of the transition tax on accumulated foreign earnings due to the favorable impact of foreign tax credits. Both non-recurring items were provisions in the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“TCJ Act”) which was enacted in December 2017.
Segment Results of Operations
The CEO evaluates and monitors segment performance primarily through segment sales and segment adjusted earnings before interest expense, income taxes and depreciation and amortization (“adjusted EBITDA”). Management believes that adjusted EBITDA by segment provides useful information for analyzing the underlying business results as well as allowing investors a means to evaluate the financial results of each reportable segment in relation to the Company as a whole. These measures are not in accordance with, nor are they a substitute for or superior to, the comparable financial measures by generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”).
Adjusted EBITDA refers to net income (loss), before interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization expense, stock-based compensation expense, other income (expense), and income (loss) from equity method investees, further adjusted by any non-recurring or one-time items that are distortive to results (impairment of equity method investment, remeasurement gain on acquisition of equity method investee, and Grupo Arato’s pre-acquisition adjusted EBITDA).
Net sales
(1)Our 50% proportionate share of Grupo Arato’s sales from November 1, 2017 through September 20, 2018 when Grupo Arato was accounted for as an equity method investment.
Adjusted EBITDA
(1)Included 50% of our proportionate share of Grupo Arato’s adjusted EBITDA from November 1, 2017 through September 20, 2018 when Grupo Arato was accounted for as an equity method investment, and 100% of Grupo Arato’s adjusted EBITDA thereafter when we acquired the remaining 50% ownership..
(2)Total adjusted EBITDA excluded our 50% proportionate share of Grupo Arato’s adjusted EBITDA from November 1, 2017 through September 20, 2018 when Grupo Arato was accounted for as an equity method investment.
Marketing and Distribution
Net sales in our Marketing and Distribution segment decreased $26.8 million or 3% in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 primarily due to a 12% decrease in average per unit sales prices partially offset by an 11% increase in volume. Average price decreases were concentrated in the second half of fiscal year 2020 primarily due to strong industry supply in California and Peru, relative to prior year.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased $19.8 million or 23% in fiscal year 2020 over fiscal year 2019 primarily due to lower gross profit per pound of avocados sold. The decrease in gross margin was due primarily to the benefit of lower low third-party fruit costs during the first quarter of fiscal year 2019. The market conditions experienced in the prior year period were non-recurring in nature, as customer prices remained steady despite significant declines in fruit costs due to the instability of supply from Mexico.
Net sales increased $15.2 million or 2% in fiscal year 2019 compared to fiscal year 2018 due to the same factors impacting the overall increase in net sales discussed above.
Adjusted EBITDA increased $59.7 million or 211% in fiscal year 2019 compared to fiscal year 2018 primarily due to a higher gross profit per pound of avocados sold. The higher margin per pound was in-part due to the benefit of abnormally low third-party fruit costs during the first
quarter of fiscal year 2019. The market conditions experienced in the prior year period were non-recurring in nature, as customer prices remained steady despite significant declines in fruit costs due to the instability of supply from Mexico. The higher margin per pound was also in-part due to improved efficiency in several key areas across our product sourcing, production and distribution footprint, which helped to complement the favorable market supply conditions and continued strong consumer demand. This increase was partially offset by higher selling, general and administrative expenses that were driven by increases in accrued management bonuses (approximately $5.5 million due to operating income growth).
International Farming
Substantially all avocado sales of our International Farming reportable segment are to our Marketing and Distribution reportable segment, with the remainder of revenue largely derived from services provided to independent third parties.
Total segment sales in our International Farming segment decreased $8.5 million or 9% in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 primarily due to lower per unit sales pricing on the sale of avocados. Average sales prices declined by 24%, driven by strong industry supply during the harvest window which was concentrated in the second half of the fiscal year. The impact of lower sales pricing was partially offset by a 20% increase in volume harvested during fiscal year 2020. Volume increases were driven by improved production yields resulting from maturity of our avocado orchards. Net sales in our International Farming segment increased $5.8 million or 60% in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 primarily due to higher packing service revenues provided to third-party growers driven by their higher volumes.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased $11.7 million or 33% in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 primarily due to lower sales which was driven by lower pricing during the second half of fiscal year 2020. Adjusted EBITDA for International Farming is generally concentrated in the third and fourth quarters of our fiscal year in alignment with the harvest season for avocados in Peru.
Total segment sales increased $52.4 million or 138% and net sales increased $8.2 million or 586% in fiscal year 2019 compared to fiscal year 2018 primarily due to the full year impact of consolidating Grupo Arato, which was acquired on September 20, 2018. The International Farming sales prior to September 20, 2018 represent our proportionate 50% share of Grupo Arato’s sales prior to the consolidation of our investment in Grupo Arato. Overall, volumes from our International Farming reporting segment decreased 21% in fiscal year 2019 over fiscal year 2018 due primarily to weather conditions that negatively impacted production yields, while average sales prices increased by 33% as a result of industry supply shortages.
Adjusted EBITDA increased $20.2 million or 136% in fiscal year 2019 compared to fiscal year 2018 primarily attributable to the full year impact of consolidating the Grupo Arato farming operation. In addition, adjusted EBITDA benefited from higher sales prices experienced during fiscal year 2019 due to tighter industry supply that more than offset volume reductions due to lower production yields that were caused by weather conditions. Within any particular year, a significant portion of our cost of international farming products are fixed. Accordingly, changes in volumes produced on company-owned farms or average sales prices will have a disproportionate effect on adjusted EBITDA.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $13.7 million in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019, reflecting lower net income, partially offset by an impairment charge on our equity method investment in Moruga, favorable net change in working capital, and higher stock-based compensation expense. Within working capital, favorable changes in inventory and trade accounts receivables were partially offset by unfavorable changes in grower payables and miscellaneous receivables. The decrease in pricing on third-party fruit during the second half of fiscal year 2020 resulted in lower revenue and lower cost-basis, resulting in lower trade accounts receivable and inventory balances, as well as lower grower payables balances as of October 31, 2020. Changes in miscellaneous receivables were largely due to change in value-added tax (“VAT”)
receivable, which is correlated with the timing of material purchases and claim activity. We also experienced an increase in other assets attributable to implementation costs associated with cloud-based computing software solutions.
Net cash provided by operating activities increased $59.9 million in fiscal year 2019 compared to fiscal year 2018, largely due to the effect of a remeasurement gain on the acquisition of Grupo Arato recognized in fiscal year 2018. We also incurred higher depreciation and amortization charges due to property, plant, and equipment acquired in the acquisition of Grupo Arato. These increases were partially offset by net unfavorable change in working capital and lower equity method income and dividends from equity method investees as a result of the acquisition and subsequent consolidation of Grupo Arato.
Within working capital, changes in inventory were unfavorable due to an increase in the volume of avocados on hand and higher average purchase prices as of October 31, 2019 compared to the prior year combined with additional capitalized farming costs in Peru as a result of more acreage coming into production. Changes in accounts receivable were unfavorable primarily due to a shift in the sales mix during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2019 towards domestic customers with longer payment terms. In addition, net sales during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2018 included a larger percentage of sales of Peruvian fruit in Europe for which payment is received shortly after revenue is recognized. Changes in prepaid expenses and other current assets were affected by higher non-grower supplier advances within our Peruvian operation related to material suppliers and fixed asset procurement. Changes in miscellaneous receivables were favorable, primarily attributed to the timing of Peruvian VAT refunds in fiscal year 2019. Changes in accounts payable and accrued expenses were favorable, primarily due to higher incentive accruals driven by strong operating performance. Higher grower payables were attributed to Mexican avocado growers having higher inventory volumes and prices in October 2019 as compared to October 2018. The increase in other liabilities was due to a long-term grower liability accrued in fiscal year 2019 and additional accruals of interest and penalties on our uncertain tax positions.
Investing activities
Property, plant and equipment
In fiscal years 2020 and 2019, we made expenditures for the construction of our new distribution center in Laredo, Texas, farm development and packinghouse expansion in Peru, and land improvements on new land leased in Guatemala. Our new distribution center in Texas is expected to expand our distribution capacity in North America.
In fiscal year 2020, proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment were primarily from the sale of two properties.
Investment in equity method investees
In fiscal years 2020 and 2019, we made capital contributions to our joint venture in Copaltas S.A.S. to support the purchase of additional farmland in Colombia.
Financing activities
IPO
Net proceeds from our IPO were $78.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and issuance costs. We intend to use the proceeds for working capital and other general corporate purposes, which may include the repayment of indebtedness, and to fund future acquisitions (if any).
Shareholders’ equity
We paid dividends of $0.21 per share in fiscal year 2020 compared to $0.09 per share in fiscal year 2019.
Borrowings and repayments of debt
We utilize a revolving line of credit for short-term working capital purposes. Principal payments on our term loans and other notes payable under our credit facility are made in accordance with debt maturity schedules under the facility.
Capital resources
Capital resources include cash flows from operations, cash and cash equivalents, and debt financing.
We have a $275 million syndicated credit facility with Bank of America, N.A., comprised of two term loans totaling $175 million and a revolving credit facility (“revolver”) providing up to $100 million in borrowings that will expire in October 2023. The credit facility also includes a swing line facility and an accordion feature which allows us to increase the borrowings by up to $125 million, with bank approval. We did not have any outstanding borrowings under the revolver as of October 31, 2020 and 2019. Interest on the revolver bears rates at a spread over LIBOR that varies with our leverage ratio. As of October 31, 2020 and 2019, interest rates on the revolver were 1.90% and 3.54%, respectively. Proceeds from the term loan borrowings were used to partially fund the acquisition of Grupo Arato in October 2018.
As of October 31, 2020, we were required to comply with the following financial covenants: (a) a quarterly consolidated leverage ratio of not more than 3.00 to 1.00 and (b) a quarterly consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio of not less than 1.50 to 1.00. As of October 31, 2020, our consolidated leverage ratio was 0.7 to 1.00 and our consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio was 1.8 to 1.00 and we were in compliance with all such covenants of the credit facility. The loans are secured by real property, personal property and the capital stock of our subsidiaries. We pay fees on unused commitments on the credit facility.
Contractual obligations
The following table summarizes contractual obligations pursuant to which we are required to make cash payments. The information is presented as of October 31, 2020:
(1)Includes interest payments on our credit facility based on rates as of October 31, 2020. The impact of our outstanding floating-to-fixed interest rate swap on the variable rate debt interest payments has been reflected in the interest payments noted above. As a result, approximately $100 million of our variable rate debt under the credit facility has been treated as if it were 4.28% fixed rate debt.
In May 2020, we entered into a lease for our new corporate headquarters in Oxnard, California. The lease commenced in July 2020, with a 20 year term, ending in 2040. The total lease payments over the term of the lease are $28.1 million.
In April 2020, we entered into an agreement with a general contractor to construct a new distribution facility in Laredo, Texas. This facility will support our distribution of Mexican sourced fruit into North American markets and will include border crossing, cold storage and value-added processing capabilities. The total estimated cost of the contract is $42 million, of which $25.2 million has been incurred as of October 31, 2020. The project is scheduled for completion in the third quarter of fiscal year 2021.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Additionally, we frequently engage third party valuation experts to assist us with estimates described below. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Investments. We maintain investments in other growers, packers and distributors of avocados. We account for these non-marketable investments using the equity method of accounting if the investment gives us the ability to exercise significant influence over, but not control, an investee. Significant influence generally exists when we have an ownership interest representing between 20% and 50% of the voting stock of the investee. Under the equity method of accounting, investments are stated at initial cost and are adjusted for subsequent additional investments and our proportionate share of earnings or losses and distributions. We evaluate whether our equity method investments are impaired when certain indications of impairment are present. Although a current fair value below the recorded investment is an indicator of impairment, we recognize an impairment loss on our equity method investments only if the loss in value is deemed to be an other-than-temporary-impairment (“OTTI”). If an impairment of an equity method investment is determined to be other than temporary, we record an impairment charge sufficient to reduce the investment’s carrying value to its fair value, which results in a new cost basis in the investment. The primary factors we consider in our determination of whether declines in fair value are other than temporary are the length of time that the fair value of the investment is below our carrying value; the severity of the decline; and the financial condition, operating performance and near term prospects of the investee. In addition, we consider the reason for the decline in fair value, be it general market conditions, industry specific or investee specific; and our intent and ability to hold the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for a recovery in fair value. As our assessment of the fair value of our investments and any resulting impairment losses and the timing of when to recognize such charges requires judgment and includes estimates and assumptions, actual results could differ materially from our estimates and assumptions.
Goodwill. Our goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price of business combinations over the fair value of the net assets acquired. We assess goodwill for impairment on an annual basis during the fourth quarter of each fiscal year, and between annual tests whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. An impairment exists by the amount the fair value of a reporting unit to which goodwill has been allocated is less than their respective carrying values. The impairment for goodwill is limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. Goodwill impairment testing requires significant judgment and management estimates, including, but not limited to, the determination of (i) the number of reporting units, (ii) the goodwill and other assets and liabilities to be allocated to the reporting units and (iii) the fair values of the reporting units. The estimates and assumptions described above, along with other factors such as discount rates, will significantly affect the outcome of the impairment tests and the amounts of any resulting impairment losses.
Income taxes. We account for deferred tax liabilities and assets for the future consequences of events that have been recognized in our consolidated financial statements or tax returns. Measurement of the deferred items is based on enacted tax laws. In the event the future consequences of differences between financial reporting bases and tax bases of our assets and liabilities result in a deferred tax asset, we perform an evaluation of the probability of being able to realize the future benefits indicated by such asset. A valuation allowance related to a deferred tax asset is recorded when it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized.
As a multinational corporation, we are subject to taxation in many jurisdictions, and the calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations in various taxing jurisdictions. If we ultimately determine that the payment of these liabilities will be unnecessary, the liability will be reversed, and we will recognize a tax benefit during the period in which it is determined the liability no longer applies. Conversely, we record additional tax charges in a period in which it is determined that a recorded tax liability is less than the ultimate assessment is expected to be.
We recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon settlement. Interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits are recognized within provision for income taxes.
The application of tax laws and regulations is subject to legal and factual interpretation, judgment and uncertainty. Tax laws and regulations themselves are subject to change as a result of changes in fiscal policy, changes in legislation, the evolution of regulations and court rulings. Therefore, the actual liability for U.S. or foreign taxes may be materially different from management’s estimates, which could result in the need to record additional tax liabilities or potentially reverse previously recorded tax liabilities.
Stock-based compensation. The Company uses the fair value recognition method for accounting for stock-based compensation. Under the fair value recognition method, cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense on the straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. When vesting is based on the occurrence of certain defined liquidity events, expense relative to such awards is measured based on the grant date fair value of the award and is recorded when the event occurs. Forfeitures are recognized in the period they occur.
The fair value of stock options is estimated as of the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option model. We use a third-party valuation specialist to determine the inputs of the model, including volatility, risk-free interest rate, and the estimated life of the option term. The fair value of restricted stock units is determined based on the market price of our common stock on the date of grant.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Refer to Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included herein for information on recently issued accounting standards.
JOBS Act
As an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act, we can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected to avail ourselves of this exemption and, as a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates. We intend to rely on other exemptions provided by the JOBS Act, including without limitation, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of Sarbanes-Oxley. As a result, our combined financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (i) the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the consummation of our IPO, (ii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, (iii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, which would occur if the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates exceeded $700 million as of the last business day of the second fiscal quarter of such year, or (iv) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the periods presented we did not have, nor do we currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under SEC rules.