Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
For a description of the Company’s critical accounting policies and an understanding of Avnet and the significant factors that influenced the Company’s performance during the past three fiscal years, the following discussion should be read in conjunction with the description of the business appearing in Item 1 of this Report and the consolidated financial statements, including the related notes and schedule, and other information appearing in Item 8 of this Report. The Company operates on a “52/53 week” fiscal year. Fiscal 2021 contains 53 weeks compared to 52 weeks in fiscal 2020. The extra week, which occurred in the first quarter of fiscal 2021, impacts the year-over-year analysis in this MD&A.
The discussion of the Company’s results of operations includes references to the impact of foreign currency translation. When the U.S. Dollar strengthens and the stronger exchange rates of the current year are used to translate the results of operations of Avnet’s subsidiaries denominated in foreign currencies, the resulting impact is a decrease in U.S. Dollars of reported results. Conversely, when the U.S. Dollar weakens and the weaker exchange rates of the current year are used to translate the results of operations of Avnet’s subsidiaries denominated in foreign currencies, the resulting impact is an increase in U.S. Dollars of reported results. In the discussion that follows, results excluding this impact, primarily for subsidiaries in EMEA and Asia, are referred to as “constant currency.”
In addition to disclosing financial results that are determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S. (“GAAP”), the Company also discloses certain non-GAAP financial information, including:
● Sales adjusted for certain items that impact the year-over-year analysis, which includes the impact of certain acquisitions by adjusting Avnet’s prior periods to include the sales of acquired businesses, as if the acquisitions had occurred at the beginning of the earliest period presented. In addition, fiscal 2021 sales are adjusted for the estimated impact of the extra week of sales in the first quarter of fiscal 2021, as discussed above. Sales taking into account these adjustments are referred to as “organic sales.” Additionally, the Company has adjusted sales for the impact of the termination of the TI distribution agreement between fiscal years.
● Operating income excluding (i) restructuring, integration and other expenses (see Restructuring, Integration and Other Expenses in this MD&A), (ii) goodwill and long-lived asset impairment expense, and (iii) amortization of acquired intangible assets and other. Operating income excluding such amounts is referred to as “adjusted operating income.”
The reconciliation of operating income (loss) to adjusted operating income is presented in the following table:
Management believes that providing this additional information is useful to readers to better assess and understand operating performance, especially when comparing results with prior periods or forecasting performance for future periods, primarily because management typically monitors the business both including and excluding these adjustments to GAAP results. Management also uses these non-GAAP measures to establish operational goals and, in many cases, for measuring performance for compensation purposes. However, any analysis of results on a non-GAAP basis should be used as a complement to, and in conjunction with, results presented in accordance with GAAP.
Results of Operations
Significant Risks and Uncertainties
The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains, constrained work force participation, disrupted logistics and distribution systems, and created significant volatility and disruption of financial markets. As the scope and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic is unknown and the extent of its economic impact continues to evolve globally, there is uncertainty related to the ultimate impact it will have on the Company’s business, its employees, results of operations and financial condition, and to what extent the Company’s actions to mitigate such impacts will be successful and sufficient.
Executive Summary
Sales for fiscal 2021 were $19.53 billion, an increase of 10.8% from fiscal 2020 sales of $17.63 billion. Organic sales in constant currency increased 6.3% as compared to sales in the prior year. This increase in organic sales was predominately driven by organic sales growth in Asia as a result from strong demand as the electronic components industry recovered from declines in demand during fiscal 2020.
Gross profit margin of 11.5% decreased 23 basis points compared to 11.7% in fiscal 2020. This decline was primarily due to geographical market mix and, to a lesser extent, from unfavorable changes in product and customer mix.
Operating income was $281.4 million in fiscal 2021, representing an increase compared with fiscal 2020 operating loss of $4.6 million. Operating income margin was 1.4% in fiscal 2021 as compared to an operating loss in fiscal 2020 driven primarily by goodwill and long-lived asset impairment expense. Adjusted operating income margin was 2.1% in fiscal 2021 as compared to 1.7% in fiscal 2020, an increase of 36 basis points. This increase in adjusted operating income margin is primarily due to the increase in sales, partially offset by an increase in selling, general and administrative expenses and decrease in gross profit margin.
Sales
Three-Year Analysis of Sales: By Operating Group and Geography
The table below provides a year-over-year summary of sales for the Company and its operating groups.
The table below provides the reconciliation of reported sales to organic sales for fiscal 2021 by region and by operating group. Reported sales were the same as organic sales in fiscal 2020.
(1)The impact of the additional week of sales in the first quarter of fiscal 2021 is estimated.
(2) Sales adjusted for the impact of the termination of the TI distribution contract, which was completed in December 2020. Sales of TI products was $292 million and $1.57 billion for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively.
The table below provides reported and organic sales growth rates for fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 by region and by operating group.
(1) Sales growth rates excluding the impact of the termination of the TI distribution agreement, which was completed in December 2020.
Avnet’s sales for fiscal 2021 were $19.53 billion, an increase of $1.90 billion, or 10.8%, from fiscal 2020 sales of $17.63 billion. Organic sales in constant currency increased 6.3% as compared to sales in the prior year. The year-over-year increase in organic sales was primarily due to growth in Asia where demand for electronic components improved compared to fiscal 2020, partially offset by declines in the Americas and EMEA primarily due to the loss of the TI product line. Organic sales in constant currency excluding TI sales increased 14.8% year over year in fiscal 2021 with all regions contributing to the growth.
EC sales in fiscal 2021 were $18.03 billion, representing a 10.3% increase over fiscal 2020 sales. EC organic sales in constant currency increased 6.0% year over year driven by the Asia region. EC organic sales in constant currency excluding TI sales increased 15.3% year over year. The increase in sales in the Company’s EC operating group is primarily due to improvements in overall market demand as fiscal 2020 was a year where demand had declined due to an overall industry economic downturn.
Farnell sales in fiscal 2021 were $1.50 billion, an increase of $0.2 million or 16.2% over fiscal 2020 sales. Organic sales in constant currency increased 9.5% year-over-year. These increases were primarily a result of improved market demand in all three regions.
Gross Profit and Gross Profit Margin
Gross profit in fiscal 2021 was $2.24 billion, an increase of $177.2 million, or 8.6%, compared to fiscal 2020. Gross profit margin of 11.5% in fiscal 2021 decreased 23 basis points from fiscal 2020 driven primarily by a higher percentage of sales coming from the Asia region and, to a lesser extent, from unfavorable changes in product and customer mix. Sales in the higher margin western regions represented approximately 55% of sales in fiscal 2021 as compared to 60% during fiscal 2020.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A expenses”) in fiscal 2021 were $1.87 billion, an increase of
$32.7 million, or 1.8%, compared to fiscal 2020. The year-over-year increase in SG&A expenses was primarily due to the impact of the extra week in the first quarter of fiscal 2021, the impact of foreign currency due to the weakening U.S. Dollar and from increases due to the growth in sales, partially offset by the cost savings from restructuring activities and lower amortization expense.
Metrics that management monitors with respect to its operating expenses are SG&A expenses as a percentage of sales and as a percentage of gross profit. In fiscal 2021, SG&A expenses as a percentage of sales were 9.6% and as a percentage of gross profit were 83.7%, as compared with 10.4% and 89.3%, respectively, in fiscal 2020. The decrease in SG&A expenses as a percentage of gross profit was primarily due to the operating leverage created from higher sales, cost savings from restructuring activities, and lower amortization expense, partially offset by foreign currency due to the weakening U.S. Dollar and from the decrease in gross profit margin.
Goodwill and Intangible Asset Impairment Expenses
The Company incurred $144.1 million of goodwill and intangible asset impairment expenses during fiscal 2020. See Note 7, “Goodwill, intangible assets and impairments” to the Company’s consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information related to goodwill impairment and intangible asset impairment expenses.
Restructuring, Integration and Other Expenses
As a result of management’s focus on improving operating efficiencies and reducing operating costs, the Company has incurred certain restructuring, integration, and other costs. Restructuring costs primarily relate to the restructuring of the Company’s information technology, distribution center footprint, and business operations. Integration costs relate to the integration of certain regional and global businesses, including incremental costs incurred as part of the consolidation, relocation, sale and closure of distribution centers and office facilities. Other costs consist primarily of any other miscellaneous costs that relate to restructuring, integration, and other expenses, including acquisition related costs and specific and incremental costs incurred associated with the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Company recorded $59.4 million for restructuring costs in fiscal 2021 and expects to realize approximately $50.0 million in incremental annualized operating costs savings as a result of such restructuring actions. Restructuring expenses consisted of $54.6 million for severance and $4.8 million for facility exit costs. The Company also incurred integration costs of $35.8 million, which was offset by a gain on legal settlement of $8.2 million and a reversal of $2.6 million for changes in estimates for costs associated with prior year restructuring actions. The after-tax impact of restructuring, integration, and other expenses were $66.9 million and $0.67 per share on a diluted basis.
See Note 18, “Restructuring expenses” to the Company’s consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information related to restructuring expenses.
Operating Income (Loss)
Operating income for fiscal 2021 was $281.4 million, an increase of $286.0 million as compared with fiscal 2020 operating loss of $4.6 million, which included goodwill and long-lived asset impairment expense of $144.1 million. Operating income margin was 1.4% in fiscal 2021 compared to an operating loss in fiscal 2020. Adjusted operating income for fiscal 2021 was $407.0 million, an increase of $104.2 million or 34.4%, from fiscal 2020. The year-over-year increase in adjusted operating income was primarily driven by the increase in sales, partially offset by a lower gross profit margin and increases to SG&A expenses.
Interest and Other Financing Expenses, Net and Other (Expense) Income, Net
Interest and other financing expenses for fiscal 2021 was $89.5 million, a decrease of $33.3 million, or 27.1%, compared with interest and other financing expenses of $122.7 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease in interest and other financing expenses in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily related to lower outstanding borrowings during fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020.
In fiscal 2021, the Company had $19.0 million of other expense as compared with $2.2 million of other expense in fiscal 2020. In fiscal 2021, other expense included equity investment impairment expense, debt extinguishment costs, and foreign currency losses of $12.9 million offset by other insignificant miscellaneous other income items compared to equity investment impairment expense substantially all offset by foreign currency gains in fiscal 2020.
Income Tax Expense
Avnet’s effective tax rate on its income before income taxes was a benefit of 11.7% in fiscal 2021. The effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 was favorably impacted primarily by (i) a tax benefit arising from the reduction in fair value of certain businesses, resulting in losses that can be carried back under U.S. tax law and, (ii) the mix of income in lower tax jurisdictions, partially offset by (iii) increases to unrecognized tax benefit reserves.
See Note 10, “Income taxes” to the Company’s consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion on the effective tax rate.
Net Income (Loss)
As a result of the factors described in the preceding sections of this MD&A, the Company’s net income in fiscal 2021 was $193.1 million, or $1.93 earnings per share on a diluted basis, compared with net loss of $31.1 million, or $0.31 of net loss per share on a diluted basis, in fiscal 2020.
Fiscal 2020 Comparison to Fiscal 2019
For comparison of the Company’s results of operations between fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 27, 2020 filed with the SEC on August 14, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
The Company generated $90.9 million of cash from its operating activities in fiscal 2021 as compared to $730.2 million in fiscal 2020. These operating cash flows are comprised of: (i) cash flows generated from net income (loss), adjusted for the impact of non-cash and other items, which includes depreciation and amortization expense, deferred income taxes, stock-based compensation expense, amortization of operating lease assets and other non-cash items , and (ii) cash flows used for, or generated from, working capital and other, excluding cash and cash equivalents. Cash used for working capital and other to support sales growth was $372.5 million during fiscal 2021, including increases in accounts receivable of $615.4 million and inventories of $409.1 million, offset by increases in accounts payable of $621.0 million and accrued expenses and other of $30.9 million. Comparatively, cash generated from working capital and other was $335.1 million during fiscal 2020, including decreases in accounts receivable of $221.5 million and
inventories of $266.8 million, partially offset by decreases in accounts payable of $107.0 million and accrued expenses and other of $46.2 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
During fiscal 2021, the Company received net proceeds of $297.7 million as a result of the issuance of $300.0 million of 3.00% Notes due May 2031 and $22.9 million under the Securitization Program. During fiscal 2021, the Company repaid $305.1 million of notes and $231.7 million under the Credit Facility, and paid dividends on common stock of $84.3 million.
During fiscal 2020, the Company repaid $302.0 million of notes and $227.3 million under the Securitization Program and received net proceeds of $223.1 million under the Credit Facility. During fiscal 2020, the Company paid dividends on common stock of $84.0 million and repurchased $237.8 million of common stock.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
During fiscal 2021, the Company used $50.4 million for capital expenditures primarily related to warehouse and facilities, and information technology hardware and software costs compared to $73.5 million in fiscal 2020. During fiscal 2021, the Company used $18.4 million of cash for acquisitions, which is net of the cash acquired, compared to $51.5 million of cash for acquisitions, which is net of the cash acquired, in fiscal 2020. In addition, the Company paid $12.8 million for other investing activities during fiscal 2020.
Financing Transactions
The Company uses a variety of financing arrangements, both short-term and long-term, to fund its operations in addition to cash generated from operating activities. The Company also uses several funding sources to avoid becoming overly dependent on one financing source, and to lower funding costs. These financing arrangements include public debt, short-term and long-term bank loans, a revolving credit facility (the “Credit Facility”), and an accounts receivable securitization program (the “Securitization Program”).
The Company has various lines of credit, financing arrangements and other forms of bank debt in the U.S. and various foreign locations to fund the short-term working capital, foreign exchange, overdraft, and letter of credit needs of its wholly owned subsidiaries. Outstanding borrowings under such forms of debt at the end of fiscal 2021 was $1.4 million.
As an alternative form of financing outside of the United States, the Company sells certain of its trade accounts receivable on a non-recourse basis to third-party financial institutions pursuant to factoring agreements. The Company accounts for these transactions as sales of receivables and presents cash proceeds as cash provided by operating activities in the consolidated statements of cash flows. Factoring fees for the sales of trade accounts receivables are recorded within “Interest and other financing expenses, net” and are not material.
See Note 8, “Debt” to the Company’s consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on financing transactions including the Credit Facility, the Securitization Program and the outstanding Notes as of July 3, 2021.
Covenants and Conditions
The Company’s Credit Facility contains certain covenants with various limitations on debt incurrence, share repurchases, dividends, investments and capital expenditures, and also includes financial covenants requiring the Company to maintain minimum interest coverage and leverage ratios. The Company was in compliance with all such covenants as of July 3, 2021.
The Company’s Securitization Program contains certain covenants relating to the quality of the receivables sold. If these conditions are not met, the Company may not be able to borrow any additional funds and the financial institutions may consider this an amortization event, as defined in the Securitization Program agreements, which would permit the financial institutions to liquidate the accounts receivables sold to cover any outstanding borrowings. Circumstances that could affect the Company’s ability to meet the required covenants and conditions of the Securitization Program include the Company’s ongoing profitability and various other economic, market, and industry factors. The Company was in compliance with all such covenants as of July 3, 2021.
Management does not believe that the covenants under the Credit Facility or Securitization Program limit the Company’s ability to pursue its intended business strategy or its future financing needs.
See Liquidity below for further discussion of the Company’s availability under these various facilities.
Liquidity
The Company had cash and cash equivalents of $199.7 million as of July 3, 2021, of which $150.5 million was held outside the United States. As of June 27, 2020, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $477.0 million, of which $411.2 million was held outside of the United States.
As of July 3, 2021, there were no borrowings outstanding under the Credit Facility, with $1.3 million in letters of credit issued and $22.9 million outstanding under the Securitization Program. During fiscal 2021, the Company had an average daily balance outstanding under the Credit Facility of approximately $167.8 million and $173.6 million under the Securitization Program. As of July 3, 2021, the combined availability under the Credit Facility and the Securitization Program was $1.64 billion. Availability under the Securitization Program is subject to the Company having sufficient eligible trade accounts receivable in the United States to support desired borrowings.
In July 2021, the Company extended the maturity of the Securitization Program to August 31, 2021. The Company expects to renew the Securitization Program for two years on similar terms in the first quarter of fiscal 2022.
During periods of weakening demand in the electronic components industry, the Company typically generates cash from operating activities. Conversely, the Company is more likely to use operating cash flows for working capital requirements during periods of higher growth. The Company generated $90.9 million in cash flows from operating activities during the fiscal year ended July 3, 2021.
Liquidity is subject to many factors, such as normal business operations and general economic, financial, competitive, legislative, and regulatory factors that are beyond the Company’s control. To the extent the cash balances held in foreign locations cannot be remitted back to the U.S. in a tax efficient manner, those cash balances are generally used for ongoing working capital, capital expenditures and other foreign business needs. In addition, local government regulations may restrict the Company’s ability to move funds among various locations under certain circumstances. Management does not believe such restrictions would limit the Company’s ability to pursue its intended business strategy.
The Company continually monitors and reviews its liquidity position and funding needs. Management believes that the Company’s ability to generate operating cash flows in the future and available borrowing capacity, including capacity for the non-recourse sale of trade accounts receivable, will be sufficient to meet its future liquidity needs. The Company may also renew or replace expiring debt arrangements in the future and management believes the Company will have adequate access to capital markets, if needed. The Company has historically generated operating cash flows and believes it will have the ability to do so in the future.
As a result of the evolving impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and the related uncertain future business conditions, the Company in unlikely to make near-term strategic investments through acquisitions.
As of July 3, 2021, the Company may repurchase up to an aggregate of $469.0 million of the Company’s common stock through a $2.95 billion share repurchase program approved by the Board of Directors. The Company may repurchase stock from time to time at the discretion of management, subject to strategic considerations, market conditions, amended Credit Facility restrictions and other factors. The Company may terminate or limit the share repurchase program at any time without prior notice. As a result of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and the corresponding need to manage liquidity and leverage, the Company has suspended share repurchases.
The Company has historically paid quarterly cash dividends on shares of its common stock, and future dividends are subject to approval by the Board of Directors. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, the Board of Directors approved a dividend of $0.22 per share, which resulted in $21.9 million of dividend payments during the quarter.
Long-Term Contractual Obligations
The Company has the following contractual obligations outstanding as of July 3, 2021 (in millions):
(1) Excludes unamortized discount and issuance costs on debt.
(2) Represents interest expense due on debt by using fixed interest rates for fixed rate debt and assuming the same interest rate at the end of fiscal 2021 for variable rate debt.
(3) Excludes imputed interest on operating lease liabilities.
At July 3, 2021, the Company had an estimated liability for income tax contingencies of $145.1 million, which is not included in the above table. Cash payments associated with the settlement of these liabilities that are expected to be paid within the next 12 months is $2.4 million. The settlement period for the remaining amount of the unrecognized tax benefits, including related accrued interest and penalties, cannot be determined, and therefore was not included in the table.
The Company does not currently have any material long-term commitments for purchases of inventories from suppliers or for capital expenditures.
Critical Accounting Policies
The Company’s consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires the Company to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, sales and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are based upon the Company’s continual evaluation of available information, including historical results and anticipated future events. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates.
The Securities and Exchange Commission defines critical accounting policies as those that are, in management’s view, most important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations and that require significant judgments and estimates. Management believes the Company’s most critical accounting policies at the end of fiscal 2021 relate to:
Valuation of Inventories
Inventories are recorded at the lower of cost or estimated net realizable value. Inventory cost includes the purchase price of finished goods and any freight cost incurred to receive the inventory into the Company’s distribution centers. The Company’s inventories include electronic components sold into changing, cyclical, and competitive markets, so inventories may decline in market value or become obsolete.
The Company regularly evaluates inventories for expected customer demand, obsolescence, current market prices, and other factors that may render inventories less marketable. Write-downs are recorded so that inventories reflect the estimated net realizable value and take into account the Company’s contractual provisions with its suppliers, which may provide certain protections to the Company for product obsolescence and price erosion in the form of rights of return, stock rotation rights, obsolescence allowances, and price protections. Because of the large number of products and suppliers and the complexity of managing the process around price protections and stock rotations, estimates are made regarding the net realizable value of inventories. Additionally, assumptions about future demand and market conditions, as well as decisions to discontinue certain product lines, impact the evaluation of whether to write-down inventories. If future demand change or actual market conditions are less favorable than assumed, then management evaluates whether additional write-downs of inventories are required. In any case, actual net realizable values could be different from those currently estimated.
Accounting for Income Taxes
Management’s judgment is required in determining income tax expenses and unrecognized tax benefits, in measuring deferred tax assets and liabilities, and valuing allowances recorded against net deferred tax assets. Recovering net deferred tax assets depends on the Company’s ability to generate sufficient future taxable income in certain jurisdictions. In addition, when assessing the need for valuation allowances, the Company considers historic levels and types of income, expectations and risk associated with estimates of future taxable income, and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. If the Company determines that it cannot realize all or part of its deferred tax assets in the future, it may record additional valuation allowances against the deferred tax assets with a corresponding increase to income tax expense in the period such determination is made. Similarly, if the Company determines that it can realize all or part of its deferred tax assets that have an associated valuation allowance established, the Company may release a valuation allowance with a corresponding benefit to income tax expense in the period such determination is made.
The Company establishes contingent liabilities for potentially unfavorable outcomes of positions taken on certain tax matters. These liabilities are based on management’s assessment of whether a tax benefit is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by tax authorities. The anticipated and actual outcomes of these matters may differ, which
may result in changes in estimates to such liabilities. To the extent such changes in estimates are necessary, the Company’s effective tax rate may fluctuate. In accordance with the Company’s accounting policy, accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits are recorded as a component of income tax expense.
In determining the Company’s income tax expense, management considers current tax regulations in the numerous jurisdictions in which it operates, including the impact of tax law and regulation changes in the jurisdictions the Company operates in. The Company exercises judgment for interpretation and application of such current tax regulations. Changes to such tax regulations or disagreements with the Company’s interpretation or application by tax authorities in any of the Company’s major jurisdictions may have a significant impact on the Company’s income tax expense.
See Note 10 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion on income tax expense, valuation allowances and unrecognized tax benefits.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848): Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting (“ASU No. 2020-04”), which provides optional guidance to ease the potential burden in accounting for reference rate reform on financial reporting. The new guidance provides optional expedients and exceptions for applying generally accepted accounting principles to transactions affected by reference rate reform if certain criteria are met. In January 2021, the FASB issued ASU No. 2021-01, Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848): Scope (“ASU No. 2021-01”), to clarify certain optional expedients and exceptions in Topic 848 for contract modifications and hedge accounting to apply to derivatives that are affected by the discounting transition. Both ASU No. 2020-04 and ASU No. 2021-01 are effective upon issuance through December 31, 2022. The Company is currently evaluating the effects of adopting the provisions of ASU No. 2020-04 and ASU No. 2021-01, but does not currently expect a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (Topic 740) (“ASU No. 2019-12”), which removes certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and also clarifies and amends existing guidance to improve consistent application. ASU No. 2019-12 will be effective for the Company in the first quarter of fiscal 2022, and early adoption is permitted. Depending on the amendment, adoption may be applied on a retrospective, modified retrospective, or prospective basis. The Company is currently evaluating the potential effects of adopting the provisions of ASU No. 2019-12.