Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Risk Factors” section in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
Cerecor Inc. (the “Company” or “Cerecor” or “we”) is a biopharmaceutical company focused on becoming a leader in development and commercialization of treatments for rare and orphan diseases. We are advancing a diverse pipeline of six assets in eight clinical development programs across immunology, oncology, and rare diseases. The management team spent the majority of their time in 2020 focusing on both progressing the pipeline and also on financing activities to fund pipeline development. These will also be the primary areas of focus in 2021.
On February 3, 2020, the Company consummated its merger with Aevi Genomic Medicine, Inc. (“Aevi”), in which Cerecor acquired the rights to CERC-002, CERC-006 and CERC-007 (the “Aevi Merger”). The Aevi Merger was a transformative event in 2020 and it significantly broadened Cerecor’s pipeline by adding the rights to these three key new assets, as well as bringing in critical leadership to guide the Company and research and development of the expanded pipeline.
The Company successfully raised capital in 2020 and early 2021 which we believe is principally due to successfully improving our pipeline, development milestones and leadership team but also due in part to a robust biotechnology favorable capital markets environment which may not continue. The Company will continue to focus on raising capital, however, with a broader focus on both non-dilutive and dilutive funding opportunities, as well as potential business development related opportunities such as the out-license or partnering of Company assets. The Company believes the potential monetization of the priority review vouchers that may be granted in 2022 (if each compound is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration) related to CERC-801, CERC-802 and CERC-803, which are in development for therapies for congenital disorders of glycosylation, to be an important part of the Company’s capital plan.
The COVID-19 pandemic presented both challenges and opportunities to the Company in 2020 and we expect that to continue in 2021. The Company adapted to new ways to work remotely and, pursuant to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), the Company benefited from favorable tax reform and loan programs. Most importantly, the Company created, initiated and executed a successful exploratory Phase 2 randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled proof of concept trial for the treatment of COVID-19 associated mild-to-moderate acute respiratory distress syndrome (“ARDS”). We are excited by the efficacy data of our primary endpoint (patients alive and free of respiratory failure over 28 days) and mortality. The development path for this compound in COVID-19 ARDS and/or potentially generalized ARDS will be an important focus of 2021. The rapidly changing environment of COVID-19 continues to present both risks and opportunities in the successful development of this asset.
Management’s primary evaluation of the success of the Company is the ability to progress its pipeline assets forward towards commercialization or successful out-license. We believe the ability to timely achieve the anticipated milestones as presented in the section entitled “Business” in Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K represents our most immediate evaluation points as to the progress of our goal to move the pipeline forward.
Aevi Merger
As discussed briefly above, on February 3, 2020, the Company consummated the Aevi Merger, in which Cerecor acquired the rights to CERC-002, CERC-006 and CERC-007, thus expanding the Company's core pipeline to six assets in eight clinical development programs across immunology, oncology and rare diseases. We expect operating expenses, notably research and development expenses, to continue to outpace historic periods, as the Company advances its expanded pipeline.
Cerecor also entered into an employment agreement with Aevi's Chief Executive Officer, Mike Cola, for him to serve as Cerecor's Chief Executive Officer and an employment agreement with Aevi's Chief Scientific Officer, Dr. Garry Neil, for him to serve as Cerecor's Chief Medical Officer (shortly thereafter promoted to Chief Scientific Officer). Additionally, Mr. Cola and Dr. Sol Barer, the former Chairman of the Board of Aevi, were appointed to the Company's Board of Directors. Dr. Barer serves as the Chairman of
the Company’s Board.
Aytu Divestiture
During the fourth quarter of 2019, the Company sold to Aytu BioScience, Inc. (“Aytu”) its rights, titles and interest in, assets relating to certain commercialized products (the “Pediatric Portfolio”), as well as the corresponding commercial infrastructure consisting of the right to offer employment to Cerecor’s sales force and the assignment of supporting commercial contracts (the “Aytu Divestiture”). Thus, our only commercial product is Millipred®, an oral prednisolone indicated across a wide variety of inflammatory conditions.
Upon the sale of the Pediatric Portfolio to Aytu, the Pediatric Portfolio met all conditions required to be classified as discontinued operations. Accordingly, unless otherwise noted, the following section focuses on results of operations from continuing operations only for all periods discussed.
Financial Operations Overview
Research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 significantly increased as compared to the prior year, which was driven by the advancement of our expanded and maturing pipeline. Additionally, there was a $25.5 million acquired in-process research and development (“IPR&D”) charge in 2020 directly related to the Aevi Merger. There was also a moderate increase to general and administrative expense related to the infrastructure needed to support the Company’s expansion of its research and development efforts. Such increases were the main drivers to our net loss of $63.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Additionally, our net cash used in operations significantly increased to $40.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was also driven by the advancement of our expanded and maturing pipeline. We expect such trends to continue to outpace historic periods, as we continue to advance our pipeline in anticipation of multiple clinical data readouts in 2021.
As of December 31, 2020, Cerecor had $18.9 million in cash and cash equivalents. In January 2021, the Company closed an underwritten public offering for net proceeds of approximately $37.6 million. We plan to use our current cash on hand along with cash inflows from investing and/or financing activities to support the ongoing clinical development of our expanded and maturing pipeline and for general corporate purposes to support such pipeline development.
Smaller Reporting Company Status
We are a “smaller reporting company,” as such term is defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act, meaning that the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million and our annual revenue is less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company if either (i) the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250 million or (ii) our annual revenue is less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million. As of December 31, 2020, we lost our status as an “emerging growth company” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012. Notwithstanding, our status as a “smaller reporting company” allows us to take advantage of many of the same exemptions from disclosure requirements applicable to us as a former emerging growth company, including not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Product Revenue, net
Net product revenue was $6.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was consistent with the net product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company entered into an amended License and Supply Agreement for the Millipred® product with a wholly owned subsidiary of Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd. (“Teva”), which extends the original license agreement for a period of thirty months (from April 1, 2021 through September 30, 2023). Beginning April 1, 2021, Cerecor will pay Teva fifty percent of the net profit of the Millipred product following each calendar quarter, subject to a $0.5 million quarterly minimum payment. We are currently exploring strategic alternatives for our non-core assets, which includes Millipred® . Therefore,
our ability to increase revenue in the future will depend on developing and commercializing our current clinical pipeline of product candidates.
License and Other Revenue
During the third quarter of 2019, the Company assigned and transferred its rights, title, interest, and obligations with respect to CERC-611 to ES Therapeutics, LLC (“ES Therapeutics”) in exchange for initial gross proceeds of $0.1 million, which was recognized as license and other revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company is also eligible for potential milestone payments upon achievement of certain targets of cumulative net sales of the licensed product. There was no license and other revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of Product Sales
Cost of product sales were $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $(0.6) million for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the second quarter of 2019, the Company entered into a settlement agreement related to the Ulesfia product, which fully released the Company of its minimum purchase obligations and minimum royalty provisions related to the Ulesfia product resulting in a reversal of expense of approximately $1.6 million. The reversal of expense was partially offset by minimum royalty obligations related to the Ulesfia product recognized in the first quarter of 2019 prior to entering into the settlement agreement.
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Research and development expenses increased $20.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The overall increase was driven by an increase in research and development activities in 2020 as the Company expanded and advanced its pipeline assets, including the rights to the additional assets acquired in the Aevi Merger.
Clinical expenses increased $7.0 million primarily due to costs incurred for the CERC-002 proof-of-concept trial in patients with COVID-19 ARDS, which began in July 2020, and increased spending related to development of the other core pipeline assets. Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Controls (“CMC”) expenses increased $3.9 million due to additional spending on manufacturing to support clinical development of the expanded pipeline. Preclinical expenses increased $3.5 million primarily due to the development of a more robust pipeline given the rights acquired to develop additional assets in the Aevi Merger.
Salaries, benefits and related costs increased by $3.9 million mainly due to an increase in headcount as a result of the Aevi Merger and salary-related costs to grow our research and development activities as we continue to invest in our expanded pipeline. Stock-based compensation increased by $0.9 million mainly due to an increase in stock option grants as a result of the increased headcount.
The $1.4 million increase to other expenses was primarily driven by the reversal of $1.3 million of research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was reversed as a result of the Company's assignment of the CERC-611 license agreement to ES Therapeutics in the third quarter of 2019. As part of the assignment, the Company was released of a contingent payment liability of $1.3 million to Eli Lilly and Company (“Lilly”) upon the first subject dosage of CERC-611 in a multiple
ascending dose study, which was previously recorded as a license obligation on the balance sheet. The decrease of the license obligation to $0 resulted in an offset of research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2019. There was no such reversal in the year ended December 31, 2020.
We expect research and development expenses to continue to outpace historic periods, as the Company advances its expanded and maturing pipeline in anticipation of multiple clinical data readouts in 2021.
Acquired In-Process Research and Development Expenses
On February 3, 2020, the Company consummated its merger with Aevi. As a result, the Company acquired $25.5 million of IPR&D. The fair value of the IPR&D was immediately recognized as acquired in-process research and development expense as the IPR&D asset has no other alternate use due to the stage of development. There was no acquired in-process research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2019.
General and Administrative Expenses
The following table summarizes our general and administrative expenses of continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
General and administrative expenses increased $7.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The increase was largely driven by a $3.6 million increase to stock-based compensation expense as a result of equity awards granted to newly appointed executive leadership and board members.
Legal, consulting and other professional expenses increased by $2.7 million, which was largely driven by a $0.9 million expense recognized related to a payment made pursuant to a settlement agreement entered into during the third quarter with the former owners of TRx. The remainder of this increase was attributable to a variety of factors including increased recruiting costs incurred to grow headcount to support the expanded pipeline development.
We expect general and administrative expenses to moderately increase compared to historic periods as a result of increased infrastructure to support the Company’s expanded research and development efforts.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
The following table summarizes our sales and marketing expenses of continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Sales and marketing expenses of continuing operations consist of expenses related to advertising and marketing initiatives to support the go-to-market strategy of our pipeline assets and the respective salaries and stock-based compensation to support such initiatives. The overall $0.9 million increase for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year was driven by a $0.6 million increase in advertising and marketing expense related to market research, a $0.1 million increase in salaries, benefits and related costs driven by increased headcount to support such initiatives.
Amortization expense
The following table summarizes amortization expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Amortization expense relates to the amortization of the assembled workforces acquired as part of previous acquisitions and mergers. In 2020, as a result of the asset acquisition accounting treatment of the Aevi Merger, the Company recorded an assembled workforce intangible asset of $0.9 million, which was assigned a two-year useful life. Therefore, the $0.3 million increase to amortization expense was primarily driven by the amortization of the assembled workforce acquired as part of the Aevi Merger.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration
The following table summarizes our change in fair value of contingent consideration from continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The Company recognized a gain on the change in fair value of contingent consideration of $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The contingent consideration was related to the potential for future payment of consideration that was contingent upon the achievement of operation and commercial milestones related to the Ulesfia product, which was acquired as part of the Company's acquisition of TRx in 2017.
During the second quarter of 2019, the Company entered into a settlement agreement related to the Ulesfia product, which released the Company from the potential contingent payments related to the TRx Acquisition, reducing the fair value down to $0. This represented a gain on the change of fair value of contingent consideration of $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. As the Company was released from the contingent payment in 2019, there was no change in fair value of contingent consideration for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other income, net
The following table summarizes our other income, net from continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Other income, net increased $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year. Other income, net is mainly comprised of a $5.2 million gain on change in the fair value of the Company's investment in Aytu. As consideration of the Aytu Divestiture in 2019, the Company received 9,805,845 shares of Aytu Series G Preferred Stock (the “Investment in Aytu”), which was remeasured at the current fair value each reporting period. In April 2020, the Company converted its shares of Aytu Series G Preferred Stock into 9,805,845 shares of common stock and sold that common stock for net proceeds of approximately $12.8 million, which resulted in the Company recognizing a realized gain of $5.2 million from its estimated fair value as of the divestiture date. The gain was primarily driven by a significant increase in Aytu's stock price from December 31, 2019 to the dates the Company sold its shares of Aytu common stock in mid-April 2020. Additionally, the Company recognized $0.4 million of other income for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) Loan received during the second quarter of 2020 as the Company believes it meets the criteria for loan forgiveness. Both transactions were unique to 2020, thus causing the increase as compared to the prior year period.
Income tax (benefit) expense
The Company recognized an income tax benefit of $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and income tax expense of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The tax benefit recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a result of a current year tax law change and the ability of the Company to now carry back certain losses related to the CARES Act for taxes paid in fiscal year 2017. This benefit was recognized in the first and second quarters. The expense recognized for the year ended December 31, 2019 was a primarily the result of estimated state cash taxes and interest on an unpaid tax liability. The annual effective tax rate was 4.21% and (1.75)% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources, including Capital Expenditure and Cash Requirements
In 2020, the Company closed three equity offerings for net proceeds of approximately $44.4 million and in April 2020, the Company sold an investment for net proceeds of $12.8 million. The Company also closed an underwritten public offering in January 2021 for net proceeds of approximately $37.6 million. As of December 31, 2020, Cerecor had $18.9 million in cash and cash equivalents.
The CARES Act provides stimulus measures, including the PPP, to provide certain small businesses with liquidity to support their operations (such as to retain employees and maintain payroll and lease payments) during the COVID-19 pandemic. Cerecor received a $0.4 million PPP loan during the second quarter of 2020. PPP loans have a 1% fixed annual interest rate and mature in two years, and are eligible for forgiveness under certain conditions. If approved by the lender, the lender will submit the forgiveness application to the Small Business Administration (the “SBA”) for ultimate approval. The SBA has 90 days from receipt to approve or reject the forgiveness application. As of December 31, 2020, the Company believes it meets the criteria for forgiveness and submitted an application for forgiveness with its lender in 2020.
In order to meet its cash flow needs, the Company applies a disciplined decision-making methodology as it evaluates the optimal allocation of the Company's resources between investing in the Company's existing pipeline assets and acquisitions or in-licensing of new assets. For the year ended December 31, 2020, Cerecor generated a net loss of $63.5 million and negative cash flows from operations of $40.5 million. As of December 31, 2020, Cerecor had an accumulated deficit of $177.8 million.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern; however, losses are expected to continue as the Company continues to invest in its core research and development pipeline assets. The Company will require additional financing to fund its operations and to continue to execute its business strategy at least one year after the date the financial statements included herein were issued. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
To mitigate these conditions and to meet the Company’s capital requirements, management plans to use its current cash on hand along with some combination of the following: (i) equity and/or debt financings, (ii) federal and/or private grants, (iii) other out-licensing or strategic alliances/collaborations of its current pipeline assets, and (iv) out-licensing or sale of its non-core assets. If the Company raises additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, the Company might have to relinquish valuable rights to its technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates. If the Company requires but is unable to obtain additional funding, the Company may be forced to make reductions in spending, delay, suspend, reduce or eliminate some or all of its planned research and development programs, or liquidate assets where possible. Due to the uncertainty regarding future financings and other potential options to raise additional funds, management has concluded that substantial doubt exists with respect to the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K were issued.
Over the long term, the Company's ultimate ability to achieve and maintain profitability will depend on, among other things, the development, regulatory approval, and commercialization of its pipeline assets, and the potential receipt and sale of any PRVs it receives.
Uses of Liquidity
The Company uses cash to primarily fund the ongoing development of our research and development pipeline assets and costs associated with its organizational infrastructure.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Net cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $40.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisting primarily of a net loss of $63.5 million, which was driven by increased research and development activities as the Company continued to fund its expanded pipeline of development assets and non-cash adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used in operating activities including a $5.2 million realized gain related to the change in fair value of the Investment in Aytu and a $1.8 million gain related to the change in value of the Guarantee associated with the Aytu Divestiture. This decrease was offset by the following non-cash adjustments: non-cash acquired IPR&D expense of $25.5 million and non-cash stock-based compensation of $6.8 million. Additionally, changes in net liabilities increased by $4.4 million, mainly driven by a $2.1 million decrease in other receivables and a $1.9 million decrease in prepaid expenses, partially offset by a $0.2 million decrease in accrued expenses and other current liabilities.
We expect net cash used in operating activities to continue to outpace historic periods due to our continued advancement of our expanded and maturing pipeline.
Further, net cash used in operating activities includes offsets from the collection of sales from Millipred. In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company and Teva entered into an amended License and Supply Agreement for the Millipred product, which extends the original license agreement for a period of thirty months (from April 1, 2021 through September 30, 2023). Beginning April 1, 2021, Cerecor will pay Teva fifty percent of the net profit of the Millipred product following each calendar quarter, subject to a $0.5 million quarterly minimum payment.
Net cash used in operating activities was $19.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, consisting primarily of a net loss of $16.1 million, which was driven by research and development expenses to fund the Company's pipeline of development assets.
Net cash provided (used in) by investing activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $11.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of net proceeds of $12.8 million from the sale of the Aytu common stock during the second quarter of 2020 underlying the Company's previous Investment in Aytu, slightly offset by transaction costs incurred as part of the Aevi Merger.
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, consisting primarily of the Company's $4.1 million loan to Aevi in December 2019 (prior to the close of the Aevi Merger in February 2020), largely offset by $4.0 million net cash received as consideration for the Aytu Divestiture. Refer to Note 5 to the audited consolidated financial statements for more information regarding the loan to Aevi in 2019.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $44.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of net proceeds of $35.4 million from an underwritten public offering of common stock for 15,180,000 shares of common stock of the Company. The Company also received net proceeds of $5.1 million from a registered direct offering with certain institutional investors, which included Armistice Capital Master Fund Ltd. (“Armistice”), that closed in February 2020 for the sale of 1,306,282 shares of common stock of the Company and net proceeds of $3.9 million from a private placement of equity securities with Armistice during March 2020.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $12.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and consisted primarily of net proceeds of approximately $9.0 million from the underwritten public offering of common stock for 1,818,182 shares of common stock of the Company, that closed in the first quarter of 2019. The Company also received $3.7 million from a private placement of equity securities with Armistice during the third quarter of 2019. The cash inflows were partially offset by $0.9 million of contingent consideration payments related to a historical acquisition.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Assumptions
In preparing the financial statements, the Company makes estimates and assumptions that have an impact on assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses reported. These estimates can also affect supplemental information disclosed by us, including information about contingencies, risk and financial condition. The Company believes, given current facts and circumstances, our estimates and assumptions are reasonable, adhere to GAAP and are consistently applied. Inherent in the nature of an estimate or assumption is the fact that actual results may differ from estimates, and estimates may vary as new facts and circumstances arise.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to the audited consolidated financial statements appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies are critical to the understanding of our financial condition and results.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company applies the provisions of ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all stock-based awards made to employees, including employee stock options, in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
For stock options issued to employees and members of the board of directors for their services, the Company estimates the grant date fair value of each option using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The use of the Black-Scholes option pricing model requires management to make assumptions with respect to the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of the common stock consistent with the expected life of the option, risk-free interest rates and expected dividend yields of the common stock. For awards subject to service-based vesting conditions, including those with a graded vesting schedule, the Company recognizes stock-based compensation expense equal to the grant date fair value of stock options on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting term. Forfeitures are recorded as they are incurred as opposed to being estimated at the time of grant and revised.
For stock option grants with market-based conditions, compensation expense is recognized ratably over the attribution period. The Company estimates the fair value of the market-based stock option grants using a Monte-Carlo simulation. The Company generally estimates fair value using assumptions, including the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of peer group of similar companies, risk free interest rate and the expected dividend yield.
The assumptions we used to determine the fair value of stock options granted to employees and members of the board of directors are as follows:
The estimates involved in the valuations include inherent uncertainties and the application of our judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates when valuing our stock options, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different. We recognize compensation expense for only the portion of awards that are expected to vest.
Acquired In-Process Research and Development Expenses
Acquired in-process research and development expense includes the initial costs of IPR&D projects, acquired directly in a transaction other than a business combination, that do not have an alternative future use.
Acquisitions
For acquisitions that meet the definition of a business under ASC 805, the Company records the acquisition using the acquisition method of accounting. All of the assets acquired, liabilities assumed, contractual contingencies, and contingent consideration, when applicable, are recorded at fair value at the acquisition date. Any excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. The application of the acquisition method of accounting requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions in the determination of the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in order to properly allocate purchase price consideration. For acquisitions that do not meet the definition of a business under ASC 805, the Company accounts for the transaction as an asset acquisition.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined by applicable SEC rules and regulations.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of new accounting standards please see Note 2 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
Assessing our staffing and training procedures to improve our internal control over financial reporting is an ongoing process. We are not currently required to comply with all of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, or the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. For the year ended December 31, 2020, management is required to make an assessment of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as required by Section 404(a) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, as further described in Item 9A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In March 2020, certain smaller reporting companies were excluded from compliance with Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, which relates to the independent auditor's attestation on the effectiveness of the issuer's internal control over financial reporting. As such, our independent registered public accounting firm has not been engaged to express, nor have they expressed, an opinion on the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020.