Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The matters discussed in this "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" contain certain forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements involve significant risks and uncertainties. See the "Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-looking Statements" above and Part 1, Item 1A, "Risk Factors" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding forward-looking statements and the factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements.
Overview
Avaya is a global leader in digital communications products, solutions and services for businesses of all sizes delivering its technology predominantly through software and services. We enable organizations around the globe to succeed by creating intelligent communications experiences for our clients, their employees and their customers. Avaya builds innovative open, converged unified communications and collaboration ("UCC") and contact center ("CC") solutions to enhance and simplify communications and collaboration in the cloud, on-premise or a hybrid of both. Our global, experienced team of professionals delivers award-winning services from initial planning and design, to seamless implementation and integration, to ongoing managed operations, optimization, training and support.
Avaya shifted its entire comprehensive portfolio of capabilities to Avaya OneCloud, which offers significant capabilities across contact center (OneCloud CCaaS), unified communications and collaboration (OneCloud UCaaS), and communications platform as a service (OneCloud CPaaS). We believe the Avaya OneCloud open, composable platform approach uniquely positions us to address a customer’s needs in creating a Digital Workplace for their campus-based and remote employees through Unified Communications and Collaboration and the Customer Experience Center, our name for contact centers, helping clients deliver tangible business results.
Avaya also offers one of the broadest portfolios of business devices in the industry, including handsets, video conferencing units and headsets to meet the needs of every type of worker across a customer’s organization and help our customers get the most out of their communications investments. Avaya IP-enabled handsets, multimedia devices and conferencing systems enhance collaboration and productivity, and position organizations to incorporate future technological advancements.
Our business has two operating segments: Products & Solutions and Services.
Products & Solutions
Products & Solutions encompasses our UCC and CC software platforms, applications and devices.
Avaya OneCloud UCaaS solutions enable organizations to reimagine collaborative work environments and help companies increase employee productivity, improve customer service and reduce costs. With Avaya OneCloud UCaaS, organizations can provide their workers with a single app for all-channel calling, messaging, meetings and team collaboration with the same ease of use as existing consumer apps. Avaya embeds communications directly into the apps, browsers and devices employees use every day, giving them a more natural, efficient and flexible way to connect, engage, respond and share where and how they want. During fiscal 2021, we expanded our portfolio to include new cloud-based solutions, and we continued integrating Artificial Intelligence ("AI") to create enhanced user experience and improve performance.
Avaya OneCloud CCaaS solutions: Avaya’s industry-leading digital contact center solutions enable clients to build a customized portfolio of applications to drive stronger customer engagement and higher customer lifetime value. Our reliable, secure and scalable communications solutions include voice, email, chat, social media, video, performance management and third-party integration that can improve customer service and help companies compete more effectively. Avaya is delivering OneCloud CCaaS solutions for cloud deployment and, in fiscal 2021, we continued to aggressively integrate AI, machine learning and leading-edge cybersecurity capabilities into our portfolio, providing our clients a deeper understanding of their customers’ needs with a robust and secure platform.
Avaya OneCloud CPaaS combines the cloud with our communications platforms, providing a development platform and the application programming interfaces that enable developers to easily integrate both UCC and CC communications capabilities directly into internal and customer-facing applications and workflows. Organizations can quickly deliver modular, composable applications ("apps") and experiences that meet ever-changing customer and operational needs.
Services
Complementing our product and solutions portfolio is a global, award-winning services portfolio, delivered by Avaya and our extensive partner ecosystem. Our services portfolio, which includes solution upgrades and provides new technology through our Avaya OneCloud subscription offerings, consists of:
•Global Support Services provide offerings that help businesses protect their technology investments and address the risk of system outages. We help our customers gain a competitive edge through proactive problem prevention, rapid resolution and continual solution optimization. Global support services also provide software solutions delivered through a subscription model to provide our customers an improved user experience and solution enhancements. Most of our global support services revenue is recurring in nature.
•Enterprise Cloud and Managed Services enable customers to take advantage of our technology via the cloud, on-premise, or a hybrid of both, depending on the solution and the needs of the customer. Most of our enterprise cloud and managed services revenue is recurring in nature and based on multi-year services contracts.
•Professional Services enable our customers to take full advantage of their IT and communications solution investments to drive measurable business results. Our experienced consultants and engineers partner with customers along each step of the solution lifecycle to deliver services that add value and drive business transformation. Most of our professional services revenue is non-recurring in nature.
With these comprehensive services, customers can leverage communications technology to help them maximize their business results. We help our customers use communications to minimize the risk of outages, drive employee productivity and deliver a differentiated customer experience.
Our services teams also help our customers transition at their desired pace to next-generation communications solutions. Customers can choose the level of support for their communications solutions best suited for their needs, which may include deployment, training, monitoring, solution management, optimization and more. Our systems and service team’s performance monitoring can quickly identify and address issues before they arise. Remote diagnostics and resolutions focus on fixing existing problems and avoiding potential issues in order to help our customers save time and reduce the risk of an outage.
Factors and Trends Affecting Our Results of Operations
There are several trends and uncertainties affecting our business. Most importantly, we are dependent on general economic conditions, the willingness of our customers to invest in technology and the manner in which our customers procure such technology and services.
Industry Trends
•UCC, CC and CPaaS are converging to become part of an integrated services offering delivering next-generation communications capabilities across a host of devices and channels.
•Preference for cloud delivery of applications and management of multiple and varied devices continues to grow, all of which must be handled with the security that business demands.
•The Experience Economy continues to grow. The Experience Economy is based on the concept that experience is a key source of value - it is a differentiator that creates competitive advantage for products and services. As consumers embrace new technologies and devices in creative ways and at an accelerating pace, Avaya is continuing to invest in AI-powered solutions delivered through cloud and subscription models to create “Experiences that Matter” for customers, employees and agents. This increased adoption and deployment of AI is providing significant new opportunities for enhanced UCC and CC solutions that improve the customer experience and transform the Digital Workplace.
Coronavirus ("COVID-19") Update
The COVID-19 pandemic has had widespread and unprecedented impacts on regional, national and global economies. The COVID-19 pandemic and its related economic effects have not had a material impact on our business or liquidity. However, the ultimate impact of the pandemic on our business, including our ability to execute our near-term and long-term business strategies and initiatives in the expected time frame, will depend on future pandemic related developments, including the duration and severity of the pandemic, the implementation or re-implementation of governmental and employer requirements to limit the spread of the virus, the speed with which vaccines can be distributed globally, the pace of acceptance of the vaccine by the public and the emergence of new variants, which are uncertain and cannot be predicted.
Our focus throughout the pandemic has been and remains on promoting employee health and safety, serving our customers and ensuring business continuity.
We believe that the current macroeconomic environment caused by the COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated a developing trend in the way people work, with more employees working remotely, and believe this could increase demand for certain of the Company's products and services.
Financial Results Summary
Fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 compared with the Fiscal year ended September 30, 2020
The section below provides a comparative discussion of our consolidated results of operations between fiscal 2021 and 2020. See Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 filed on November 25, 2020 for comparative discussion of our consolidated results of operations between fiscal 2020 and 2019.
The following table displays our consolidated net loss for the periods indicated:
Revenue
Revenue for fiscal 2021 was $2,973 million compared to $2,873 million for fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily driven by higher revenue from the Company's subscription and OneCloud Private offerings; revenue growth from the Company's Avaya Cloud Office offering which launched on March 31, 2020; and the favorable impact of foreign currency exchange rates, partially offset by lower demand for the Company's on-premise product solutions, hardware maintenance and software support services as customers transition to our subscription and cloud solutions. Revenue for fiscal 2021 also includes a $15 million out-of-period adjustment to record revenue for certain performance obligations satisfied in prior periods. See Note 1 "Background and Basis of Presentation" included within Part II Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The following table displays revenue and the percentage of revenue to total sales by operating segment for the periods indicated:
(1)Not meaningful
Products & Solutions revenue for fiscal 2021 was $992 million compared to $1,074 million for fiscal 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower demand for the Company's on-premise product solutions; and higher revenue from the fulfillment of certain obligations related to a new government contract in the prior period, partially offset by revenue from the Company's Avaya Cloud Office offering which launched on March 31, 2020; the impact of the out-of-period adjustment described above; and the favorable impact of foreign currency exchange rates.
Services revenue for fiscal 2021 was $1,982 million compared to $1,805 million for fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily driven by higher revenue from the Company's subscription and OneCloud Private offerings; revenue from implementation services related to a government contract signed in fiscal 2020; and the favorable impact of foreign currency exchange rates, partially offset by the planned declines in hardware maintenance and software support services which continue to face headwinds driven by lower new product sales over the past several years.
Unallocated amounts for fiscal 2021 and 2020 represent the fair value adjustment to deferred revenue recognized upon emergence from bankruptcy in December 2017 which is excluded from segment revenue.
The following table displays revenue and the percentage of revenue to total sales by location for the periods indicated:
Revenue in the U.S. for fiscal 2021 was $1,704 million compared to $1,640 million for fiscal 2020. The increase in U.S. revenue was mainly driven by higher revenue from the Company's subscription and OneCloud Private offerings; and revenue growth from the Company's Avaya Cloud Office offering which launched on March 31, 2020, partially offset by lower demand for the Company's on-premise product solutions, hardware maintenance and software support services.
Revenue in Europe, Middle East and Africa ("EMEA") for fiscal 2021 was $732 million compared to $714 million for fiscal 2020. The increase in EMEA was mainly driven by higher revenue from the Company's subscription and OneCloud Private offerings; revenue growth from the Company's Avaya Cloud Office offering; and the favorable impact of foreign currency exchange rates, partially offset by lower demand for the Company's on-premise product solutions, hardware maintenance and software support services.
Revenue in Asia Pacific ("APAC") for fiscal 2021 was $297 million compared to $296 million for fiscal 2020. The increase in APAC revenue was primarily attributable to higher revenue from the Company's subscription and OneCloud Private offerings; revenue growth from the Company's Avaya Cloud Office offering; and the favorable impact of foreign currency exchange rates, partially offset by lower demand for the Company's on-premise product solutions, hardware maintenance and software support services.
Revenue in Americas International for fiscal 2021 was $240 million compared to $223 million for fiscal 2020. The increase in Americas International revenue was primarily driven by higher revenue from the Company's subscription offerings; higher revenue from the Company's professional services; and the favorable impact of foreign currency exchange rates, partially offset by lower demand for the Company's hardware maintenance and software support services.
Gross Profit
The following table sets forth gross profit and gross margin by operating segment for the periods indicated:
(1)Not meaningful
Products & Solutions gross profit for fiscal 2021 was $594 million compared to $669 million for fiscal 2020. The decrease was mainly attributable to the decline in revenue described above. Products & Solutions gross margin decreased from 62.3% in fiscal 2020 to 59.9% in fiscal 2021 mainly driven by increase in cloud and partner costs, as well as an unfavorable product mix primarily due to a shift in consumption of higher margin on-premise software from a perpetual license model to a subscription model, which is reflected within our Services segment.
Services gross profit for fiscal 2021 was $1,230 million compared to $1,092 million for fiscal 2020. The increase was mainly driven by the growth in revenue described above. Services gross margin increased from 60.5% in fiscal 2020 to 62.1% in fiscal 2021 mainly due to the favorable impact of higher revenue from the Company's subscription offerings, partially offset by higher third party expenses.
Unallocated amounts for fiscal 2021 and 2020 include the amortization of technology intangibles and fair value adjustments recognized upon emergence from bankruptcy which are excluded from segment gross profit.
Operating Expenses
The following table sets forth operating expenses and the percentage of operating expenses to total revenue for the periods indicated:
Selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal 2021 were $1,053 million compared to $1,013 million for fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to higher channel compensation; higher share-based compensation expense; higher costs for employee benefits; and the unfavorable impact of foreign currency exchange rates, partially offset by advisory fees incurred in prior period associated with executing the strategic partnership with RingCentral; lower expense for expected credit losses; and lower travel and facility related costs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Research and development expenses for fiscal 2021 were $228 million compared to $207 million for fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to investments in cloud technology development.
Amortization of intangible assets for fiscal 2021 was $159 million compared to $161 million for fiscal 2020.
Impairment charges for fiscal 2020 were $624 million. During fiscal 2020, the Company performed an interim impairment test of its goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets due to (i) the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the macroeconomic environment which led to revisions to the Company's long-term forecast during the second quarter of fiscal 2020 and (ii) the sustained decrease in the Company's stock price at the beginning stages of the pandemic which was caused by the resulting volatility in the financial markets. The results of the Company's interim goodwill impairment test indicated that the estimated fair value of the Company's Services reporting unit exceeded its carrying amount. The carrying amount of the Company's Products & Solutions reporting unit exceeded its estimated fair value primarily due to a reduction in the Company's long-term forecast to reflect increased risk from higher market uncertainty and the accelerated reduction of product sales related to the Company's historical on-premises perpetual licenses with a continued shift and acceleration of customers upgrading and acquiring new technology innovation through the utilization of the Company's subscription offering, which is included in the Services reporting unit. As a result, the Company recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $624 million to write down the full carrying amount of the Products & Solutions goodwill. The results of the indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment test indicated that no impairment existed. The Company performed its annual impairment test for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets in fiscal 2021 and determined that no impairment existed.
Restructuring charges, net, were $30 million for both fiscal 2021 and 2020. Restructuring charges during fiscal 2021 consisted of $19 million for employee severance actions and $11 million for facility exit costs primarily in the U.S. and EMEA. Restructuring charges during fiscal 2020 consisted of $24 million for facility exit costs primarily in the U.S. and $6 million for employee severance actions in EMEA.
Operating Income
Operating income for fiscal 2021 was $180 million compared to an operating loss of $455 million for fiscal 2020. Our operating results for fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 reflect, among other things, the following items which are described in more detail above:
•higher revenue and gross profit for fiscal 2021;
•higher selling, general and administrative expenses and research and development costs in fiscal 2021; and
•a $624 million goodwill impairment charge during fiscal 2020 with no comparable charge during fiscal 2021.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for fiscal 2021 was $222 million compared to $226 million for fiscal 2020. The decrease was mainly driven by lower debt issuance costs and lower average principal amounts outstanding in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 as a result of the changes in the Company’s debt portfolio described in the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section below, partially offset by higher average interest rates primarily attributable to the issuance of the Company’s Senior 6.125% First Lien Notes (the "Senior Notes") in September 2020.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net for fiscal 2021 was $44 million as compared to $63 million for fiscal 2020. The decrease was mainly driven by gains on the sale of all the Company's RingCentral shares during fiscal 2020, partially offset by a non-cash settlement gain recorded during fiscal 2021 related to the Company's other post-retirement plan; and the net impact of foreign currency gains (losses).
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes was $15 million for fiscal 2021 compared to $62 million for fiscal 2020.
The Company's effective income tax rate for fiscal 2021 differed from the U.S. federal tax rate by 729% or $15 million principally related to deferred taxes (including losses) for which no benefit was recorded because it is more likely than not that the tax benefits would not be realized; and certain nondeductible expenses.
The Company's effective income tax rate for fiscal 2020 differed from the U.S. federal tax rate by 31% or $192 million principally related to the goodwill impairment charge recorded in the second quarter of fiscal 2020 and deferred taxes (including losses) for which no benefit was recorded because it is more likely than not that the tax benefits would not be realized.
Net Loss
Net loss was $13 million for fiscal 2021 compared to $680 million for fiscal 2020 as a result of the items discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We expect our existing cash balance, cash generated by operations and borrowings available under our ABL Credit Agreement to be our primary sources of short-term liquidity. Our ability to meet our cash requirements will depend on our ability to generate cash in the future, which is subject to general economic, financial, competitive, legislative, regulatory and other factors that are beyond our control. Based on our current level of operations, we believe these sources will be adequate to meet our liquidity needs for at least the next twelve months.
Cash Flow Activity
The following table provides a summary of the statements of cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities for fiscal 2021 and 2020 was $30 million and $147 million, respectively. The decrease was primarily due to higher incentive compensation payments; and the timing of customer cash payments as the Company continues its rapid transition to a cloud and subscription model, partially offset by higher advisory fees incurred in the prior
year period associated with executing the strategic partnership with RingCentral; the timing of vendor payments; lower income tax payments; and lower interest payments.
Investing Activities
Cash used for investing activities for fiscal 2021 was $117 million compared to cash provided by investing activities of $314 million for fiscal 2020. The change was primarily due to proceeds in the prior year period from the sale of shares of RingCentral common stock, which were received by the Company upon entry into the strategic partnership in October 2019, partially offset by an increase in capital expenditures and an asset acquisition in fiscal 2021.
Financing Activities
Cash used for financing activities for fiscal 2021 and 2020 was $142 million and $489 million, respectively. The decrease was primarily due to lower repurchases of shares of common stock under the Company's share repurchase program; lower principal prepayments under the Term Loan Credit Agreement; higher proceeds from the Employee Stock Purchase Plan which was introduced in June 2020; and higher proceeds from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by the issuance of Series A Preferred Stock to RingCentral upon entry into the strategic partnership and higher debt issuance costs in the prior year period as a result of the issuance of the Company's Senior Notes and its Term Loan Credit Agreement refinancing in September 2020 described in more detail below.
Senior Notes Issuance
On September 25, 2020, the Company issued $1,000 million in aggregate principal amount of its Senior Notes. The Senior Notes were issued under an indenture, among the Company, the Company's subsidiaries that guaranteed the Senior Notes on the issuance date and Wilmington Trust, National Association, as trustee and notes collateral agent. The Senior Notes mature on September 15, 2028. The Company used the net proceeds from the issuance of the Senior Notes after debt issuance costs to prepay $981 million in principal amount of certain first lien term loans under its Term Loan Credit Agreement.
Term Loan Credit Agreement Refinancing
On September 25, 2020, the Company amended the Term Loan Credit Agreement, pursuant to which the maturity of $800 million in principal amount of the first lien term loans outstanding under the Term Loan Credit Agreement was extended from December 2024 to December 2027. The amendment also made certain other changes to the Term Loan Credit Agreement, including with respect to the change of control provisions.
On February 24, 2021, the Company further amended the Term Loan Credit Agreement, pursuant to which the Company prepaid, replaced and refinanced all first lien term loans due December 2024 outstanding under the Term Loan Credit Agreement with $100 million in cash and $743 million in principal amount of new first lien term loans due December 2027.
ABL Credit Agreement Refinancing
On September 25, 2020, the Company also amended its ABL Credit Agreement to, among other things, extend its maturity to September 25, 2025, subject to customary adjustments to the extent certain of the Company's indebtedness matures prior to such date. The total commitments under the ABL Credit Agreement were also reduced from $300 million to $200 million, subject to borrowing base availability.
As of September 30, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all covenants and other requirements under its debt agreements.
See Note 11, "Financing Arrangements," and Note 12, "Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities," to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further details about our financing arrangements and hedging activities, including summaries of the material provisions of the Company's Term Loan Credit Agreement, ABL Credit Agreement, Senior Notes, Convertible Notes and interest rate swap agreements.
Future Cash Requirements
Our primary future cash requirements will be to fund operations, debt service, capital expenditures, benefit obligations and restructuring payments. In addition, we may use cash in the future to make strategic acquisitions or investments.
Specifically, we expect our primary cash requirements for fiscal 2022 to be as follows:
•Debt service-We expect to make payments of approximately $185 million to $190 million during fiscal 2022 in interest associated with the Term Loan Credit Agreement, Senior Notes and Convertible Notes, and fees associated with our ABL Credit Agreement. In the ordinary course of business, we may from time to time borrow and repay amounts under our ABL Credit Agreement.
•Capital expenditures-We expect to spend approximately $110 million to $115 million for capital expenditures during fiscal 2022.
•Benefit obligations-We estimate we will make payments under our pension and post-retirement benefit obligations of approximately $37 million during fiscal 2022. These payments include $26 million for our non-U.S. benefit plans, which are predominantly not pre-funded, and $11 million for salaried and represented retiree post-retirement benefits. As a result of the American Rescue Plan Act, we do not expect to make any contributions to satisfy the minimum statutory funding requirements of our U.S. qualified pension plans during fiscal 2022. See discussion in Note 15, "Benefit Obligations," to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further details.
•Restructuring payments-We expect to make payments of approximately $20 million during fiscal 2022 for employee separation costs and lease termination obligations associated with restructuring actions. The Company continues to evaluate opportunities to streamline its operations and identify additional cost savings globally.
In addition to the matters identified above, in the ordinary course of business, the Company is involved in litigation, claims, government inquiries, investigations and proceedings relating to intellectual property, commercial, employment, environmental and regulatory matters, including but not limited to a suit filed by Solaborate Inc. and Solaborate LLC described in Note 22, “Commitments and Contingencies” to our Consolidated Financial Statements. An unfavorable resolution in this or other matters could have a material adverse effect on the Company's future cash requirements.
We and our subsidiaries and affiliates may from time to time seek to repurchase or prepay our outstanding equity (common stock and warrants) and/or debt (including our Term Loans, Senior Notes and Convertible Notes) through cash purchases and/or exchanges, in open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, tender offers, redemptions or otherwise. Such repurchases or exchanges, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors.
Future Sources of Liquidity
We expect our cash balance, cash generated by operations and borrowings available under our ABL Credit Agreement to be our primary sources of short-term liquidity.
As of September 30, 2021 and 2020, our cash and cash equivalent balances held outside the U.S. were $195 million and $227 million, respectively. As of September 30, 2021, the Company’s cash and cash equivalents held outside the U.S. are not expected to be needed to be repatriated to fund the Company’s operations in the U.S. based on our expected future sources of liquidity.
Under the terms of the ABL Credit Agreement, the Company can issue letters of credit up to $150 million. At September 30, 2021, the Company had issued and outstanding letters of credit and guarantees of $37 million under the ABL Credit Agreement and had no borrowings outstanding. The aggregate additional principal amount that may be borrowed under the ABL Credit Agreement, based on the borrowing base less $37 million of outstanding letters of credit and guarantees, was $147 million at September 30, 2021.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents of $498 million as of September 30, 2021, expected future cash provided by operating activities and borrowings available under the ABL Credit Agreement will be sufficient to meet our future cash requirements for at least the next twelve months from the filing of this annual report on Form 10-K. Our ability to meet these requirements will depend on our ability to generate cash in the future, which is subject to general economic, financial, competitive, legislative, regulatory and other factors that are beyond our control. We also believe that our financial resources, along with appropriate management of discretionary expenses, will allow us to manage the anticipated impact of COVID-19 on our business operations, and specifically our liquidity, for the foreseeable future.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
See discussion in Note 22, "Commitments and Contingencies," to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further details.
Debt Ratings
Our ability to obtain additional external financing and the related cost of borrowing may be affected by our ratings, which are periodically reviewed by the major credit rating agencies. The ratings are subject to change or withdrawal at any time by the respective credit rating agencies.
On June 2, 2021, Standard and Poor's upgraded both the Company's definitive corporate credit rating and the rating applicable to the Company's Senior Notes and the Term Loan Credit Agreement from "B" to "B+" with a stable outlook.
On July 23, 2021, Fitch Ratings Inc. (“Fitch”) upgraded the rating applicable to the Company's Senior Notes and the Term Loan Credit Agreement from "BB-" to "BB." Fitch also affirmed the Company’s definitive corporate credit rating of “B” and upgraded the outlook from stable to positive.
As of September 30, 2021, Moody's Investors Service issued a corporate family rating of "B2" with a stable outlook and a rating of "B2" applicable to the Senior Notes and the Term Loan Credit Agreement.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
We present below the Company's EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, each of which is a non-GAAP measure.
EBITDA is defined as net income before income taxes, interest expense, interest income and depreciation and amortization and excludes the results of discontinued operations. EBITDA provides us with a measure of operating performance that excludes certain non-operating and/or non-cash expenses, which can differ significantly from company to company depending on capital structure, the tax jurisdictions in which companies operate and capital investments.
Adjusted EBITDA is EBITDA as further adjusted by the items noted in the reconciliation table below. We believe Adjusted EBITDA provides a measure of our financial performance based on operational factors that management can impact in the short-term, such as our pricing strategies, volume, costs and expenses of the organization, and therefore presents our financial performance in a way that can be more easily compared to prior quarters or fiscal years. In addition, Adjusted EBITDA serves as a basis for determining certain management and employee compensation. We also present EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA because we believe analysts and investors utilize these measures in analyzing our results. Under the Company's debt agreements, the ability to engage in activities such as incurring additional indebtedness, making investments and paying dividends is tied in part to ratios based on a measure of Adjusted EBITDA.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA have limitations as analytical tools. EBITDA measures do not represent net income or cash flow from operations as those terms are defined by GAAP and do not necessarily indicate whether cash flows will be sufficient to fund cash needs. While EBITDA measures are frequently used as measures of operations and the ability to meet debt service requirements, these terms are not necessarily comparable to other similarly titled captions of other companies due to the potential inconsistencies in the method of calculation. Further, Adjusted EBITDA excludes the impact of earnings or charges resulting from matters that we consider not to be indicative of our ongoing operations that still affect our net income. In particular, our formulation of Adjusted EBITDA adjusts for certain amounts that are included in calculating net income as set forth in the following table including, but not limited to, restructuring charges, impairment charges, resolution of certain legal matters and a portion of our pension costs and post-retirement benefits costs, which represents the amortization of prior service costs (credits) and actuarial (gains) losses associated with these benefits. However, these are expenses that may recur, may vary and/or may be difficult to predict.
The reconciliation of net loss, which is a GAAP measure, to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, which are non-GAAP measures, is presented below for the periods indicated:
(a)The impact of fresh start accounting adjustments in connection with the Company's emergence from bankruptcy.
(b)Restructuring charges represent employee separation costs and facility exit costs (excluding the impact of accelerated depreciation expense) related to the Company's restructuring programs, net of sublease income.
(c)Advisory fees represent costs incurred to assist in the assessment of strategic and financial alternatives to improve the Company's capital structure.
(d)Realized and unrealized gains on investments in equity securities, net of impairment of investments in debt securities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP") requires the Company's management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and revenue and expenses during the periods reported. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates and such differences may be material. Note 2, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements. The accounting policies and estimates below have been identified by the Company's management as those that are most critical to our financial statements as they require management to make significant judgments and estimates about inherently uncertain matters.
Revenue Recognition
The Company derives revenue primarily from the sale of products and services for communications systems and applications. The Company sells directly through its worldwide sales force and indirectly through its global network of channel partners, including distributors, service providers, dealers, value-added resellers, systems integrators and business partners that provide sales and services support. The Company’s critical revenue recognition estimate is the variable consideration included in the total transaction price for a customer contract.
The total transaction price for each customer contract represents the total consideration specified in the contract, including variable consideration such as sales incentives and other discounts. Judgment is required in estimating variable consideration, which typically reduces the total transaction price due to the nature of the elements to which variable consideration relates. The Company’s variable consideration estimates mainly consist of reserves for contractual stock rotation rights to channel partners to support the management of inventory; future credits and sales incentives to distributors and other channel partners based on our contractual arrangements; and reserves for estimated sales returns based on a customer’s right of return. Estimates of variable consideration reflect the Company’s historical experience, current contractual requirements, specific known market events and trends, industry data and forecasted customer buying patterns. When estimating returns, the Company considers customary inventory levels held by third-party distributors. The Company’s variable consideration estimates are recorded as a reduction of revenue at the time of sale and depending on the facts and circumstances, a change in variable consideration estimate will either be accounted for at the contract level or using the portfolio method.
Goodwill and Indefinite-lived Intangible Assets
Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized but are subject to annual testing for impairment each July 1st, or more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of goodwill or an indefinite-lived intangible asset below its carrying amount. As of September 30, 2021, the Company's goodwill balance is assigned to its Services reporting unit.
Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level. Depending on the facts and circumstances, the impairment test for goodwill can be performed using either a qualitative or quantitative approach. The qualitative approach consists of a weighting of several qualitative factors, including, but not limited to, macroeconomic conditions (including changes in interest rates and discount rates), industry and market considerations, the recent and projected financial performance of the reporting unit, changes in the Company's stock price and other relevant factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill. This assessment can require significant judgments, including the estimation of future cash flows and an assessment of market and industry dependent risks. If the assessment of all relevant qualitative factors indicates that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount, a quantitative goodwill impairment test is not necessary. If the assessment of all relevant qualitative factors indicates that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, the Company will perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test. The Company has the unconditional option to bypass the qualitative assessment for any reporting unit in any period and proceed directly to performing a quantitative goodwill impairment test.
The quantitative approach consists of a comparison of the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying value, including the goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, the Company will recognize an impairment loss equal to the amount of the excess, limited to the amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. Application of the impairment test requires estimates and judgment when determining the fair value of a reporting unit. In performing the goodwill impairment test, the Company estimates the fair value using a weighting of fair values derived from an
income approach and a market approach. This analysis requires significant judgments, including estimation of future cash flows, which is dependent on internal forecasts, estimation of the long-term rate of growth for our business, estimation of the useful life over which cash flows will occur, determination of our weighted average cost of capital and selection and application of multiples of operating performance measures the reporting unit's operating performance (the "Guideline Public Company Method") using current and projected operating performance results.
Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value and the goodwill impairment test result.
The Company performed its annual goodwill impairment test as of July 1, 2021. As permitted under Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 350, the Company performed a qualitative goodwill impairment assessment to determine whether it was more likely than not that the fair value of its Services reporting unit was less than its carrying amount, including goodwill. After assessing all relevant qualitative factors, the Company determined that it was more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit exceeded its carrying amount and a quantitative goodwill impairment test was not necessary.
The impairment test of the Company’s indefinite-lived intangible asset, the Avaya Trade Name, consists of a comparison of the estimated fair value of the asset with its carrying value. The fair value of the Avaya Trade Name is estimated using the relief-from-royalty model, a form of the income approach. Under this methodology, the fair value of the trade name is estimated by applying a royalty rate to forecasted net revenues which is then discounted using a risk-adjusted rate of return on capital. Revenue growth rates inherent in the forecast are based on input from internal and external market intelligence research sources that compare factors such as growth in global economies, regional trends in the telecommunications industry and product evolution. The royalty rate is determined using a set of observed market royalty rates.
As of July 1, 2021, the Company performed its annual impairment test of the Avaya Trade Name and determined that its estimated fair value exceeded its carrying amount and no impairment existed.
The Company determined that no events occurred or circumstances changed during the three months ended September 30, 2021 that would indicate that it is more likely than not that its goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible asset were impaired. To the extent that business conditions deteriorate or if changes in key assumptions and estimates differ significantly from management's expectations, it may be necessary to record additional impairment charges in the future.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Operations in the period that includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance is recorded to reduce the carrying amounts of deferred tax assets if it is more likely than not that such assets will not be realized.
Additionally, the accounting for income taxes requires the Company to evaluate and make an assertion as to whether undistributed foreign earnings will be indefinitely reinvested or repatriated.
FASB ASC subtopic 740-10, "Income Taxes-Overall" ("ASC 740-10") prescribes a comprehensive model for the financial statement recognition, measurement, classification and disclosure of uncertain tax positions. ASC 740-10 contains a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit based on the technical merits of the position. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement.
Significant judgment is required in evaluating uncertain tax positions and determining the provision for income taxes. Although the Company believes its reserves are reasonable, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be different from that which is reflected in the historical income tax provision and accruals. The Company adjusts its estimated liability for uncertain tax positions periodically due to new information discovered from ongoing examinations by, and settlements with, various taxing authorities, as well as changes in tax laws, regulations and interpretations. The Company’s policy is to recognize, when applicable, interest and penalties on uncertain tax positions as part of income tax expense.
As part of the Company’s accounting for business combinations, some of the purchase price is allocated to goodwill and intangible assets. Impairment expenses associated with goodwill are generally not tax deductible and will result in an increased effective income tax rate in the fiscal period any impairment is recorded. The income tax benefit from future releases of the acquisition date valuation allowances or income tax contingencies, if any, are reflected in the income tax provision in the Consolidated Statements of Operations, rather than as an adjustment to the purchase price allocation.
Pension and Post-retirement Benefit Obligations
The Company sponsors non-contributory defined benefit pension plans covering a portion of its U.S. employees and retirees, and post-retirement benefit plans covering a portion of its U.S. employees and retirees that include healthcare benefits and life insurance coverage. Certain non-U.S. operations have various retirement benefit programs covering substantially all of their employees.
The Company’s pension and post-retirement benefit costs are developed from actuarial valuations. Inherent in these valuations are key assumptions, including the discount rate, expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, rate of compensation increase and healthcare cost trend rate. Material changes in pension and post-retirement benefit costs may occur in the future due to changes in these assumptions, in the number of plan participants, in the level of benefits provided, in asset levels and in legislation.
The discount rate is subject to change each year, consistent with changes in rates of return on high-quality fixed-income investments currently available and expected to be available during the expected benefit payment period. The Company selects the assumed discount rate for its U.S. pension and post-retirement benefit plans by applying the rates from the Aon AA Above Median and Aon AA Only Bond Universe yield curves to the expected benefit payment streams and develops a rate at which it is believed the benefit obligations could be effectively settled. The Company follows a similar process for its non-U.S. pension plans by applying the Aon Euro AA corporate bond yield curve for the plans based in Europe and relevant country-specific bond indices for other locations.
The market-related value of the Company’s plan assets for the Company’s U.S. and international pension plans and post-retirement medical plans as of the measurement date is developed using a five-year smoothing technique. First, a preliminary market-related value is calculated by adjusting the market-related value at the beginning of the year for payments to and from plan assets and the expected return on assets during the year. The expected return on assets represents the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets adjusted up to plus or minus 2% based on the actual ten-year average rate of return on plan assets. A final market-related value is determined as the preliminary market-related value, plus 20% of the difference between the actual return and expected return for each of the past five years. As a result of the partial settlement of the post-retirement life insurance in fiscal 2021, which is further described within Note 15, “Benefit Obligations,” the market-related value of the Company’s plan assets for other post-retirement life insurance plan is determined using the fair market value technique.
Salary growth and healthcare cost trend assumptions are based on the Company's historical experience and future outlook.
While the Company believes that the assumptions used in these calculations are reasonable, differences in actual experience or changes in assumptions could materially affect the expense and liabilities related to the Company's defined benefit plans. For the U.S. pension; non-U.S. pension; and post-retirement plans combined, a hypothetical 25 basis point increase or decrease in the discount rate would affect expense for fiscal 2021 by $1 million or $2 million, respectively. A hypothetical 25 basis point increase or decrease in the discount rate would change the projected benefit obligation as of September 30, 2021 by $(48) million or $50 million, respectively. A hypothetical 25 basis point change in the expected long-term rate of return would affect expense for fiscal 2021 by approximately $3 million.
Loss Contingencies
In the ordinary course of business, the Company is involved in various litigation, claims, government inquiries, investigations and proceedings, including but not limited to, those relating to intellectual property, commercial, employment, environmental indemnity and regulatory matters. The Company records accruals for loss contingencies to the extent that it has concluded that it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. When a material loss contingency is reasonably possible but not probable, we do not record a liability, but instead disclose the nature and the amount of the claim, and an estimate of the loss or range of loss, if such an estimate can be made. Due to the inherent uncertainties related to these matters, significant judgment is required in the determination of the risk of loss and whether the loss is reasonably estimable. This assessment is based on our current understanding of relevant facts and circumstances, including but not limited to, the status of the legal or regulatory proceedings, the merits of its defenses and consultations with internal and external counsel to determine whether such accruals should be made or adjusted. Any accruals or revisions in estimates could have a material impact on our results of operations or financial position.