ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Armstrong World Industries, Inc. (“AWI”) is a Pennsylvania corporation incorporated in 1891.
This discussion should be read in conjunction with the financial statements, the accompanying notes, the cautionary note regarding forward-looking statements and risk factors included in this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a leading producer of ceiling systems for use in the construction and renovation of commercial and residential buildings. We design, manufacture and sell ceiling and wall systems (primarily mineral fiber, fiberglass wool, metal, wood, wood fiber, glass-reinforced-gypsum and felt) throughout the Americas.
COVID-19
The impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on our future consolidated results of operations is uncertain. We experienced a significant decrease in customer demand within both segments during the second through fourth quarters of 2020 due to COVID-19. Specifically, we noted delays in construction driven by temporary closures of non-life sustaining businesses, with the most significant impacts in major metropolitan areas impacted by COVID-19. We experienced less of a comparative decline in net sales during the third and fourth quarters of 2020 compared to the second quarter of 2020, as construction resumed across many parts of the U.S. In response to COVID-19, we reduced capital expenditures and discretionary spending including compensation, travel and marketing expenses.
As of December 31, 2020, all of our manufacturing facilities were operational, excluding the St. Helens, Oregon facility which was idled prior to the COVID-19 outbreak. In an effort to operate safely and responsibly, we continue to follow guidelines from governmental and local health authorities across all our facilities and have implemented preventative measures that include working remotely, providing personal protective equipment, limiting group meetings, enhancing cleaning and sanitizing procedures, and social distancing.
During the first quarter of 2020, we borrowed an additional $100.0 million from our revolving credit facility and $30.0 million from our accounts receivable securitization facility. During the second quarter of 2020, we repaid $65.0 million of the revolving credit facility borrowings and during the third quarter of 2020 we repaid $30.0 million in connection with the maturity of our accounts receivable securitization facility. Our share repurchase program was temporarily suspended in the first quarter of 2020 in response to uncertainties surrounding COVID-19. On October 21, 2020, we elected to restart the program and had $593.8 million remaining under our Board of Director’s repurchase authorization as of December 31, 2020. We did not record any asset impairments, inventory charges or material bad debt reserves related to COVID-19 during 2020 but future events may require such charges. We will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the COVID-19 outbreak’s impact on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Acquisitions
In December 2020, we acquired all of the issued and outstanding equity of Arktura LLC (“Arktura”) and certain subsidiaries with operations in the United States and Argentina. Arktura is a designer and fabricator of metal and felt ceilings, walls, partitions and facades with one manufacturing facility based in Los Angeles, California.
In August 2020, we acquired the business and assets of Moz Designs, Inc. (“Moz”), based in Oakland, California. Moz is a designer and fabricator of custom architectural metal ceilings, walls, dividers and column covers for interior and exterior applications with one manufacturing facility.
In July 2020, we acquired all of the issued and outstanding capital stock of TURF Design, Inc. (“Turf”), with one manufacturing facility in Elgin, Illinois and a design center in Chicago, Illinois. Turf is a designer and manufacturer of acoustic felt ceilings and wall products.
In November 2019, we acquired the business and assets of MRK Industries, Inc. (“MRK”), based in Libertyville, Illinois. MRK is a manufacturer of specialty metal ceiling, wall and exterior solutions with one manufacturing facility.
In March 2019, we acquired the business and assets of Architectural Components Group, Inc. (“ACGI”), based in Marshfield, Missouri. ACGI is a manufacturer of custom wood ceilings and walls with one manufacturing facility.
In August 2018, we acquired the business and assets of Steel Ceilings, Inc. (“Steel Ceilings”), based in Johnstown, Ohio. Steel Ceilings is a manufacturer of aluminum and stainless metal ceilings that include architectural, radiant and security solutions with one manufacturing facility.
In May 2018, we acquired the business and assets of Plasterform, Inc. (“Plasterform”), based in Mississauga, Ontario, Canada. Plasterform is a manufacturer of architectural cast ceilings, walls, facades, columns and moldings with one manufacturing facility.
The operations, assets and liabilities of these acquisitions are included in our Architectural Specialties segment.
Discontinued Operations
On September 30, 2019, we completed the sale of certain subsidiaries comprising our businesses and operations in Europe, the Middle East and Africa (including Russia) (“EMEA”) and the Pacific Rim, including the corresponding businesses and operations conducted by Worthington Armstrong Venture (“WAVE”), our joint venture with Worthington Industries, Inc. (“Worthington”) in which AWI holds a 50% interest (collectively, the “Sale”), to Knauf International GmbH (“Knauf”). The purchase price of $330.0 million was previously paid by Knauf to us during 2018 and was subject to certain post-closing adjustments for cash and debt as provided in the Purchase Agreement dated as of November 17, 2017, by and between us and Knauf (the “Purchase Agreement”), including adjustments based on the economic impact of any required regulatory remedies and a working capital adjustment. During 2020, we remitted $25.9 million, respectively, to WAVE for their remaining portion of the proceeds from Knauf. Also during 2020, WAVE paid each of AWI and Worthington dividends of $13.0 million relating to these payments. During the third quarter of 2020, we remitted $6.4 million to Knauf for working capital and other adjustments. In January 2021, we finalized the post-closing adjustments to purchase price related to certain pension liabilities assumed by Knauf in the Sale. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we recorded a $12.0 million loss primarily related to this purchase price adjustment, which is reflected within accounts payable and accrued expenses as of December 31, 2020.
In 2019, we entered into a Transition Services Agreement with Knauf for its benefit and the benefit of a buyer of certain businesses divested by Knauf, pursuant to which we provided certain transition technology, finance and information technology support services. The Transition Services Agreement expired in 2020. In connection with the closing of the Sale, we also entered into (i) a royalty-free intellectual property License Agreement with Knauf under which they, and the buyers of certain businesses divested by Knauf, license patents, trademarks and know-how from us for use in licensed territories in which the business was conducted prior to the Sale, and (ii) a Supply Agreement with Knauf under which the parties may continue to purchase certain products from each other following the closing of the Sale. WAVE also entered into similar agreements with Knauf for such purposes. The term of the granted licenses, with respect to each intellectual property right, extend until the expiration or abandonment of each such intellectual property right.
The EMEA and Pacific Rim segment historical financial results through September 30, 2019 have been reflected in AWI’s Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income as discontinued operations for all periods presented, while the assets and liabilities of discontinued operations have been removed from AWI’s Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2019.
See Notes 5 and 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to our acquisitions and discontinued operations.
Manufacturing Plants
As of December 31, 2020, we had 16 manufacturing plants in two countries, with 14 plants located within the U.S., which included our St. Helens, Oregon mineral fiber manufacturing facility, which closed in the second quarter of 2018. We have two plants in Canada. During 2020, as part of our acquisition of Turf, we acquired a plant in Illinois and, as part of acquisitions of Moz and Arktura, we acquired two additional plants in California. During 2020, we sold our idled plant in China, which had been classified as an asset held for sale.
WAVE operates six additional plants in the U.S. to produce suspension system (grid) products, which we use and sell in our ceiling systems.
Reportable Segments
Our operating segments are as follows: Mineral Fiber, Architectural Specialties and Unallocated Corporate.
Mineral Fiber - produces suspended mineral fiber and soft fiber ceiling systems for use in commercial and residential settings. Products offer various performance attributes such as acoustical control, rated fire protection, aesthetic appeal and health attributes. Commercial ceiling products are sold to resale distributors and to ceiling systems contractors. Residential ceiling products are sold
primarily to wholesalers and retailers (including large home centers). The Mineral Fiber segment also includes the results of WAVE, which manufactures and sells suspension system (grid) products and ceiling component products that are invoiced by both AWI and WAVE. Segment results relating to WAVE consist primarily of equity earnings and reflect our 50% equity interest in the joint venture. Ceiling component products consist of ceiling perimeters and trim, in addition to grid products that support drywall ceiling systems. To a lesser extent, however, in some geographies and for some customers, WAVE sells its suspension systems products to AWI for resale to customers. Mineral Fiber segment results reflect those sales transactions. The Mineral Fiber segment also includes all assets and liabilities not specifically allocated to our Architectural Specialties or Unallocated Corporate segment, including all property and related depreciation associated with our Lancaster, PA headquarters. Operating results for the Mineral Fiber segment include a significant majority of allocated Corporate administrative expenses that represent a reasonable allocation of general services to support its operations.
Architectural Specialties - produces and sources ceilings and walls for use in commercial settings. Products are available in numerous materials, such as metal and wood, in addition to various colors, shapes and designs. Products offer various performance attributes such as acoustical control, rated fire protection and aesthetic appeal. We sell standard and customized products, and a portion of our Architectural Specialties revenues are derived from sourced products. Architectural Specialties products are sold primarily to resale distributors and ceiling systems contractors. The majority of revenues are project driven, which can lead to more volatile sales patterns due to project scheduling uncertainty. Operating results for the Architectural Specialties segment include a portion of allocated Corporate administrative expenses that represent a reasonable allocation of general services to support its operations.
Unallocated Corporate - includes assets, liabilities, income and expenses that have not been allocated to our other business segments and consists of: cash and cash equivalents, the net funded status of our U.S. Retirement Income Plan (“RIP”), the estimated fair value of interest rate swap contracts, outstanding borrowings under our senior credit facility and income tax balances. Our Unallocated Corporate segment also includes all assets, liabilities, income and expenses formerly reported in our EMEA and Pacific Rim segments that were not included in the Sale.
Factors Affecting Revenues
For information on our segments’ 2020 net sales by geography, see Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K. For information on our segments’ 2020 net sales disaggregated by major customer groups, see Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
Markets. We compete in the commercial and residential construction markets. We closely monitor publicly available macroeconomic trends that provide insight into commercial and residential market activity, including GDP, office vacancy rates, the Architecture Billings Index, new commercial construction starts, state and local government spending, corporate profits and retail sales.
We noted several factors and trends within our markets that directly affected our business performance during 2020, most importantly the aforementioned decrease in demand within both segments as a result of COVID-19. During 2020, we experienced an $87 million reduction in volumes compared to 2019. Revenues for our Architectural Specialties segment were also positively impacted by our 2019 acquisitions of ACGI and MRK (collectively, the “2019 Acquisitions”) and our 2020 acquisitions of Turf, Moz and Arktura (collectively, the “2020 Acquisitions”). The following table presents the impact of the 2019 Acquisitions and the 2020 Acquisitions on our Architectural Specialties segment’s net sales (dollar amounts in millions):
Average Unit Value. We periodically modify sales prices of our products due to changes in costs for raw materials and energy, market conditions and the competitive environment. In certain cases, realized price increases are less than the announced price increases because of project pricing, competitive reactions and changing market conditions. We also offer a wide assortment of products that are differentiated by style, design and performance attributes. Pricing and margins for products within the assortment vary. In addition, changes in the relative quantity of products purchased at different price points can impact year-to-year comparisons of net sales and operating income. Within our Mineral Fiber segment, we focus on improving sales dollars per unit sold, or average unit value (“AUV”), as a measure that accounts for the varying assortment of products impacting our revenues. We estimate that unfavorable AUV decreased our total consolidated net sales for 2020 by approximately $14 million compared to 2019. See Results of Operations for further information. Our Architectural Specialties segment generates revenues that are generally earned based on individual contracts that include a mix of products, both manufactured by us and sourced from third parties that vary by project. As such, we do not track AUV performance for this segment, but rather attribute most changes in sales to volume.
Seasonality. Historically, our sales tend to be stronger in the second and the third quarters of our fiscal year due to more favorable weather conditions, customer business cycles and the timing of renovation and new construction. In comparison to the prior year, sales were weaker in the second through fourth quarters of 2020 due to reduced demand related to COVID-19.
Factors Affecting Operating Costs
Operating Expenses. Our operating expenses are comprised of direct production costs (principally raw materials, labor and energy), manufacturing overhead costs, freight, costs to purchase sourced products and selling, general, and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses.
Our largest raw material expenditures are for aluminum, clays, felt, fiberglass, perlite, pigment, recycled paper, starch, steel, wood and wood fiber. We manufacture most of the production needs for mineral wool at one of our manufacturing facilities. Natural gas and packaging materials are also significant input costs. Fluctuations in the prices of these inputs are generally beyond our control and have a direct impact on our financial results. In 2020, lower costs for raw materials and energy positively impacted operating income by $3 million, compared to 2019.
2020 Acquisition-Related Expenses
In connection with the 2020 Acquisitions, we incurred certain acquisition-related expenses in 2020, summarized as follows (dollar amounts in millions):
The deferred revenue, backlog and inventory amounts reflect the post-acquisition expense associated with recording these liabilities and assets at fair value as part of purchase accounting. The estimated fair value of contingent consideration for Moz and Turf is remeasured at each reporting period. Expenses related to the deferred cash and restricted stock awards for Arktura’s former owners and employees will be recorded over their respective service and vesting periods, as such payments are subject to the awardees’ continued employment with AWI. Purchase accounting expenses related to depreciation of fixed asset fair value adjustments and certain intangible asset amortization expenses have been excluded from the table above. See Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in Item 7 of our Amendment No. 1 to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Unless otherwise indicated, net sales in these results of operations are reported based upon the AWI location where the sale was made. Please refer to Notes 3 and 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a reconciliation of segment operating income to consolidated earnings from continuing operations before income taxes and additional financial information related to discontinued operations.
2020 COMPARED TO 2019
CONSOLIDATED RESULTS FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS
(dollar amounts in millions)
Consolidated net sales decreased 9.7% due to lower volumes of $87 million and unfavorable AUV of $14 million. Mineral Fiber net sales decreased by $100 million and Architectural Specialties net sales decreased by $1 million. As previously noted, decreases in volumes for both our Mineral Fiber and Architectural Specialties segments were a result of lower market demand due to COVID-19, partially offset by the impact of our 2020 Acquisitions and 2019 Acquisitions in the Architectural Specialties segment. We experienced less of a comparative decline in net sales during the third and fourth quarters of 2020 compared to the second quarter of 2020, with sequential improvement in each quarter.
Cost of goods sold was 64.4% of net sales in 2020, compared to 61.9% in 2019. The increase in cost of goods sold as a percent of net sales in comparison to 2019 was primarily due to unfavorable AUV and the impact of the 2020 Acquisitions and 2019 Acquisitions, partially offset by improved manufacturing productivity and cost reduction actions. The unfavorable AUV was partially driven by lower mix due to regional weakness in major metropolitan areas and due to changes in sales by customer group, both of which were impacted by COVID-19.
SG&A expenses in 2020 were $163.3 million, or 17.4% of net sales, compared to $174.3 million, or 16.8% of net sales, in 2019. The decrease in SG&A expenses was due to a $20 million decrease in legal and professional fees, driven by expenses and attorney’s fees incurred in the first quarter of 2019 under a settlement agreement with Roxul, USA, Inc. (“Rockfon”), a $7 million reduction related to higher environmental insurance settlements, net of charges, a $6 million reduction in incentive-based compensation expenses and a $5 million reduction in travel expense. These decreases in SG&A expenses were partially offset by a $10 million charitable endowment level funding to the Armstrong Foundation, a $9 million increase in SG&A expenses due to the impact of the 2020 Acquisitions and 2019 Acquisitions, including intangible asset amortization, and a $9 million increase in business development costs and investments in digitally enabled systems and tools.
The gain related to the sale of fixed and intangible assets was due to the sale of our idled mineral fiber plant in China, which was reported with our Unallocated Corporate segment.
Equity earnings from our WAVE joint venture were $64.0 million in 2020, compared to $96.6 million in 2019. Consistent with our results, demand for WAVE’s products were significantly impacted by COVID-19. The decrease in WAVE earnings was primarily related to lower volumes and unfavorable AUV and an increase in selling and administrative charges from AWI and Worthington Industries, Inc., partially offset by lower steel costs. Also contributing to the decrease in equity earnings was a $21 million increase in WAVE equity earnings in the third quarter of 2019, representing our 50% share of WAVE’s gain on sale of its discontinued European and Pacific Rim businesses, net of a $4 million write-off related to our WAVE fresh-start reporting for customer relationships and developed technology intangible assets. See Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Interest expense was $24.1 million in 2020, compared to $38.4 million in 2019. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to lower borrowings and decreases in LIBOR. Also impacting the decrease in interest expense was a lower spread on our borrowings and the write-off of unamortized debt financing cost in 2019, both of which were a result of the refinancing of our credit facility on September 30, 2019.
Other non-operating expense, net, was $357.4 million in 2020, compared to $20.4 million of income in 2019. The increase in expense was primarily related to the $374.4 million settlement loss and the $2.0 million special termination benefit charge, both related to our RIP. See Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Income tax benefit was $42.6 million in 2020, compared to $57.1 million of income tax expense in 2019, primarily driven by the effects of our first quarter 2020 pension settlement. The effective tax rate for 2020 was 33.6% as compared to a rate of 19.1% for 2019. In comparison to the statutory rate, the effective tax rate for 2020 was most significantly increased by the pre-tax benefits recognized on the sale of our mineral fiber plant in China. In comparison to the statutory rate, the effective tax rate for 2019 was most significantly impacted by the benefits related to WAVE’s gain on sale of its EMEA and Pacific Rim businesses and statute closures.
Total other comprehensive income (“OCI”) was $266.8 million in 2020, compared to $83.4 million in 2019. The change in OCI was primarily driven by pension and postretirement adjustments, primarily a $278.6 million settlement loss, net of taxes, related to our
RIP, partially offset by $6.9 million of foreign currency translation adjustments that were reclassified out of accumulated other comprehensive income (“AOCI”) upon the sale of our idled mineral fiber plant in China and the absence of $80.2 million of foreign currency translation adjustments that were reclassified out of AOCI concurrent with the Sale in third quarter of 2019. Pension and postretirement adjustments represent the amortization of actuarial gains and losses related to our defined benefit pension and postretirement plans. Foreign currency translation adjustments represent the change in the U.S. dollar value of assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies. Also impacting the change in OCI in both periods were derivative gains/losses. Derivative gain/loss represents the mark-to-market value adjustments of our derivative assets and liabilities and the recognition of gains and losses previously deferred in OCI.
REPORTABLE SEGMENT RESULTS
Mineral Fiber
(dollar amounts in millions)
Net sales decreased due to lower volumes of $89 million and unfavorable AUV of $12 million. The decreases in volumes were driven by a significant decrease in demand due to COVID-19. The unfavorable AUV was partially driven by lower mix due to regional weakness in major metropolitan areas and due to changes in sales by customer group, both of which were impacted by COVID-19.
Operating income decreased primarily due to a $63 million negative impact due to lower volumes, a $33 million reduction in WAVE equity earnings, a $22 million impact from lower AUV, a $10 million charitable endowment level funding to the Armstrong Foundation and a $9 million increase in business development costs and investments in digitally enabled systems and tools. Partially offsetting these decreases to operating income was a $29 million reduction in manufacturing costs, a $20 million decrease in legal and professional fees incurred in 2019 under a settlement agreement with Rockfon, a $7 million reduction related to higher environmental insurance settlements, net of charges, a $6 million reduction in incentive-based compensation expenses and a $4 million reduction in travel expense.
Architectural Specialties
(dollar amounts in millions)
Net sales decreased $1 million and were negatively impacted by a reduction in demand across almost all product categories and geographies as a result of COVID-19. Net sales in 2020 increased by $23 million due to the impact of the 2020 Acquisitions and 2019 Acquisitions.
Operating income decreased due to the impact of lower sales, excluding the impact of the 2020 Acquisitions and 2019 Acquisitions. Also contributing to the decrease in operating income was an additional $2 million of amortization expense related to the 2020 Acquisitions and the 2019 Acquisitions.
Unallocated Corporate
Unallocated Corporate operating income was $14 million in 2020 compared to $8 million of operating loss in 2019. The increase in operating income was primarily due to the $21 million gain related to the sale of our idled mineral fiber plant in China. See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
FINANCIAL CONDITION AND LIQUIDITY
Cash Flow
The discussion that follows includes cash flows related to discontinued operations in 2019, primarily operations sold in the Sale.
Operating activities for 2020 provided $218.8 million of cash, compared to $182.7 million in 2019. The increase was primarily due to lower tax payments and positive working capital changes, primarily receivables and accounts payable, partially offset by lower cash earnings.
Net cash used for investing activities was $141.1 million for 2020, compared to $89.1 million in 2019. The increase was primarily due to higher cash paid for acquisitions and the remittance of the remaining portion of Knauf proceeds to WAVE in 2020, partially offset by lower payments to Knauf, proceeds from the sale of our idled mineral fiber plant in China in 2020 and lower purchases of property, plant and equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $13.5 million in 2020, compared to $384.9 million of cash used in 2019. The favorable change of cash was primarily due to decreased debt payments as a result of our September 2019 debt refinancing and lower repurchases of outstanding common stock.
Liquidity
Our liquidity needs for operations vary throughout the year. We retain lines of credit to facilitate our seasonal cash flow needs, since cash flow is generally lower during the first and fourth quarters of our fiscal year.
We have a $1,000.0 million variable rate senior credit facility, which is composed of a $500.0 million revolving credit facility (with a $150.0 million sublimit for letters of credit) and a $500.0 million Term Loan A. The revolving credit facility and Term Loan A are currently priced at 1.50% over LIBOR. The senior credit facility also has a $25.0 million letter of credit facility, also known as our bi-lateral facility. The revolving credit facility and Term Loan A mature in September 2024. The $1,000.0 million senior credit facility is secured by the capital stock of material U.S. subsidiaries and a pledge of 65% of the stock of our material first-tier foreign subsidiary in Canada. The unpaid balances of the revolving credit facility and Term Loan A may be prepaid without penalty at the maturity of their respective interest reset periods. Any principal amounts paid on the Term Loan A may not be re-borrowed.
As of December 31, 2020, total borrowings outstanding under our senior credit facility were $225.0 million under the revolving credit facility and $493.7 million under Term Loan A.
The senior credit facility includes two financial covenants that require the ratio of consolidated earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) to consolidated cash interest expense minus cash consolidated interest income to be greater than or equal to 3.0 to 1.0 and requires the ratio of consolidated funded indebtedness, minus AWI and domestic subsidiary unrestricted cash and cash equivalents up to $100 million, to EBITDA to be less than or equal to 3.75 to 1.0. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants of the senior credit facility.
The Term Loan A is currently priced on a variable interest rate basis. The following table summarizes our interest rate swaps (dollar amounts in millions):
Under the terms of the November 2016 swap maturing in 2021, we receive 3-month LIBOR and pay a fixed rate over the hedged period, in addition to a basis rate swap to convert the floating rate risk under our November 2016 swap from 3-month LIBOR to 1-month LIBOR. As a result, we receive 1-month LIBOR and pay a fixed rate over the hedged period.
Under the terms of the November 2018 swap maturing in 2023, we pay a fixed rate over the hedged amount and receive a 1-month LIBOR. This is inclusive of a 0% floor.
Under the terms of the forward starting November 2018 swap maturing in 2025, we will pay a fixed rate monthly and receive 1-month LIBOR. This is inclusive of a 0% floor.
Under the terms of the March 2020 swap maturing in 2022, we pay a fixed rate over the hedged amount and receive 1-month LIBOR. This is inclusive of a 0% floor.
Under the terms of the forward starting March 2020 swaps maturing in 2024, we will pay a fixed rate monthly and receive 1-month LIBOR. These are inclusive of a 0% floor.
These swaps are designated as cash flow hedges against changes in LIBOR for a portion of our variable rate debt.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $136.9 million of cash and cash equivalents, $123.7 million in the U.S and $13.2 million in various foreign jurisdictions, primarily Canada.
During 2020, we borrowed and subsequently repaid $30.0 million under our Accounts Receivable Securitization Facility with the Bank of Nova Scotia (the “funding entity”) which matured in September 2020. Interest on borrowings under this amended facility was calculated at a 90-day commercial paper rate. Under this facility, we sold accounts receivables to Armstrong Receivables Company, LLC (“ARC”), a Delaware entity that is consolidated in these financial statements. ARC is a 100% wholly owned single member LLC special purpose entity created specifically for this transaction; therefore, any receivables sold to ARC were not available to the general creditors of AWI. ARC used this facility to borrow cash or issue letters of credit. When ARC borrowed cash under this facility, ARC sold an undivided percentage ownership interest in the purchased accounts receivables to the funding entity. We had the unilateral right to repurchase the funding entity’s purchased interest in the accounts receivables and, as a result, borrowings under this facility were reported as debt in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Borrowings under this facility were obligations of ARC and not AWI. ARC contracted with and paid a servicing fee to AWI to manage, collect and service the purchased accounts receivables. All new receivables under the program were continuously purchased by ARC with the proceeds from collections of receivables previously purchased.
We utilize lines of credit and other commercial commitments in order to ensure that adequate funds are available to meet operating requirements. Letters of credit are currently arranged through our revolving credit facility and our bi-lateral facility. Letters of credit may be issued to third party suppliers, insurance and financial institutions and typically can only be drawn upon in the event of AWI’s failure to pay its obligations to the beneficiary. The following table presents details related to our letters of credit facilities (dollar amounts in millions):
The table below reflects future payments of long-term debt, excluding $3.2 million of unamortized debt financing costs, and the related interest payments, which are projected based on market-based interest rate swap curves (dollar amounts in millions):
As of December 31, 2020, we had $136.9 million of cash and cash equivalents and $275.0 million available under our revolving credit facility. We believe cash on hand and cash generated from operations, together with borrowing capacity under our credit facility, will be adequate to address our near-term liquidity needs based on current expectations of our business operations, capital expenditures and scheduled payment of debt obligations. In 2021, we expect to spend approximately $75.0 million to $80.0 million on capital expenditures and approximately $40.0 million on dividends. The impacts of COVID-19 could create volatility in financial markets which may impact the terms under which we access capital. We continue to evaluate reductions in discretionary spending, capital expenditures and other costs.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
In preparing our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), we are required to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an on-going basis, using relevant internal and external information. We believe that our estimates and assumptions are reasonable. However, actual results may differ from what was estimated and could have a significant impact on the financial statements.
We have identified the following as our critical accounting estimates. We have discussed these critical accounting estimates with our Audit Committee.
U.S. Pension Credit and Postretirement Benefit Costs - We maintain significant pension and postretirement plans in the U.S. Our defined benefit pension and postretirement benefit costs are developed from actuarial valuations. These valuations are calculated using a number of assumptions, which represent management’s best estimate of the future. The assumptions that have the most significant impact on reported results are the discount rate, the estimated long-term return on plan assets and the estimated inflation in health care costs. These assumptions are generally updated annually.
Management utilizes the Aon Hewitt AA only above median yield curve, which is a hypothetical AA yield curve comprised of a series of annualized individual discount rates, as the primary basis for determining discount rates. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we assumed discount rates of 2.68% and 3.16%, respectively, for the U.S. defined benefit pension plans. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we assumed a discount rates of 2.37% and 3.14%, respectively, for the U.S. postretirement plan. The effects of the change in discount rate will be amortized into earnings as described below. Absent any other changes, a one-quarter percentage point increase or decrease in the discount rates for the U.S. pension and postretirement plans would not have a material impact on 2021 operating or non-operating income.
We manage two U.S. defined benefit pension plans, our RIP, which is a qualified funded plan, and a nonqualified unfunded plan. For the RIP, the expected long-term return on plan assets represents a long-term view of the future estimated investment return on plan assets. This estimate is determined based on the target allocation of plan assets among asset classes and input from investment professionals on the expected performance of the asset classes over 10 to 30 years. Historical asset returns are monitored and considered when we develop our expected long-term return on plan assets. An incremental component is added for the expected return from active management based on historical information obtained from the plan’s investment consultants. These forecasted gross returns are reduced by estimated management fees and expenses. Over the 10-year period ended December 31, 2020, the historical annualized return was approximately 7.6% compared to an average expected return of 6.1%. The actual gain on plan assets incurred for 2020 was 9.6%, net of fees. The difference between the actual and expected rate of return on plan assets will be amortized into earnings as described below.
The expected long-term return on plan assets used in determining our 2020 U.S. pension cost was 5.25%. We have assumed a return on plan assets for 2021 of 3.25% as a result of a more conservative asset allocation. The 2021 expected return on assets was calculated in a manner consistent with 2020. A one-quarter percentage point increase or decrease in this assumption would not have a material impact on 2021 non-operating income.
Contributions to the unfunded pension plan were $3.1 million in 2020 and were made on a monthly basis to fund benefit payments. We estimate the 2021 contributions will be approximately $2.9 million. See Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
The estimated inflation in health care costs represents a 5-10 year view of the expected inflation in our postretirement health care costs. We separately estimate expected health care cost increases for pre-65 retirees and post-65 retirees due to the influence of Medicare coverage at age 65, as illustrated below:
The difference between the actual and expected health care costs is amortized into earnings as described below. As of December 31, 2020, health care cost increases are estimated to decrease ratably until 2027, after which they are estimated to be constant at 4.50%. See Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
Actual results that differ from our various pension and postretirement plan estimates are captured as actuarial gains/losses. When certain thresholds are met, the gains and losses are amortized into future earnings over the remaining life expectancy of participants. Changes in assumptions could have significant effects on earnings in future years.
Total net actuarial losses related to our U.S. pension benefit plans as of December 31, 2020 decreased by $398.1 million in 2020 primarily due to a $374.4 million settlement loss related to the transfer of certain benefit obligations of our RIP, better than expected return on assets, an annuity premium gain in the RIP and an experience gain in the RBEP, partially offset by a 48-basis point decrease in the discount rate. The $398.1 million actuarial gain impacting our U.S. pension plans is reflected as a component of other comprehensive income in our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income along with actuarial gains and losses from our foreign pension plan and our U.S. postretirement benefit plan.
Income Taxes - Our effective tax rate is primarily determined based on our pre-tax income, statutory income tax rates in the jurisdictions in which we operate, and the tax impacts of items treated differently for tax purposes than for financial reporting purposes. Some of these differences are permanent, such as expenses that are not deductible in our tax returns, and some differences are temporary, reversing over time, such as depreciation expense. These temporary differences create deferred income tax assets and liabilities. Deferred income tax assets are also recorded for net operating losses (“NOL”), capital loss carryforwards, and foreign tax credit (“FTC”) carryforwards.
As of December 31, 2020, we have recorded valuation allowances totaling $79.4 million for various federal and state deferred tax assets. While we have considered future taxable income in assessing the need for the valuation allowances based on our best available projections, if these estimates and assumptions change in the future or if actual results differ from our projections, we may be required to adjust our valuation allowances accordingly. Such adjustments could be material to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
As further described in Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, our Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020 includes deferred income tax assets of $163.8 million. Included in this amount are deferred federal income tax assets for FTC carryforwards of $17.7 million, federal and state capital loss carryforwards of $19.3 million, and state NOL deferred income tax assets of $48.7 million. We have established valuation allowances in the amount of $79.4 million consisting of $17.7 million for federal deferred tax assets related to FTC carryovers, $42.4 million for state deferred tax assets, primarily operating loss carryovers, and $19.3 million for federal and state deferred tax assets related to capital loss carryovers. Inherent in determining our effective tax rate are judgments regarding business plans and expectations about future operations. These judgments include the amount and geographic mix of future taxable income, the amount of foreign source income, limitations on usage of NOL carryforwards, the impact of ongoing or potential tax audits, and other future tax consequences.
We estimate we will need to generate future U.S. taxable income of approximately $612.3 million for state income tax purposes during the respective realization periods (ranging from 2021 to 2040) to be able to fully realize the net state NOL deferred income tax assets.
Our ability to utilize deferred tax assets may be impacted by certain future events, such as changes in tax legislation and insufficient future taxable income prior to expiration of certain deferred tax assets.
Impairments of Long-Lived Tangible, Intangible Assets and Goodwill - Our indefinite-lived assets include goodwill and other intangibles, primarily trademarks and brand names. Those trademarks and brand names are integral to our corporate identity and expected to contribute indefinitely to our corporate cash flows. Accordingly, they have been assigned an indefinite life. We conduct our annual impairment tests for these indefinite-lived intangible assets and goodwill during the fourth quarter. These assets undergo more frequent tests if an indication of possible impairment exists. We conduct impairment tests for tangible assets and definite-lived intangible assets when indicators of impairment exist for the asset group, such as operating losses and/or negative cash flows.
The principal assumptions used in our impairment tests for definite-lived intangible assets is operating profit adjusted for depreciation and amortization and, if required to estimate the fair value, the discount rate. The principal assumptions used in our impairment tests for indefinite-lived intangible assets include revenue growth rates, discount rate and royalty rate. The principal assumptions utilized in our impairment tests for goodwill include after-tax cash flows growth rates and discount rate. Revenue growth rates, after-tax cash flows growth rates and operating profit assumptions are derived from those used in our operating plan and strategic planning processes. The discount rate assumption is calculated based upon an estimated weighted average cost of capital which reflects the overall level of inherent risk and the rate of return a market participant would expect to achieve. The royalty rate assumption represents the estimated contribution of the intangible assets to the overall profits of the related businesses. Methodologies used for valuing our intangible assets did not change from prior periods.
In 2020, indefinite-lived intangibles and goodwill were tested for impairment based on the identified asset (for indefinite-lived intangibles) or on our identified reporting units (for goodwill). There were no impairment charges recorded in 2020, 2019 or 2018 related to intangible assets. We did not test tangible assets within our continuing operations for impairment in 2020, 2019 or 2018 as no indicators of impairment existed.
The revenue and cash flow estimates used in applying our impairment tests are based on management’s analysis of information available at the time of the impairment test and represent a market participant view. Actual cash flows lower than the estimate could lead to significant future impairments. If subsequent testing indicates that fair values have declined, the carrying values would be reduced and our future statements of operations would be affected.
We cannot predict the occurrence of certain events that might lead to material impairment charges in the future. Such events may include, but are not limited to, the impact of economic environments, particularly related to the commercial and residential
construction industries, material adverse changes in relationships with significant customers, or strategic decisions made in response to economic and competitive conditions. See Notes 3 and 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Environmental Liabilities - We are actively involved in the investigation, closure and/or remediation of existing or potential environmental contamination under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (“CERCLA”), and state Superfund and similar environmental laws at two domestically owned locations allegedly resulting from past industrial activity. In a few cases, we are one of several potentially responsible parties and have agreed to jointly fund the required investigation, while preserving our defenses to the liability. We may also have rights of contribution or reimbursement from other parties or coverage under applicable insurance policies.
We provide for environmental remediation costs and penalties when the responsibility to remediate is probable and the amount of associated costs is reasonably determinable. Accruals are estimates based on the judgment of management related to ongoing proceedings. Estimates of our future liability at the environmental sites are based on evaluations of currently available facts regarding each individual site. In determining the probability of contribution, we consider the solvency of other parties, the site activities of other parties, whether liability is being disputed, the terms of any existing agreements and experience with similar matters, and the effect of our October 2006 Chapter 11 reorganization upon the validity of the claim.
We evaluate the measurement of recorded liabilities each reporting period based on current facts and circumstances specific to each matter. The ultimate losses incurred upon final resolution may materially differ from the estimated liability recorded. Changes in estimates are recorded in earnings in the period in which such changes occur.
We are unable to predict the extent to which any recoveries from other parties or coverage under insurance policies might cover our final share of costs for these sites. Our final share of investigation and remediation costs may exceed any such recoveries, and such amounts net of insurance recoveries may be material. However, we do not expect the total future costs to have a material adverse effect on our liquidity or financial condition as the cash payments may be made over many years.
Business Combinations and Contingent Consideration - Acquired businesses are accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires that the purchase price be allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their respective fair values. Adjustments to the fair value of assets acquired and/or liabilities assumed are amortized over the estimated useful life on a straight-line basis and recorded as a component of operating income (expense). Any excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. The estimated fair value of contingent consideration is recorded as a liability on the balance sheet at the date of acquisition. The purchase price allocation requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date, with respect to intangible assets and contingent consideration. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made are reasonable, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies. We engage independent, third-party valuation specialists to assist in determining the fair values of acquired intangible assets and contingent consideration.
Both the Moz and Turf acquisitions in 2020 include the potential for contingent earn out payments based on the financial performance of the acquired companies. We estimated the fair value of these contingent consideration liabilities upon acquisition and are required to measure the liability at fair value each reporting period until the contingency is resolved, with changes in the fair value after the acquisition date affecting earnings in the period of the estimated fair value change. See Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
The principal assumptions used in valuing certain intangible assets and contingent consideration include future expected cash flows from sales and acquired developed technologies, the acquired company's trade names and customer relationships as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired trade names and customer relationships will continue to be used in the combined company's portfolio, the probability of meeting the future revenue and EBITDA growth targets and discount rates used to determine the present value of estimated future cash flows.
These estimates are inherently uncertain and unpredictable, and if different estimates were used the total consideration, including the estimated fair value of the contingent consideration, could be allocated to the acquired assets and liabilities differently from the allocation that we have made. In addition, unanticipated events and circumstances may occur, which may affect the accuracy or validity of such estimates, and if such events occur we may be required to record a charge against the value assigned to an acquired asset or an increase in the amounts recorded for assumed liabilities.
ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS EFFECTIVE IN FUTURE PERIODS
See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.