Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following is a discussion of our consolidated financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and capital resources. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes thereto. See “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in Item 8.
General
We are an independent energy company primarily engaged in the acquisition, exploration, exploitation, development and production of oil and gas in the United States. Historically, we have grown through the acquisition and subsequent development and exploitation of producing properties, principally through the redevelopment of old fields utilizing new technologies such as modern log analysis and reservoir modeling techniques as well as 3-D seismic surveys and horizontal drilling. As a result of these activities, we believe that we have a number of development opportunities on our properties. In addition, we intend to expand upon our development activities with complementary acreage acquisitions in our core areas of operation. Success in our development and exploration activities is critical in the maintenance and growth of our current production levels and associated reserves.
Our financial results depend upon many factors which significantly affect our results of operations including the following:
•
commodity prices and the effectiveness of our hedging arrangements;
•
the level of total sales volumes of oil and gas;
•
the availability of and our ability to raise additional capital resources and provide liquidity to meet cash flow needs;
•
the level of and interest rates on borrowings; and
•
the level and success of exploration and development activity.
Commodity Prices and Hedging Arrangements. The results of our operations are highly dependent upon the prices received for our oil and gas production. The prices we receive for our production are dependent upon spot market prices, differentials and the effectiveness of our derivative contracts, which we sometimes refer to as hedging arrangements. Substantially all of our sales of oil and gas are made in the spot market, or pursuant to contracts based on spot market prices, and not pursuant to long-term, fixed-price contracts. Accordingly, the prices received for our oil and gas production are dependent upon numerous factors beyond our control. Significant declines in prices for oil and gas could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and quantities of reserves recoverable on an economic basis.
Oil and gas prices have been volatile, and this volatility is expected to continue. As a result of the many uncertainties associated with the world political environment, worldwide supplies of oil, NGL and gas, the availability of other worldwide energy supplies and the relative competitive relationships of various energy sources in the view of consumers, we are unable to predict what changes may occur in oil, NGL, and gas prices in the future. The market price of oil, NGL and gas in 2021 will impact the amount of cash generated from operating activities, which will in turn impact our financial position. As of April 30, 2021, the NYMEX oil and gas price was $63.58 per Bbl of oil and $2.93 per Mcf of gas, respectively.
During 2020, the NYMEX future price for oil averaged $39.57 per barrel as compared to $57.05 per barrel in 2019 and the NYMEX future spot price for gas averaged $2.13 per Mcf compared to $2.53 per Mcf in 2019. Prices closed on December 31, 2020 at $48.52 per Bbl of oil and $2.13 per Mcf of gas. If commodity prices decline from these levels, our revenue and cash flows from operations will also likely decline. In addition, lower commodity prices could also reduce the amount of oil and gas that we can produce economically. If oil and gas prices decline, our revenues, profitability and cash flows from operations will also likely decrease which could cause us to alter our business plans, including reducing our drilling activities. Such declines will require us to write down the carrying value of our oil and gas assets which will also cause a reduction in net income.
The realized prices that we receive for our production differ from NYMEX futures and spot market prices, principally due to:
•
basis differentials which are dependent on actual delivery location;
•
adjustments for BTU content;
•
quality of the hydrocarbons; and
•
gathering, processing and transportation costs.
The following table sets forth our average differentials for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020:
_______________________
(1)
Average realized prices are before the impact of hedging activities.
The Company’s derivative contracts as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 consisted of NYMEX-based fixed price swaps and basis differential swaps. Under fixed price swaps, we receive a fixed price for our production and pay a variable market price to the contract counter-party.
As of December 31, 2020, we had NYMEX-based fixed price commodity swap arrangements, on approximately 88% of the oil production from our estimated net proved developed producing reserves (as of December 31, 2020) through December 31, 2021, 96%for 2022, 72% for 2023 and 88% for 2024. By removing a portion of price volatility on our future oil and gas production, we believe we will mitigate, but not eliminate, the potential effects of changing commodity prices on our cash flows from operations for those periods. However, when prevailing market prices are higher than our contract prices, we will not realize increased cash flows on the portion of the production that has been hedged. We have in the past and will in the future sustain losses on both open and settled derivative contracts if market prices are higher than our contract prices. Conversely, when prevailing market prices are lower than our contract prices, we will sustain realized and unrealized gains on our commodity derivative contracts. In 2020, we recorded a gain of $42.9 million, consisting of a gain of $17.5 million on closed contracts and a gain of $25.4 million related to open contracts. In 2019, we recognized a loss of $26.8 million, consisting of a loss of $6.0 million on closed contracts and a loss of $20.8 million related to open contracts. We have not designated any of these derivative contracts as a hedge as permitted by applicable accounting rules if certain conditions are met. Substantially all of our hedging contracts were terminated subsequent to March 31, 2021. See Note 14 "Subseqemt Events".
The following table sets forth our derivative contracts at December 31, 2020:
At December 31, 2020, the aggregate fair market value of our commodity derivative contracts was an asset of approximately $19.4 million.
In April 2021, we received notice that certain of our hedging agreements were being terminated as a result of events of default under the First Lien Credit Facility, and we voluntarily terminated most of our other hedging arrangements. As a result of the settlement of the terminated hedges, we have outstanding obligations of $9.9 million. The settlement values of the terminated hedges were determined at various dates between April 15 and April 30, 2021. These obligations will be added to the balance of the First Lien Credit Facility and accrue interest at the default interest rate, currently 6.7%, until repaid. Our remaining hedging agreements may also be terminated as a result of such events of default. The settlement of terminated hedging agreements may result in losses and limit our ability to reduce exposure to adverse fluctuations in oil and gas prices. See Note 14 “Subsequent Events” for current information regarding non-compliance with certain covenants.
Production Volumes. Our proved reserves will decline as oil and gas is produced, unless we find, acquire or develop additional properties containing proved reserves or conduct successful exploration and development activities. Based on the reserve information set forth in our reserve report as of December 31, 2020, our average annual estimated decline rate for our net proved developed producing reserves is 39%, 18%, 14% , 13% and 12% in 2021, 2022, 2023, 2024 and 2025, respectively, 9% in the following five years, and approximately 9% thereafter. These rates of decline are estimates and actual production declines could be materially higher. While we have had some success in finding, acquiring and developing additional reserves, we have not always been able to fully replace the production volumes lost from natural field declines and property sales. Our ability to acquire or find additional reserves in the future will be dependent, in part, upon the amount of available funds for acquisition, exploration and development projects. The decline in oil prices that occurred in March 2020, resulted in the suspension of our 2020 drilling program as well as shutting in production for some period of time. Both of these events impacted our production volumes and will impact them going forward.
In addition to our ability to successfully drill wells, we must also market our production which depends substantially on the availability, proximity and capacity of gathering systems, pipelines and processing facilities, which are also known as midstream facilities, owned and operated by third parties. If adequate midstream facilities and services are not available to us on a timely basis and at acceptable costs, our production and results of operations could be adversely affected. Both of our principal areas of operation (the Bakken and Permian Basin) have experienced substantial development in recent years, and this has made it more difficult for providers of midstream infrastructure and services to keep pace with the corresponding increases in field-wide production. The ultimate timing and availability of adequate infrastructure is not within our control and we could experience capacity constraints for extended periods of time that would negatively impact our ability to meet our production targets. Weather, regulatory developments and other factors also affect the adequacy of midstream infrastructure.
We had cash capital expenditures during 2020 of approximately $12.6 million. This amount includes a decrease in the amount of capital expenditures in accounts payable of $7.2 million, resulting in accrual based capital expenditures related to 2020 of $5.4 million. Due to declines in oil prices, we suspended our planned capital expenditures for 2020. This suspension of our capital expenditure budget is subject to change depending upon a number of factors, including the availability and costs of drilling and service equipment and crews, economic and industry conditions at the time of drilling, prevailing and anticipated prices for oil and gas, the availability of sufficient capital resources the results of our exploitation efforts, our financial results and our ability to obtain permits for drilling locations.
The following table presents historical net production volumes for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020:
Availability of Capital. As described more fully under “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below, our sources of capital are cash flows from operating activities, cash on hand, proceeds from the sale of properties, monetizing of derivative instruments, and if an appropriate opportunity presents itself, the sale of debt or equity securities, although we may not be able to complete any financing on terms acceptable to us, if at all. Our credit facilities were amended in June 2020 and the borrowing base under our First Lien Credit Facility was reduced to the then outstanding balance of $102.0 million, resulting in no additional availability, additionally, any excess cash, as defined in the First Lien Credit Facility, will be applied to the outstanding balance on a monthly basis, and the borrowing base will be reduced to the new outstanding balance.
Borrowings and Interest. At December 31, 2020, we had a total of $95.0 million outstanding under our First Lien Credit Facility, $112.7 million under our Second Lien Credit Facility, and total indebtedness of $220.5 million, including a $10.0 million exit fee. As of April 30, 2021, we had a total of $89.5 million outstanding under our First Lien Credit Facility, $127.2 million under our Second Lien Credit Facility, including a $10.0 million exit fee, and total indebtedness of $219.4 million. If interest expense increases as a result of higher interest rates or increased borrowings, more cash flow from operations would be used to meet debt service requirements. As a result, we would need to increase our cash flow from operations in order to fund the development of our drilling opportunities which, in turn, will be dependent upon the level of our production volumes and commodity prices.
Exploration and Development Activity. We believe that our asset base, high degree of operational control and inventory of drilling projects position us for future growth. At December 31, 2020, we operated properties comprising approximately 97% of the Boe's of our estimated net proved reserves, giving us substantial control over the timing and incurrence of operating and capital expenditures. We have identified numerous additional drilling locations on our existing leaseholds, the successful development of which we believe could significantly increase our production and proved reserves. Over the five years ended December 31, 2020, we drilled or participated in 92 gross (42.8 net) wells all of which were commercially productive. The amendments to our First Lien Credit Facility and Second Lien Credit facility place severe restrictions on our future capital expenditures. We have suspended any planned drilling activity for 2021 indefinitely.
Our future oil and gas production, and therefore our success, is highly dependent upon our ability to find, finance, acquire and develop additional reserves that are profitable to produce. The rate of production from our oil and gas properties and our proved reserves will decline as our reserves are produced unless we acquire additional properties containing proved reserves, conduct successful development and exploration activities or, through engineering studies identify additional behind-pipe zones or secondary recovery reserves. We cannot assure you that our exploration and development activities will result in increases in our proved reserves. If our proved reserves decline in the future, our production may also decline and, consequently, our cash flows from operations will decline. We may be unable to acquire or develop additional reserves, in which case our results of operations and financial condition could be adversely affected.
Results of Operations
Selected Operating Data.
Not required for Smaller Reporting Company.
Comparison of Year Ended December 31, 2020 to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue. During the year ended December 31, 2020, revenue decreased to $43.0 million from $129.1 million in 2019. The decrease in revenue was primarily due to lower sales volumes and lower prices for all products in 2020 . Lower sales volumes were the result of our decision to shut-in a significant amount of our production in mid-March as a result of the drastic price drop in early March due predominantly to the COVID 19 pandemic as well as geopolitical issues impacting supply and demand Lower commodity prices negatively impacted revenue by $18.5 million, while lower sales volumes had a negative impact on revenue of $67.5 million. During 2020 we experienced a decrease in the average realized oil price of approximately 29% from 2019 levels. Average realized gas prices decreased by approximately 57% and average realized NGL prices decreased by approximately 75% from 2019 levels.
Oil sales volumes decreased to 1,133 MBbls for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 2,388 MBbls for the same period of 2019. The decrease in oil sales volumes was primarily due to wells being shut in for most of the second quarter of 2020 due to severely depressed prices. We started bringing the shut in wells back on production in June, and had a majority of such wells back on production by early September. No new wells were brought on line in 2020. Gas sales volumes decreased to 2,134 MMcf for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 4,076 MMcf for the year ended December 31, 2019. NGL sales decreased to 313 MBbls for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 548 MBbls for the same period of 2019. Overall BOE sales in 2020 were approximately 50% of 2019 sales.
Lease Operating Expenses (“LOE”). LOE for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $16.5 million from $27.6 million in 2019. The decrease in LOE was primarily due to the disposition of our south Texas properties during the fourth quarter of 2019 and lower non-recurring LOE in 2020 as compared to 2019. Additionally, during the first nine months of 2020, we purchased certain production equipment that we had previously been renting and brought electrical power into most of our West Texas locations eliminating the need for generator rentals. We also reduced our work force in North Dakota in May 2020 and eliminated substantially all field overtime. LOE per Boe for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $9.14 compared to $7.64 for the same period of 2019. The increase in LOE per Boe was attributable to lower sales volumes in 2020 as compared to 2019.
Production and Ad Valorem Taxes. Production and ad valorem taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $4.6 million from $10.6 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower realized prices and sales volumes in 2020 as compared to 2019. Production and ad valorem taxes as a percentage of oil and gas revenue were 11% in 2020 compared to 8% for the same period of 2019. The increase in the percentage of revenue is primarily due to ad valorem taxes that are not impacted by production tax rates.
General and Administrative (“G&A”) Expense. G&A expense, excluding stock-based compensation, decreased to $7.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $9.4 million in 2019. G&A expense per Boe was $4.15 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $2.60 for the same period of 2019. The reduction in total G&A expense was primarily due to a reduction in personnel in the corporate office, as well as reductions in salaries. Officer salaries were reduced by 20% effective March 1, 2020, and our CEO took an additional 20% reduction in salary effective April 1, 2020. The increase per Boe was primarily due to lower sales volumes. Due to management's decision to shut in substantially all production for most of the second quarter and a portion of the third quarter, management believes the absolute decrease in cost is more relevant than the cost per BOE.
Stock-Based Compensation. Restricted stock, stock options and performance based restricted stock granted to employees and directors are valued at the date of grant and expense is recognized over the securities vesting period. Stock-based compensation decreased to $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1.9 million for the same period of 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the cancellation, forfeiture, and expiration of stock options. The Company did not award any stock options in 2019 or 2020..
Depreciation, Depletion, and Amortization (“DD&A”) Expenses. DD&A expense excluding accretion of future site restoration, decreased to $24.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $52.3 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower future development cost included in the December 31, 2020 internal reserve report, as well as lower production volumes during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2019. DD&A expense per Boe for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $13.63 compared to $14.46 in the same period of 2019. The decrease in DD&A expense per Boe was primarily due to a lower full cost pool as the result of the impairment incurred as of December 31, 2019 and in 2020 as well as lower production volumes.
Interest Expense. Interest expense increased to $21.3 million in 2020 from $12.3 million for 2019. The increase was primarily due to higher debt levels in 2020 as compared to 2019, as well as higher overall interest rates in 2020 as compared to 2019. In 2020 the interest rate on our First Lien Credit facility averaged 3.6% as compared to 5.7% in 2019. On November 13, 2019, we entered into the Term Loan Credit Agreement, which we refer to as the Second Lien Credit Facility. The average interest rate on the Second Lien Credit Facility was 13.75% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Approximately $12.7 million of interest on the Second Lien Credit Facility was paid in kind.
Income Taxes. Due to losses in the periods and loss carry forwards, we did not recognize any income tax expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
(Gain) loss on Derivative Contracts. Derivative gains or losses are determined by actual derivative settlements during the period and by periodic mark to market valuation of derivative contracts in place. We have elected not to apply hedge accounting to our derivative contracts as prescribed by Accounting Standards Codification 815, Derivatives and Hedging "ASC 815"; therefore, fluctuations in the market value of the derivative contracts are recognized in earnings during the current period. Our derivative contracts consisted of fixed price swaps and basis differential swaps in 2020 and 2019. The net estimated value of our commodity derivative contracts was an asset of approximately $19.4 million as of December 31, 2020. When our derivative contract prices are higher than prevailing market prices, we recognize gains and conversely, when our derivative contract prices are lower than prevailing market prices, we incur losses. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred a gain of $42.9 million, consisting of a gain of $17.5 million on closed contracts and a gain of $25.4 million on the mark to market valuation on open contracts. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized a loss on our derivative contracts of approximately $26.8 million, consisting of a loss of $6.0 million on closed contracts and a loss of $20.8 million on the mark to market valuation of open contracts.
Ceiling Limitation Write-Down. We record the carrying value of our oil and gas properties using the full cost method of accounting for oil and gas properties. Under this method, we capitalize the cost to acquire, explore for and develop oil and gas properties. Under the full cost accounting rules, the net capitalized cost of oil and gas properties less related deferred taxes, are limited by country, to the lower of the unamortized cost or the cost ceiling, defined as the sum of the present value of estimated unescalated future net revenues from proved reserves, discounted at 10%, plus the cost of properties not being amortized, if any, plus the lower of cost or estimated fair value of unproved properties included in the costs being amortized, if any, less related income taxes. If the net capitalized cost of oil and gas properties exceeds the ceiling limit, we are subject to a ceiling limitation write-down to the extent of such excess. A ceiling limitation write-down is a charge to earnings which does not impact cash flows from operating activities. However, such write-downs do impact the amount of our stockholders' equity and reported earnings. During 2020, the net capitalized cost of our oil and gas properties exceeded the future net revenues from our estimated proved reserves resulting in the recording of an impairment of $187.0 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the net capitalized cost of our oil and gas properties exceeded the future net revenues from our estimated proved reserves resulting in the recording of an impairment of $51.3 million. The year-end amounts were calculated in accordance with SEC rules utilizing the twelve month first-day-of-the-month average oil and gas prices utilized for the year ended 2020 which were $39.54 per Bbl of oil and $2.03 per Mcf of gas as adjusted to reflect the expected realized prices for our oil and gas reserves. The twelve month first-day-of-the-month average oil and gas prices utilized for the year ended 2019 were $50.03 per Bbl of oil and $0.56 per Mcf of gas as adjusted to reflect the expected realized prices for our oil and gas reserves.
Working Capital (Deficit). At December 31, 2020, our current liabilities of $219.3 million exceeded our current assets of $24.1 million resulting in a working capital deficit of $195.2 million. This compares to a working capital deficit of $28.6 million at December 31, 2019. Current assets at December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of accounts receivable of $10.0 million, current amount of our derivative asset of $9.6 million and other current assets of $1.6 million. Current liabilities at December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of trade payables of $6.1 million, revenues due third parties of $8.8 million, current maturities of long-term debt of $202.8 million, the current amount of our derivative liability of $0.5 million and accrued expenses of $0.3 million.
Capital Expenditures. Capital expenditures in 2019 and 2020 were $93.0 million and $5.4 million, respectively. The table below sets forth the components of these capital expenditures:
During 2020 capital expenditures were primarily expenditures on our existing properties, designed to reduce lease operating expense, such as purchasing certain equipment as opposed to renting. We also performed extensive workovers on several wells in 2020. In 2019, capital expenditures were for the exploration and development of our existing properties. The level of capital expenditures will vary during future periods depending on economic and industry conditions and commodity prices. Should the prices of oil and gas decline and if our costs of operations increase or if our production volumes decrease, our cash flows from operations will decrease which may result in a reduction of capital expenditure. Due to capital expenditure limits imposed by our credit facilities, we have not adopted a capital drilling budget for 2021, but do intend to complete the six previously drilled wells in the Bakken. If we cannot incur significant capital expenditure, we will not be able to offset oil and gas production decreases caused by natural field declines.
Sources and Uses of Capital. The net funds provided by and/or used in each of the operating, investing and financing activities are summarized in the following table and discussed in further detail below:
Operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 provided $16.0 million in cash compared to $73.6 million in 2019. The reduction was primarily due to lower net income due to lower commodity prices and lower production volumes. Investing activities used $12.6 million in 2020 primarily for the development of our existing properties. Cash expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2020 included a decrease in the accounts payable balance related to capital expenditures of $7.2 million, resulting in accrual based capital expenditures incurred during the period of $5.4 million.
Operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 provided $73.6 million in cash. The reduction from 2018 was primarily due to lower net income due to lower commodity prices. Investing activities used $85.0 million in 2019 primarily for the development of our existing properties and leasehold acquisitions. Cash expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2019 included a decrease in the accounts payable balance related to capital expenditures of $16.5 million, and an increase in our asset retirement obligation liability of $0.8 million, resulting in accrual based capital expenditures, net of dispositions of $23.4 million, incurred during the period of $93.0 million. Financing activities provided $10.5 million primarily from net borrowings under our First Lien Credit Facility and Second Lien Credit Facility.
Future Capital Resources. Our principal sources of capital going forward, are cash flows from operations, proceeds from the sale of properties, monetizing of derivative instruments and if an opportunity presents itself, the sale of debt or equity securities, although we may not be able to complete financing on terms acceptable to us, if at all.
Cash from operating activities is dependent upon commodity prices and production volumes. A decrease in commodity prices from current levels would likely reduce our cash flows from operations. This could cause us to alter our business plans, including reducing our exploration and development plans. Unless we otherwise expand and develop reserves, our production volumes may decline as reserves are produced. In the future we may continue to sell producing properties, which could further reduce our production volumes. To offset the loss in production volumes resulting from natural field declines and sales of producing properties, we must conduct successful exploration and development activities, acquire additional producing properties or identify and develop additional behind-pipe zones or secondary recovery reserves. We believe our numerous drilling opportunities will allow us to increase our production volumes; however, our drilling activities are subject to numerous risks, including the risk that no commercially productive oil and gas reservoirs will be found. If our proved reserves decline in the future, our production will also decline and, consequently, our cash flows from operations will decline.
Contractual Obligations. We are committed to making cash payments in the future on the following types of agreements:
•
Long-term debt
Below is a schedule of the future payments that we are obligated to make based on agreements in place as of December 31, 2020:
___________________________
(1)
These amounts represent the balances outstanding under our credit facilities and the real estate lien note. These payments assume that we will not borrow additional funds.
(2)
Interest expense assumes the balances of long-term debt at December 31, and current effective interest rates at that time.
(3) Represents interest expense paid in kind on our Second Lien Credit Facility. Accrued interest is added to the outstanding balance and is payable at maturity.
We maintain a reserve for costs associated with the retirement of tangible long-lived assets. At December 31, 2020, our reserve for these obligations totaled $7.4 million for which no contractual commitments exist. For additional information relating to this obligation, see Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements. At December 31, 2020, we had no existing off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC regulations, that have, or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Contingencies. From time to time, we are involved in litigation relating to claims arising out of our operations in the normal course of business. At December 31, 2020, we were not engaged in any legal proceedings that are expected, individually or in the aggregate, to have a material adverse effect on us.
Long-Term Indebtedness.
Long-term debt consisted of the following:
The following sections regarding the First Lien Credit Facility and Second Lien Credit Facility are qualified in their entirety by the disclosure contained in Item 1. Business, Going Concern, which is expressly incorporated in the sections below. Due to certain covenant violations as of December 31, 2020, and the potential for future violations, all of the debt related to our credit facilities has been classified as current liabilities.
First Lien Credit Facility
The Company has a senior secured First Lien Credit Facility with Société Générale, as administrative agent and issuing lender, and certain other lenders. As of December 31, 2020, $95.0 million was outstanding under the First Lien Credit Facility.
Outstanding amounts under the First Lien Credit Facility accrue interest at a rate per annum equal to (a)(i) for borrowings that we elect to accrue interest at the reference rate at the greater of (x) the reference rate announced from time to time by Société Générale, (y) the federal funds rate plus 0.5%, and (z) daily one-month LIBOR plus, in each case, 1.5%-2.5%, depending on the utilization of the borrowing base, and (ii) for borrowings that we elect to accrue interest at the Eurodollar rate, LIBOR plus 2.5%-3.5% depending on the utilization of the borrowing base, and (b) at any time an event of default exists, 3.0% plus the amounts set forth above. At December 31, 2020, the interest rate on the First Lien Credit Facility was approximately 3.6%.
Subject to earlier termination rights and events of default, the stated maturity date of the First Lien Credit Facility is May 16, 2022. Interest is payable quarterly on reference rate advances and not less than quarterly on LIBOR advances. The Company is permitted to terminate the First Lien Credit Facility and is able, from time to time, to permanently reduce the lenders’ aggregate commitment under the First Lien Credit Facility in compliance with certain notice and dollar increment requirements.
Each of the Company's subsidiaries has guaranteed our obligations under the First Lien Credit Facility on a senior secured basis. Obligations under the First Lien Credit Facility are secured by a first priority perfected security interest, subject to certain permitted encumbrances, in all of the Company and its subsidiary guarantors’ material property and assets. As of December 31, 2020, the collateral is required to include properties comprising at least 90% of the PV-9 of the Company's proven reserves and 95% of the PV-9 of the Company's PDP reserves.
Under the amended First Lien Credit Facility, the Company is subject to customary covenants, including financial covenants and reporting covenants. The amendment to the First Lien Credit Facility dated June 25, 2020 (the "1L Amendment") modified certain provisions of the First Lien Credit Facility, including (i) the addition of monthly mandatory prepayments from excess cash (defined as available cash minus certain cash set-asides and a $3.0 million working capital reserve) with corresponding reductions to the borrowing base; (ii) the elimination of scheduled redeterminations (which were previously made every six months) and interim redeterminations (which were previously made at the request of the lenders no more than once in the six month period between scheduled redeterminations) of the borrowing base; (iii) the replacement of total debt leverage ratio and minimum asset ratio covenants with a first lien debt leverage ratio covenant (comparing the outstanding debt of the First Lien Credit Facility to the consolidated EBITDAX of the Company and requiring that the ratio not exceed 2.75 to 1.00 as of the last day of each fiscal quarter) and a minimum first lien asset coverage ratio covenant (comparing the sum of, without duplication, (A) the PV-15 of producing and developed proven reserves of the Company, (B) the PV-9 of the Company’s hydrocarbon hedge agreements and (C) the PV-15 of proved reserves of the Company classified as “drilled uncompleted” (up to 20% of the sum of (A), (B) and (C)) to the outstanding debt of the First Lien Credit Facility and requiring that the ratio exceed 1.15 to 1.00 as of the last day of each fiscal quarter ending on or before December 31, 2020, and 1.25 to 1.00 for fiscal quarters ending thereafter); (iv) the elimination of current ratio and interest coverage ratio covenants; (v) additional restrictions on (A) capital expenditures (limiting capital expenditures to $3.0 million in any four fiscal quarter period (commencing with the four fiscal quarter period ended June 30, 2020 and calculated on an annualized basis for the 1, 2 and 3 quarter periods ending on June 30, 2020, September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020, respectively, subject to certain exceptions, including capital expenditures financed with the proceeds of newly permitted, structurally subordinated debt and capital expenditures made when (1) the first lien asset coverage ratio is at least 1.60 to 1.00, (2) the Company is in compliance with the first lien leverage ratio, (3) the amounts outstanding under the First Lien Credit Facility are less $50.0 million, (4) no default exists under the First Lien Credit Facility and (5) and all representations and warranties in the First Lien Credit Facility and the related credit documents are true and correct in all material respects), (B) outstanding accounts payable (limiting all outstanding and undisputed accounts payable to $7.5 million, undisputed accounts payable outstanding for more than 60 days to $2.0 million and undisputed accounts payable outstanding for more than 90 days to $1.0 million and (C) general and administrative expenses (limiting cash general and administrative expenses the Company may make or become legally obligated to make in any four fiscal quarter period to $9.0 million for the four fiscal quarter period ended June 30, 2020, $8.25 million for the four fiscal quarter period ended September 30, 2020, $6.9 million for the four fiscal quarter period ending December 31, 2020, and $6.5 million for the fiscal quarter from March 31, 2021 through December 31, 2021 and $5.0 million thereafter; in all cases, general and administrative expense excludes up to $1.0 million in certain legal and professional fees; and (vi) permission for up to an additional $25.0 million in structurally subordinated debt to finance capital expenditures. Under the 1L Amendment, the borrowing base was adjusted to $102.0 million. The borrowing base will be reduced by any mandatory prepayments from excess cash flow (in an amount equal to such prepayment) and upon the disposition of the Company’s oil and gas properties.
The First Lien Credit Facility contains a number of covenants that, among other things, restrict our ability to:
• incur or guarantee additional indebtedness;
• transfer or sell assets;
• pay dividends or make other distributions on capital stock or make other restricted payments;
• engage in transactions with affiliates other than on an "arm's length" basis;
• make any change in the principal nature of our business; and
• permit a change in control
The First Lien Credit Facility also contains customary events of default, including nonpayment of principal or interest, violations of covenants, cross default and cross acceleration to certain other indebtedness, bankruptcy and material judgments and liabilities.
Events of default have occurred, or are reasonably likely to occur, under the First Lien Credit Facility as a result of (i) our failure to timely deliver audited financial statements without a “going concern” or like qualification for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, (ii) our inability to comply with the first lien debt to consolidated EBITDAX ratio for the fiscal quarter ended December 31, 2020, (iii) our failure to cause certain deposit accounts to be subject to control agreements in favor of the administrative agent for the First Lien Credit Facility and (iv) certain cross-defaults that have occurred, or may occur, as a result of the events of default under the First Lien Credit Agreement and corresponding cross-defaults under the Second Lien Credit Facility and cross-defaults or similar termination events under our hedging contracts.
Second Lien Credit Facility
On November 13, 2019, we entered into the Term Loan Credit Agreement, with Angelo Gordon Energy Servicer, LLC, as administrative agent, and certain other lenders party thereto, which we refer to as the Second Lien Credit Facility. The Second Lien Credit facility was amended on June 25, 2020. The Second Lien Credit Facility has a maximum commitment of $100.0 million. On November 13, 2019, $95.0 million of the net proceeds obtained from the Second Lien Credit Facility were used to permanently reduce the borrowings outstanding on the First Lien Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2020, the outstanding balance on the Second Lien Credit Facility was $122.7 million, which includes a $10.0 million exit fee.
The stated maturity date of the Second Lien Credit Facility is November 13, 2022. Prior to the latest amendments of the Second Lien Credit Facility, accrued interest was payable quarterly on reference rate loans and at the end of each three-month interest period on Eurodollar loans. We are permitted to prepay the loans in whole or in part, in compliance with certain notice and dollar increment requirements.
Each of our subsidiaries has guaranteed our obligations under the Second Lien Credit Facility. Obligations under the Second Lien Credit Facility are secured by a first priority perfected security interest, subject to certain permitted liens, including those securing the indebtedness under the First Lien Credit Facility to the extent permitted by the Intercreditor Agreement, of even date with the Second Lien Credit Facility, among us, our subsidiaries, Angelo Gordon Energy Servicer, LLC and Société Générale, in all of our subsidiary guarantors’ material property and assets. As of December 31, 2020, the collateral is required to include properties comprising at least 90% of the PV-9 of the Company's proven reserves and 95% of the PV-9 of the Company's PDP reserves.
Under the amended Second Lien Credit Facility, the Company is subject to customary covenants, including financial covenants and reporting covenants. The amendment to the Second Lien Credit Facility dated June 25, 2020 (the "2L Amendment") modified certain provisions of the Second Lien Credit Facility, including (i) a requirement that, while the obligations under the First Lien Credit Facility are outstanding, scheduled payments of accrued interest under the Second Lien Credit Facility will be paid in the form of capitalized interest; (ii) an increase in the interest rate by 200bps for interest payable in cash and 500bps for interest payable in kind; (iii) modification of the minimum asset ratio covenant to be the sum of, without duplication, (A) the PV-15 of producing and developed proven reserves of the Company, (B) the PV-9 of the Company’s hydrocarbon hedge agreements and (C) the PV-15 of proved reserves of the Company classified as “drilled uncompleted” (up to 20% of the sum of (A), (B) and (C)) to the total outstanding debt of the Company and requiring that the ratio not exceed 1.45 to 1.00 as of the last day of each fiscal quarter ending between September 30, 2021 to December 31, 2021, and 1.55 to 1.00 for fiscal quarters ending thereafter); (iv) modification of the total leverage ratio covenant to set the first test date to occur on September 30, 2021; (v) modification of the current ratio to eliminate the exclusion of certain valuation accounts associated with hedge contracts from current assets and from current liabilities, (vi) additional restrictions on (A) capital expenditures (limiting capital expenditures to those expenditures set forth in a plan of development approved by Angelo Gordon Energy Servicer, LLC, subject to certain exceptions, including capital expenditures financed with the proceeds of newly permitted, structurally subordinated debt), (B) outstanding accounts payable (limiting all outstanding and undisputed accounts payable to $7.5 million, undisputed accounts payable outstanding for more than 60 days to $2.0 million and undisputed accounts payable outstanding for more than 90 days to $1.0 million and (C) general and administrative expenses (limiting cash general and administrative expenses the Company may make or become legally obligated to make in any four fiscal quarter period to $9.0 million for the four fiscal quarter period ended June 30, 2020, $8.25 million for the four fiscal quarter period ended September 30, 2020, $6.5 million for fiscal quarter period from March 31, 2021 through December 31, 2021 and $5.0 million thereafter.
As of December 31, 2020 we were in compliance with the financial covenants under the Second Lien Credit Facility, as amended.
The Second Lien Credit Facility contains a number of covenants that, among other things, restrict our ability to:
● incur or guarantee additional indebtedness;
● transfer or sell assets;
● create liens on assets;
● pay dividends or make other distributions on capital stock or make other restricted payments;
● engage in transactions with affiliates other than on an “arm’s length” basis;
● make any change in the principal nature of our business; and
● permit a change of control
The Second Lien Credit Facility also contains customary events of default, including nonpayment of principal or interest, violation of covenants, cross default and cross acceleration to certain other indebtedness, bankruptcy and material judgments and liabilities.
Events of default have occurred, or are reasonably likely to occur, under the Second Lien Credit Facility as a result of (i) our failure to timely deliver audited financial statements without a “going concern” or like qualification for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, (ii) our failure to cause certain deposit accounts to be subject to control agreements in favor of the administrative agent for the Second Lien Credit Facility, (iii) the failure of the Company to meet certain hedging requirements, and (v) certain cross-defaults that have occurred, or may occur, as a result of the occurrence of events of default under the First Lien Credit Facility and the Second Lien Credit Facility and corresponding cross-defaults or similar termination events under our hedging contracts.
On April 16, 2021, we received a Notice of Default and Reservation of Rights (the “Notice of Default”) from Angelo Gordon stating that we have defaulted under the Second Lien Credit Facility, and that, as a result, the lenders have accelerated our obligations due thereunder and have reserved their rights to pursue additional remedies in the future.
The Notice of Default describes certain events of default that occurred under the Second Lien Credit Facility as a result of (i) our failure to file timely our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, (ii) our failure to timely deliver audited financial statements without a “going concern” or like qualification for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, and (iii) other defaults under our revolving credit facility.
The Notice of Default declares that our obligations under the Second Lien Credit Facility are immediately due and payable, in each case without presentment, demand, protest or other requirements of any kind, and have begun to bear interest at the rate applicable to such amount under the Second Lien Credit Facility, plus an additional 3%. Additionally, the administrative agent and the lenders have reserved their right to exercise further rights, powers and remedies under the Second Lien Credit Facility, at any time or from time to time, with respect to any of the events of default described above. Angelo Gordon has agreed to forbear from exercising remedies available to it until May 6, 2021.
In connection with the amendment to the Second Lien Credit Facility on June 25, 2020, the Company entered into an Exit Fee and Warrant Agreement subject to NASDAQ approval for the issuance of the issuance of certain warrants. This agreement was finalized on August 11, 2020 at which time the Company issued a warrant to the lender to purchase a total of 33,445,792 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.01 per share. On October 19, 2020, the Company effected a reverse stock split of the Company’s authorized, issued and outstanding shares of common stock at a ratio of 1-for-20, thus the warrant was adjusted to provide that the lender may purchase a total of 1,672,290 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.20 per share. The warrant is exercisable immediately in whole or in part, on or before five years from the issuance date. The fair value of the warrant and exit fee were recorded as debt issuance costs, presented in the consolidated balance sheets as a deduction from the carrying amount of the note payable, and are being amortized over the loan term. The Exit Fee shall be due and payable in cash on the earliest to occur of maturity of the obligation under the Second Lien Credit Agreement or the earlier acceleration or payment in full of the same. The 2L Amendment, including the impact of the Exit Fee and Warrant Agreement finalized on August 11, 2020, resulted in the 2L Amendment meeting the criteria of debt extinguishment under the guidance of ASC 470: Debt. Accordingly, all debt issuance cost, including the original discount, of the original Second Lien Credit Facility, were charged to debt extinguishment loss in the accompanying Condensed Consolidated Statement of Operation in the amount of $4.1 million.
Real Estate Lien Note
We have a real estate lien note secured by a first lien deed of trust on the property and improvements which serves as our corporate headquarters. The outstanding principal accrues interest at a fixed rate of 4.9%. The note is payable in monthly installments of principal and interest in the amount of $35,672. The maturity date of the note is July 20, 2023. As of December 31, 2019, and 2020, $3.1 million and $2.8 million, respectively, were outstanding on the note.
Net Operating Loss Carryforwards
At December 31, 2020, we had, subject to the limitation discussed below, $245.20 million of pre 2020 NOLs for U.S. tax purposes and a $140.0 million NOL for 2020. Our pre-2018 NOLs will expire in varying amounts from 2023 through 2037, if not utilized; and can offset 100% of future taxable income for regular tax purposes. Any NOLs arising in 2018, 2019 and 2020 can generally be carried back five years, carried forward indefinitely and can offset 100% of future taxable income for tax years before January 1, 2021 and up to 80% of future taxable income for tax years after December 31, 2020. Any NOLs arising on or after January 1, 2021, cannot be carried back and can generally be carried forward indefinitely and can offset up to 80% of future taxable income for regular tax purposes, (the alternative minimum tax no longer applies to corporations after January 1, 2018).
Uncertainties exist as to the future utilization of the operating loss carryforwards under the criteria set forth under ASC 740-10 “Income Taxes”. Therefore, we have established a valuation allowance of $117.27 million for deferred tax assets at December 31, 2020.
Related Party Transactions
We have adopted a policy that transactions between us and our officers, directors, principal stockholders, or affiliates of any of them, will be on terms no less favorable to us than can be obtained on an arm’s length basis in transactions with third parties and must be approved by our audit committee. There were no related party transactions in 2019 or 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) requires that management apply accounting policies and make estimates and assumptions that affect results of operations and the reported amounts of assets and liabilities in the financial statements. The following represents those policies that management believes are particularly important to the financial statements and that require the use of estimates and assumptions to describe matters that are inherently uncertain.
Full Cost Method of Accounting for Oil and Gas Activities. SEC Regulation S-X Rule 4-10 and ASC 932 defines the financial accounting and reporting standards for companies engaged in oil and gas activities. Two methods are prescribed: the successful efforts method and the full cost method. We have chosen to follow the full cost method under which all costs associated with property acquisition, exploration and development are capitalized. We also capitalize internal costs that can be directly identified with our acquisition, exploration and development activities but do not include any costs related to production, general corporate overhead or similar activities. Sales of oil and gas properties are treated as a reduction of the full cost pool with no gain or loss being recognized, except under certain circumstances. Under the successful efforts method, geological and geophysical costs and costs of carrying and retaining undeveloped properties are charged to expense as incurred. Costs of drilling exploratory wells that do not result in proved reserves are charged to expense. Depreciation, depletion, amortization and impairment of oil and gas properties are generally calculated on a well by well or lease or field basis versus the “full cost” pool basis. Additionally, gain or loss may be recognized on sales of oil and gas properties under the successful efforts method. As a result, our financial statements will differ from those of companies that apply the successful efforts method since we will generally reflect a higher level of capitalized costs as well as a higher depreciation, depletion and amortization rate on our oil and gas properties.
At the time it was adopted, management believed that the full cost method would be preferable, as earnings tend to be less volatile than under the successful efforts method. However, the full cost method makes us susceptible to significant non-cash charges during times of volatile commodity prices because the full cost pool may be impaired when prices are low. These charges are not recoverable when prices return to higher levels. We have experienced this situation several times over the years, including a $51.3 million and $187.0 million impairment recorded as of December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Our oil and gas reserves have a relatively long life. However, temporary drops in commodity prices can have a material impact on our business including impact from impairment testing procedures associated with the full cost method of accounting as discussed below.
Under full cost accounting rules, the net capitalized cost of oil and gas properties, less related deferred taxes, may not exceed a “ceiling limit” which is based upon the present value of estimated future net cash flows from proved reserves on a pool by pool basis, discounted at 10%, plus the lower of cost or fair market value of unproved properties and the cost of properties not being amortized, less income taxes. If net capitalized costs of oil and gas properties exceed the ceiling limit, we must charge the amount of the excess to earnings. This is called a “ceiling limitation write-down.” This charge does not impact cash flows from operating activities, but does reduce our stockholders’ equity and reported earnings. The risk that we will be required to write down the carrying value of oil and gas properties increases when oil and gas prices are depressed. In addition, write-downs may occur if we experience substantial downward adjustments to our estimated proved reserves. An expense recorded in one period may not be reversed in a subsequent period even though higher oil and gas prices may have increased the ceiling applicable to the subsequent period. We apply the full cost ceiling test on a quarterly basis on the date of the latest balance sheet presented. Given the recent decline in oil prices, it is likely that we will incur future impairments.
Estimates of Proved Oil and Gas Reserves. Estimates of our proved reserves included in this report are prepared in accordance with GAAP and SEC guidelines. The accuracy of a reserve estimate is a function of:
•
the quality and quantity of available data;
•
the interpretation of that data;
•
the accuracy of various mandated economic assumptions; and
•
the judgment of the persons preparing the estimate.
Our proved oil and gas reserves have been estimated by our independent petroleum engineering firm, DeGolyer & MacNaughton, as of December 31, 2019 and 2020, Estimates prepared by other third parties may be higher or lower than those included herein. Because these estimates depend on many assumptions, all of which may substantially differ from future actual results, reserve estimates will be different from the quantities of oil and gas that are ultimately recovered. In addition, results of drilling, testing and production after the date of an estimate may justify material revisions to the estimate.
You should not assume that the present value of future net cash flows is the current market value of our estimated proved reserves. In accordance with SEC requirements, we based the estimated discounted future net cash flows from proved reserves on costs on the date of the estimate and for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020 oil and gas prices were based on the average 12-month first-day-of-the-month pricing. Actual future prices and costs may be materially higher or lower than the prices and costs used in the estimate.
The estimates of proved reserves materially impact DD&A expense and the ceiling test calculation. If the estimates of proved reserves decline, the rate at which we record DD&A expense will increase and we may be required to record future impairments of the full cost pool, reducing future net income. Such a decline may result from lower market prices, which may make it uneconomic to drill for and produce higher cost fields.
Asset Retirement Obligations. The estimated costs of restoration and removal of facilities are accrued. The fair value of a liability for an asset’s retirement obligation is recorded in the period in which it is incurred and the corresponding cost is capitalized by increasing the carrying amount of the related long-lived asset. The liability is accreted to its then present value each period, and the capitalized cost is depreciated over the useful life of the related asset. For all periods presented, we have included estimated future costs of abandonment and dismantlement in our full cost amortization base and we amortize these costs as a component of our depletion expense.
Accounting for Derivatives. Gains or losses are determined by actual derivative settlements during the period and on the periodic mark to market valuation of derivative contracts in place. The derivative instruments we utilize are based on index prices that may and often do differ from the actual oil and gas prices realized in our operations. We have elected not to apply hedge accounting to our derivative contracts. As a result, fluctuations in the market value of the derivative contract are recognized in earnings during the current period. In 2019 and 2020 derivative contracts consisted of fixed price swaps and basis differential swaps. Due to the volatility of oil and gas prices, our financial condition and results of operations can be significantly impacted by changes in the market value of our derivative instruments. As of December 31, 2019, and 2020, the net market value of our commodity derivatives was a net liability of $7.4 million and a net asset of $19.4 million, respectively. The recent drop in oil prices has resulted in a significant increase in the value of our derivative contracts.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Effective January 1, 2020, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") 2016-13 and its related amendments. This ASU primarily applies to the Company’s accounts receivable, of which the majority are due within 30 days. The Company monitors the credit quality of its counterparties through review of collections, credit ratings, and other analysis. The Company develops its estimated allowance for credit losses primarily using an aging method and analysis of historical loss rates as well as consideration of current and future conditions that could impact its counterparties’ credit quality and liquidity. The adoption and implementation of this ASU did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
In November 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12 - Income Taxes (“Topic 740”): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. The amendments in ASU 2019-12 are part of an initiative to reduce complexity in accounting standards and simplify the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions from Topic 740 and making minor improvements to the codification. ASU 2019-12 and its related amendments will be effective for public entities for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020. The provisions of this update are not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s financial position or results of operations.
New accounting pronouncements issued but not yet adopted.
In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-04, “Reference Rate Reform (Topic 840): Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting” (“ASU 2020-04”), which provides companies with optional guidance to ease the potential accounting burden associated with transitioning away from reference rates (e.g., London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”)) that are expected to be discontinued. ASU 2020-04 allows, among other things, certain contract modifications, such as those within the scope of Topic 470 on debt, to be accounted as a continuation of the existing contract. This ASU was effective upon the issuance and its optional relief can be applied through December 31, 2022. The Company will consider this optional guidance prospectively, if applicable.
In May 2020, the SEC adopted final rules that amend the financial statement requirements for significant business acquisitions and dispositions. Among other changes, the final rules modify the significance tests and improve the disclosure requirements for acquired or to be acquired businesses and related pro forma financial information, the periods those financial statements must cover, and the form and content of the pro forma financial information. The final rules do not modify requirements for the acquisition and disposition of significant amounts of assets that do not constitute a business. The final rules are effective January 1, 2021, but earlier compliance is permitted. The Company will consider these final rules and update its disclosures, as applicable.