Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) summarizes our change in fiscal year financial condition, results of operations, recent developments, the significant factors affecting our results of operations, capital resources and liquidity, off-balance sheet arrangements, and contractual obligations, and discusses recent accounting pronouncements and our critical accounting policies and estimates. You should read the following discussion and analysis together with our financial statements, including the related notes, which are included in this Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below and elsewhere in this report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. See Item 1A, Risk Factors of this Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements in this report.
COVID-19 Update
In late 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China, which has since spread globally. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic. Further, the COVID-19 outbreak has resulted in government authorities around the world implementing numerous measures to try to reduce the spread of COVID-19, such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place, stay-at-home or total lock-down (or similar) orders and business limitations and shutdowns. For example, the State of Arizona has implemented several orders promoting physical distancing, limiting certain activities, and restricting the operations of certain businesses. The COVID-19 pandemic and these measures have caused, and are continuing to cause, business slowdowns or shutdowns in affected areas, both regionally and worldwide, which have significantly impacted our business and results of operations, starting in the first quarter of 2020. For example, this included diminished access to our customers, including hospitals, which has severely limited our ability to sell or implement the Accelerate Pheno systems. In addition, in April and May 2020 our Accelerate Pheno kit orders declined as many hospitals curtailed elective surgeries to respond to COVID-19. Since May 2020, our Accelerate Pheno kit orders have returned to more normal levels, but could decline again if COVID-19 surges cause hospitals to reduce or prohibit elective surgeries. Furthermore, our expected rate of growth of our consumable test kit sales has been reduced because of the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on Accelerate Pheno system new sales and implementations.
The reduced sales and implementations caused by the COVID-19 pandemic lowered our expected revenue growth for 2020. Due to this reduced revenue growth's impact on cash we furloughed certain employees and implemented salary reductions for executives and other highly compensated employees. Most of the furloughs became permanent in December 2020.
As a medical device company, we have not experienced any disruptions to our ability to manufacture our products at our Tucson, Arizona headquarters under the various State of Arizona executive orders relating to the COVID-19 pandemic because we were classified as an essential service. We currently expect that, should future orders be issued, we would be able to sustain our essential operations. Our third-party manufacturing supply chain for Accelerate Pheno systems and consumable test kits remains stable. However, the economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic remain unpredictable, and we are closely monitoring the ability of all our suppliers to provide us with materials necessary for the manufacture of Accelerate Pheno systems and consumable test kits.
We continue to monitor the rapidly evolving situation caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, and we may take further actions required by governmental authorities or that we determine are prudent to support the well-being of our employees, customers, suppliers, business partners and others. The degree to which the COVID-19 pandemic ultimately impacts our business, results of operations, cash flows and financial position will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain, continuously evolving and cannot be predicted. This includes, but is not limited to, the duration and spread of the pandemic, its severity, the actions to contain the virus or treat its impact,(including the efficacy of vaccines, particularly with respect to emerging strains of the virus), and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume. We currently expect to continue to have limited access to our customers and prospects for at least the first half of 2021, particularly with regard to new sales.
Accordingly, our current results and financial condition discussed herein may not be indicative of future operating results and trends. Refer to the section entitled “Risk Factors” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, which is incorporated by reference herein, for additional risks we face due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Changes in Results of Operations: Comparison of fiscal years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, total revenues increased compared to the previous year due to increased sales of Accelerate PhenoTest BC Kits and instruments. Accelerate PhenoTest BC revenue has increased as customers complete their instrument verifications and begin purchasing kits. In addition, the Company recorded increased revenue in connection with sales-type leases of Accelerate PhenoTest Systems during the year ended December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cost of sales and gross profit increased as a result of an increase in sales and sales-type leases of Accelerate Pheno systems and Accelerate PhenoTest BC kits compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily driven by an increase in Accelerate PhenoTest BC kits sales.
Gross profit increased at a slower rate than the increase in sales due to higher revenue from sales-type leases of Accelerate PhenoTest systems. Gross profit on sales-type leases is generally lower than gross profit from sales of Accelerate PhenoTest systems sold direct to customers.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cost of sales and gross profit increased as a result of an increase in sales of Accelerate Pheno systems and Accelerate PhenoTest BC kits compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was primarily driven by an increase in Accelerate PhenoTest BC kits sales.
Inventory without a cost basis was sold to customers for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. Pre-launch inventory previously not capitalized and expensed in a previous year for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 was $0.1 million, $0.5 million and $0.4 million, respectively.
Cost of sales includes non-cash equity-based compensation of $0.4 million, $0.3 million and $0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in non-cash equity-based compensation was primarily driven by an increase in sales of Accelerate Pheno systems and Accelerate PhenoTest BC kits. Non-cash equity-based compensation cost is a component of manufacturing overhead. Manufacturing overhead is capitalized as inventory and relieved to cost of sales when consumable tests are sold to a customer, instruments are sold to a customer or when we recognize depreciation is recorded on revenue generating instruments under operating leases. Cost of sales also includes non-cash equity-based compensation of service overhead when supporting revenue generating instruments.
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was the result of a decrease in external studies spend and other cost containment measures.
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease was primarily the result of decreases in employee non-cash equity-based compensation and employee related expenses, decreases in purchases of engineering supplies to support research and development and decreases in depreciation expense.
Research and development expenses include non-cash equity-based compensation of $4.0 million, $4.1 million and $4.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Non-cash equity-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was relatively consistent with the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily the result of equity-based stock options becoming fully vested during the period, and new stock awards being granted and released in the same period. These two events resulted in the expense balance remaining flat for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
The decrease of non-cash equity-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 was primarily the result of equity-based stock options becoming fully vested during the period, and new equity-based stock option grants having a lower average fair value per share.
Sales, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is primarily the result of the COVID-19 pandemic, as hospitals have limited access to their facilities to primarily focus on COVID-19 initiatives. These circumstances resulted in decreased expenses associated with travel, trade shows, and instrument demonstration expenses. In addition management also implemented additional cost containment initiatives to reduce other expenses such as services and marketing expenses.
Sales, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease was primarily the result of a decrease in employee non-cash equity-based compensation, along with a reduction in expenditures with third-party vendors.
Sales, general and administrative expenses include non-cash equity-based compensation of $12.1 million, $8.2 million and $9.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
The increase of expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily the result of larger stock option and stock awards granted to employees in the current year period.
The decrease of expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 was primarily the result of new equity-based stock option grants having a lower average fair value per share, and an increase in forfeitures which offset expenses.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our loss from operations decreased compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily the result of a decrease in research and development expenses, and sales, general and administrative expenses, combined with an increase in net sales as described above.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, our loss from operations decreased compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease was primarily the result of decreases in non-cash equity-based compensation, a decrease in research and development expenses, a decrease in sales, general and administrative expenses and increased sales as described above.
Loss from operations includes non-cash equity-based compensation expense of $16.5 million, $12.6 million and $14.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
This loss and further losses are anticipated and are the result of our continued investments in sales and marketing, key research and development personnel, related costs associated with product development, and commercialization of the Company’s products.
Other expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 increased compared to the previous year. The increases were primarily the result of increased interest expense partially offset by investment income. In 2018 the Company started incurring interest expense in connection with our convertible notes. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 the Company incurred interest expense of $15.5 million, $14.3 million, and $10.1 million, respectively. These amounts were partially offset by investment income of $0.9 million, $2.8 million and $2.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded immaterial expense for income taxes as the Company is anticipating a small amount of state and foreign tax expense. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded a benefit for income taxes due to an income tax refund in connection with restructuring a transfer pricing agreement of a foreign subsidiary. For the year ended December 31, 2018, the Company recorded tax provisions related to tax liabilities generated by our foreign subsidiaries for foreign income taxes.
Capital Resources and Liquidity
Our primary source of liquidity has been from sales of shares of our common stock, the issuance of our convertible notes and cash from operations. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $68.3 million in cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities, a decrease of $40.2 million from $108.5 million at December 31, 2019. The primary reason for the decrease was due to cash used in operations during the period.
The Company is subject to Lease Agreements. The future lease obligations under the Lease Agreements
are included in Item 8, Note 16, Leases.
As of December 31, 2020, management believes that current cash balances will be more than sufficient to fund our capital and liquidity needs for the next twelve months.
Our primary use of capital has been for the commercialization and development of the Accelerate Pheno system. We believe our capital requirements will continue to be met with our existing cash balance and those provided under revenue, grants, exercises of stock options and/or additional issuance of equity or debt securities. However, if capital requirements vary materially from those currently planned, we may require additional capital sooner than expected. There can be no assurance that such capital will be available in sufficient amounts or on terms acceptable to us, if at all. Additional issuances of equity or convertible debt securities will result in dilution to our current common stockholders.
Summary of Cash Flows
The following summarizes selected items in the Company’s consolidated statements of cash flows for years ended December 31 (in thousands):
Cash flows from operating activities
The net cash used in operating activities was $50.4 million, $64.8 million and $67.8 million during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Net cash used in operating activities was primarily the result of net losses offset by equity-based compensation and amortization of debt discount and issuance costs.
These losses are the result of continued investments in research and development to further mature Accelerate Pheno, develop ancillary products, and develop a next generation product, sales and marketing, along with other factors.
Cash flows from investing activities
The net cash provided by investing activities was $13.6 million for year ended December 31, 2020. The Company had maturities of $61.9 million which were offset in part by purchases of marketable securities of $46.9 million.
The net cash provided by investing activities was $52.8 million for year ended December 31, 2019. The Company purchased marketable securities of $50.2 million, offset in part by maturities of marketable securities of $88.9 million and proceeds from sales of marketable securities of $14.5 million.
The net cash used in investing activities was $20.1 million for year ended December 31, 2018. The Company purchased marketable securities of $120.6 million, offset in part by maturities of marketable securities of $98.4 million. The Company had an increase in marketable securities purchases during the year ended December 31, 2018 in connection with investing the proceeds from the Company's convertible notes offering.
Cash flows from financing activities
The net cash provided by financing activities was $11.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and was primarily comprised of proceeds from exercises of options and long-term debt. Proceeds from exercises of options was $6.1 million, while the Company received $5.6 million in proceeds from long-term debt, $4.8 million of which consists of proceeds from the Paycheck Protection Program Note described below.
The net cash provided by financing activities was $6.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, and was primarily comprised of proceeds from exercises of options.
The net cash provided by financing activities was $125.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2018. This was primarily from proceeds received from the Notes offering during 2018, partially offset by the prepayment of a forward stock repurchase and debt issuance costs as described in Item 8, Note 11, Convertible Notes.
Convertible Notes
On March 27, 2018, the Company issued $150.0 million aggregate principal amount of 2.50% Convertible Senior Notes (the “Notes”). In connection with the offering of the Notes, the Company granted the initial purchasers of the Notes a 13-day option to purchase up to an additional $22.5 million aggregate principal amount of the Notes on the same terms and conditions. On April 4, 2018 the option was partially exercised, which resulted in $21.5 million of additional proceeds, for total proceeds of $171.5 million. The Notes mature on March 15, 2023, unless earlier repurchased or converted into shares of common stock subject to certain conditions. The Notes are convertible into shares of the Company’s common stock, can be repurchased for cash, or a combination thereof, at the Company’s election, at an initial conversion rate of 32.3428 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of the Notes, which is equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $30.92 per share of common stock, subject to adjustment. We will pay interest on the Notes semi-annually in arrears on March 15 and September 15 of each year with interest payments beginning on September 15, 2018. Proceeds received from the issuance of the Notes was allocated between long-term debt (the “liability component”) and contributed capital (the “equity component”), within the consolidated balance sheet. The fair value of the liability component was measured using rates determined for similar debt instruments without a conversion feature.
In connection with the offering, we entered into a prepaid forward stock repurchase transaction (the “Prepaid Forward”) with a financial institution. Pursuant to the Prepaid Forward, we used approximately $45.1 million of the proceeds from the offering of the Notes to pay the prepayment amount. The aggregate number of shares of our common stock underlying the Prepaid Forward is approximately 1,858,500 shares (based on the sale price of $24.25). The expiration date for the Prepaid Forward is March 15, 2023, although it may be settled earlier in whole or in part. Upon settlement of the Prepaid Forward, at expiration or upon any early settlement, the Forward Counterparty will deliver to us the number of shares of common stock underlying the Prepaid Forward or the portion thereof being settled early. The shares purchased under the Prepaid Forward were treated as treasury stock on the consolidated balance sheet (and not outstanding for purposes of the calculation of basic and diluted earnings per share), but remain outstanding for corporate law purposes, including for purposes of any future stockholders' votes, until the Forward Counterparty delivers the shares underlying the Prepaid Forward to us. Net proceeds, less issuance cost from the offering of approximately $121.4 million, is being used for general corporate purposes.
Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) Loan
On April 14, 2020, the Company entered into a promissory note (the “PPP Note”) evidencing an unsecured loan in the amount of $4.8 million. The PPP Note matures on April 14, 2025 and bears interest at a rate of 1% per annum. Beginning August 14, 2021, the Company is required to make 45 monthly payments of principal and interest in the amount of $0.1 million. The PPP Note may be prepaid by the Company at any time prior to maturity with no prepayment penalties. The proceeds from the PPP Note were used for payroll costs (including benefits), rent and utilities.
Pursuant to the terms of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES Act”) and the PPP, the Company applied to the lender for forgiveness for the amount due on the Loan. The amount eligible for forgiveness is based on the amount of loan proceeds used by the Company (during the 24 week period after the lender makes the first disbursement of loan proceeds) for the payment of certain covered costs, including payroll costs (including benefits), rent and utilities, subject to certain limitations and reductions in accordance with the CARES Act and the PPP. No assurance can be given that the Company will obtain forgiveness of the PPP Note in whole or in part. As of December 31, 2020 the Company had submitted its application for forgiveness to the Small Business Administration, which is currently under review.
Other notes payable
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company entered into three loan agreements with two capital asset financing companies. Loan proceeds were $0.8 million, with interest rates ranging from 9.8% to 12.4%
and maturities ranging from January 2022 through September 2022.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
The Company has certain contractual obligations and commercial commitments as disclosed in Item 8, Note 15, Commitments and Contingencies that do not meet the definition of long term debt obligations, capital leases, operating leases or purchase obligations. The Company has entered into Lease Agreements as described in Item 2, Properties and Item 8, Note 16, Leases. The Company has entered into Long-Term Debt as described in Item 8, Note 10, Long-Term Debt. The Company has entered into Convertible Senior Notes as described in Item 8, Note 11, Convertible Notes. The future expected payment obligations under our agreements over the next five years are (in thousands):
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A discussion relating to recent accounting pronouncements can be found in Item 8, Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.
Critical Accounting Policies
We consider our accounting policies related to inventory, convertible notes, revenue and equity-based compensation to be critical accounting policies. A number of significant estimates, assumptions, and judgments are inherent in our calculations, which are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates.
Inventory
Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. The Company determines the cost of inventory using the first-in, first out method. The Company estimates the recoverability of inventory by reference to internal estimates of future demands and product life cycles, including expiration. The Company periodically analyzes its inventory levels to identify inventory that may expire prior to expected sale or has a cost basis in excess of its estimated realizable value and records a charge to expense for such inventory as appropriate.
Instruments Classified as Property and Equipment
Property and equipment includes Accelerate Pheno systems (also referred to as instruments) used for sales demonstrations, instruments under rental agreements and instruments used for research and development. Depreciation expense for instruments used for sales demonstrations is recorded as a component of sales, general and administrative expense. Depreciation expense for instruments placed at customer sites pursuant to reagent rental agreements is recorded as a component of cost of sales. Depreciation expense for instruments used in our laboratory and research is recorded as a component of research and development expense. The Company retains title to these instruments and depreciates them over five years. Losses from the retirement of returned instruments are included in costs and expenses.
The Company evaluates the recoverability of the carrying amount of its instruments whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable, and at least
annually. This evaluation is based on our estimate of future cash flows and the estimated fair value of such long-lived assets, and provides for impairment if such undiscounted cash flows or the estimated fair value are insufficient to recover the carrying amount of instruments.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company identified potential impairment indicators related to instruments installed at customer sites under rental agreement that have not yet generated revenue and the length of time from when these instruments are installed to when revenue is initially generated. The Company’s evaluation for impairment included consideration of the cash flows of current revenue generating instruments, the length of time to recover the carrying value, the historical rate of returned instruments from customers and the Company’s ability to resell or repurpose used instruments. As a result of the Company’s evaluation, no impairment charges were recorded at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
See Note 7, Property and Equipment, for further information and related disclosures.
Convertible Notes
We account for convertible debt instruments that may be settled in cash or equity upon conversion by separating the liability and equity components of the instruments in a manner that reflects our nonconvertible debt borrowing rate. We determined the carrying amount of the liability component of the Notes by using estimates and assumptions that market participants would use in pricing a debt instrument. These estimates and assumptions are judgmental in nature and could have a significant impact on the determination of the debt component, and the associated non-cash interest expense.
The equity component is treated as a discount on the liability component of the Notes, which is amortized over the term of the Notes using the effective interest rate method. Debt issuance costs related to the Notes are allocated to the liability and equity components of the Notes based on their relative values. Debt issuance costs allocated to the liability component are amortized over the life of the Notes as additional non-cash interest expense. Transaction costs allocated to equity are netted with the equity component of the convertible debt instrument in stockholders’ deficit.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue when control of the promised good or service is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. Sales taxes are excluded from revenues.
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
•Identification of the contract with a customer
•Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
•Determination of the transaction price
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations
•Recognition of revenue as we satisfy a performance obligation
Product revenue is derived from the sale or rental of our instruments and sales of related consumable products. When an instrument is sold, revenue is generally recognized upon installation of the unit consistent with contract terms, which do not include a right of return. When a consumable product is sold, revenue is generally recognized upon shipment. Invoices are generally issued when revenue is recognized. Our payment terms vary by the type and location of our customer and the products or services offered. The term between invoicing and when payment is due is not significant.
Service revenue is derived from the sale of extended service agreements which are generally non-cancellable. This revenue is recognized on a straight-line basis over the contract term beginning on the effective
date of the contract because the Company is standing ready to provide services. Invoices are generally issued annually and coincide with the beginning of individual service terms.
Our contracts with customers may include multiple performance obligations. For such arrangements, we allocate revenue to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. We generally determine relative standalone selling prices based on the price charged to customers for each individual performance obligation.
Sales commissions earned by our sales force are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. The Company has determined these costs would have an amortization period of less than one year and has elected to recognize them as an expense when incurred. Contract asset opening and closing balances were immaterial for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Leases
The Company accounts for leases in accordance with ASC 842, Leases, which was adopted on January 1, 2019. We determine if an arrangement is or contains a lease and the type of lease at inception. The Company classifies leases as finance leases (lessee) or sales-type leases (lessor) when there is either a transfer of ownership of the underlying asset by the end of the lease term, the lease contains an option to purchase the asset that we are reasonably certain will be exercised, the lease term is for the major part of the remaining economic life of the asset, the present value of the lease payments and any residual value guarantee equals or substantially exceeds all the fair value of the asset, or the asset is of such a specialized nature that it will have no alternative use to the lessor at the end of the lease term. Payments contingent on future events (i.e. based on usage) are considered variable and excluded from lease payments for the purposes of classification and initial measurement. Several of our leases include options to renew or extend the term upon mutual agreement of the parties and others include one-year extensions exercisable by the lessee. None of our leases contain residual value guarantees, restrictions, or covenants.
To determine whether a contract contains a lease, the Company uses its judgment in assessing whether the lessor retains a material amount of economic benefit from an underlying asset, whether explicitly or implicitly identified, which party holds control over the direction and use of the asset, and whether any substantive substitution rights over the asset exist.
Lessee
Operating leases are included in right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and operating lease liabilities within our consolidated balance sheets. These assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. ROU assets and their related liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. Typically, we use our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at commencement in determining the present value of lease payments. We use the implicit rate when readily determinable. ROU assets are net of lease payments made and exclude lease incentives. Lease expense for lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term, which may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise the option. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019 the Company was not party to finance lease arrangements.
Our operating leases consist primarily of leased office, factory, and laboratory space in the U.S. and office space in Europe, have between two and six-year terms, and typically contain penalizing, early-termination provisions.
Lessor
The Company leases instruments to customers under “reagent rental” agreements, whereby the customer agrees to purchase consumable products over a stated term, typically five years or less, for a volume-based price that includes an embedded rental for the instruments. When collectibility is probable, the amount is recognized as income at lease commencement for sales-type leases and as product is shipped, typically in a straight-line pattern, over the term for operating leases, which typically include a termination without cause or penalty provision given a short notice period.
Consideration is allocated between lease and non-lease components based on stand-alone selling price in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers and ASC 842, Leases.
Net investment in sales-type leases are included within our consolidated balance sheets as a component of other current assets and other non-current assets, which include the present value of lease payments not yet received and the present value of the residual asset, which are determined using the information available at commencement, including the lease term, estimated useful life, rate implicit in the lease, and expected fair value of the instrument.
See Note 16, Leases for further information.
Equity-Based Compensation
The Company may award stock options, restricted stock units (“RSUs”), performance-based awards and other equity-based instruments to its employees, directors and consultants. Compensation cost related to equity-based instruments is based on the fair value of the instrument on the grant date, and is recognized over the requisite service period on a straight-line basis over the vesting period for each tranche (an accelerated attribution method) except for performance-based awards. Performance-based stock awards vest based on the achievement of performance targets. Compensation costs associated with performance-based awards are recognized over the requisite service period based on probability of achievement. Performance-based stock awards require management to make assumptions regarding the likelihood of achieving performance targets.
The Company estimates the fair value of service based and performance based stock option awards, including modifications of stock option awards, using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. This model derives the fair value of stock options based on certain assumptions related to expected stock price volatility, expected option life, risk-free interest rate and dividend yield.
•Volatility: The expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of the Company's stock price over the most recent period commensurate with the expected term of the stock option award.
•Expected term: The estimated expected term for employee awards is based on the calculation published by the SEC in SAB110 for use when there is not a sufficient history of employee exercise patterns. For consultant awards, the estimated expected term is the same as the life of the award.
•Risk-free interest rate: The risk-free interest rate is based on published U.S. Treasury rates for a term commensurate with the expected term.
•Dividend yield: The dividend yield is estimated as zero as the Company has not paid dividends in the past and does not have any plans to pay any dividends in the foreseeable future.
The Company records the fair value of RSUs or stock grants based on published closing market price on the day before the grant date.
The Company accounts for forfeitures as they occur rather than on an estimated basis.
The Company also has an employee stock purchase program whereby eligible employees can elect payroll deductions that are subsequently used to purchase common stock at a discounted price. There is no compensation recorded for this program as (i) the purchase discount does not exceed the issuance costs that would have been incurred to raise a significant amount of capital by a public offering, (ii) substantially all employees that meet limited employment qualifications may participate on an equitable basis, and (iii) the plan doesn't incorporate option features that would require compensation to be recorded.