Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of the financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. We caution you that forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance, and that our actual results of operations, financial condition and liquidity, and the developments in our business and the industry in which we operate, may differ materially from the results discussed or projected in the forward-looking statements contained in this Annual Report. We discuss risks and other factors that we believe could cause or contribute to these potential differences elsewhere in this Annual Report, including under Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” In addition, even if our results of operations, financial condition and liquidity, and the developments in our business and the industry in which we operate are consistent with the forward-looking statements contained in this Annual Report, they may not be predictive of results or developments in future periods. We caution readers not to place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements made by us, which speak only as of the date they are made. We disclaim any obligation, except as specifically required by law and the rules of the SEC to publicly update or revise any such statements to reflect any change in our expectations or in events, conditions or circumstances on which any such statements may be based, or that may affect the likelihood that actual results will differ from those set forth in the forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company focused on pioneering a new approach to treat complex diseases and improve health using endogenous metabolic modulator, or EMM, compositions. Our product candidates are comprised of multiple EMMs that are engineered in distinct combinations and ratios with the goal of simultaneously impacting multiple biological pathways. Our pipeline includes our lead therapeutic candidates: AXA1665 for the reduction in risk of recurrent overt hepatic encephalopathy, or OHE, and AXA1125 for non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, or NASH.
Using our development platform, we have efficiently designed product candidates that are comprised of amino acids and their derivatives, which have a general history of safe use. The orally administered EMM compositions that we have tested to date have shown the potential to generate multifactorial effects in our initial Clinical Studies.
To date, we have funded our operations with proceeds from the sale of preferred stock and common stock, and borrowing of debt. Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend heavily on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our current or future product candidates. Our net losses were $56.5 million and $59.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $272.6 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses for at least the next several years as we continue to develop our product candidates.
As a result, we will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, strategic alliances and marketing and licensing arrangements. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when, needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development and commercialization of one or more of our product candidates or delay our pursuit of potential in-licenses or acquisitions.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities of $107.3 million. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities as of December 31, 2020 will enable us to fund our operating expenses, capital expenditure requirements and debt service payments for at least the next 12 months following the filing date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources.” To finance our operations significantly beyond that point, we will need to raise additional capital, which cannot be assured.
The extent to which COVID-19 impacts our business, operations or financial results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the duration of the pandemic, new information that may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 or the nature or effectiveness of actions to contain COVID-19 or treat its impact, among others. We cannot presently predict the scope and severity of any potential business shutdowns or disruptions. If we or any of the third parties with whom we engage, however, were to experience shutdowns or other business disruptions, our ability to conduct our business in the manner and on the timelines presently planned could be materially and negatively affected, which could have a material adverse impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Components of our Consolidated Results of Operations
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products in the near future. If our development efforts for our product candidates are successful and result in regulatory approval or we execute license or collaboration agreements with third parties, we may generate revenue in the future from product sales, payments from collaborations or license agreements that we may enter into with third parties, or any combination thereof.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred in connection with our research activities, including our drug discovery efforts, and the development of our product candidates, which include:
•direct external research and development expenses, including fees, reimbursed materials and other costs paid to consultants, contractors, contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs and clinical research organizations, or CROs, in connection with our clinical and preclinical development and manufacturing activities;
•employee-related expenses, including salaries, related benefits and stock-based compensation expense for employees engaged in research and development functions;
•expenses incurred in connection with the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates, including any Clinical Studies, planned Clinical Trials and other research programs, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants, contractors and CROs;
•the cost of developing and scaling our manufacturing process and manufacturing products for use in our preclinical studies, Clinical Studies and Clinical Trials, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants, contractors and CMOs;
•patent-related costs incurred in connection with filing and prosecuting patent applications; and
•facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and insurance.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. We often contract with CROs and CMOs to facilitate, coordinate and perform agreed-upon research, design, development, and manufacturing of our product candidates. To ensure that research and development costs are expensed as incurred, we record monthly accruals for clinical studies and manufacturing costs based on the work performed under the contract.
These CRO and CMO contracts typically call for the payment of fees for services at the initiation of the contract and/or upon the achievement of certain clinical or manufacturing milestones. In the event that we prepay CRO or CMO fees, we record the prepayment as a prepaid asset and amortize the asset into research and development expense over the period of time the contracted research and development or manufacturing services are performed. Most professional fees, including project and clinical management, data management, monitoring and manufacturing fees are incurred throughout the contract period. These professional fees are expensed based on their estimated percentage of completion at a particular date. Our CRO and CMO contracts generally include pass through fees. Pass through fees include, but are not limited to, regulatory expenses, investigator fees, travel costs and other miscellaneous costs and raw materials. We expense the costs of pass through fees under our CRO and CMO contracts as they are incurred, based on the best information available to us at the time.
A significant portion of our research and development costs are not tracked by project as they benefit multiple projects or our technology platform, and, as such, are not separately classified.
Research and development expenses may fluctuate from period to period depending upon the stage of certain projects and the stage of preclinical and clinical activities and development. Many factors can affect the cost and timing of our Clinical Studies and planned Clinical Trials, including, without limitation, slow patient enrollment and the availability of supplies, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and real or perceived lack of effect on biology or safety of our product candidates. In addition, the development of all of our product candidates may be subject to extensive governmental regulation. These factors make it difficult for us to predict the timing and costs of the further development of our product candidates.
See “Risk Factors” for further discussion of these and additional risks and uncertainties associated with product development and commercialization that may significantly affect the timing and cost of our research and development expenses and our ability to obtain regulatory approval for and successfully commercialize our product candidates. We expect research and development expenses to increase as we advance existing product candidates into additional Clinical Trials and Clinical Studies and develop new product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits, travel and stock-based compensation expense for personnel in executive, finance and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include professional fees for legal, consulting, accounting and audit services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support our continued research and development of our product candidates. We also anticipate that we will incur increased finance, accounting, audit, legal, compliance, director and officer insurance costs as well as investor and public relations expenses associated with operating as a public company. Additionally, if and when we believe a regulatory approval of a product candidate appears likely, we anticipate an increase in payroll and expense as a result of our preparation for commercial operations, especially as it relates to the sales and marketing of our product candidate.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net primarily consists of interest income and interest expense. Interest income consists of interest earned on our invested cash balances. Interest expense consists of interest on outstanding borrowings under our loan and security agreement, and the amortization expense of the debt discount and debt issuance costs.
Income Taxes
Since our inception, we have not recorded any income tax benefits for the net losses we have incurred in each year or for our research and development tax credits, as we believe, based upon the weight of available evidence, that it is more likely than not that all of our net operating loss, or NOLs, carryforwards and tax credits will not be realized.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses incurred during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
The increase of $0.8 million in salary and benefits-related costs resulted from higher average salaries, bonuses, and promotions for personnel in research and development. Stock-based compensation expense also contributed to the year-over-year growth in salary and benefits-related costs due to an increase in the number of awards granted. Clinical research and outside services costs decreased by $5.1 million due to lower costs associated with Clinical Studies' expenses as we completed our AXA1125-003 and AXA1665-002, and the closure of our AXA1957-002 pediatric study.
General and Administrative Expenses
The following table summarizes our general and administrative expenses incurred during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Salary and benefits-related costs grew by $0.8 million due to the hiring of additional personnel in our general and administrative functions to support our operations. Stock-based compensation expense also contributed to the year-over-year growth in salary and benefits-related costs due to an increase in the number of awards granted. Other contract services and outside costs decreased by $0.6 million, driven by decreases in professional and legal fees, largely as a result of one-time expenses related to becoming a public company in 2019. Facility-related and other costs increased by $0.8 million due to a standard increase in annual rent expense and an increase in purchased software costs.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net was a net expense of $2.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a net expense of $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This net expense increase was driven by lower interest income of $1.5 million, partially offset by lower interest expense on borrowings under our loan and security agreement of $0.4 million as a result of declines in interest rates.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have not generated any revenue and have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from our operations. We have funded our operations to date primarily with proceeds from the sale of preferred stock and common stock, and borrowings under our loan and security agreement.
On May 18, 2020, we completed a follow-on public offering pursuant to which we issued an aggregate of 12,650,000 shares of our common stock for net proceeds of approximately $55.9 million after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses.
On June 5, 2020, we entered into a sales agreement with SVB Leerink LLC (“SVB Leerink”) pursuant to which we may offer and sell shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $35.0 million from time to time through SVB Leerink, acting as our agent (the “ATM Offering”). During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold an aggregate of 1,721,267 shares of common stock under the ATM Offering for net cash proceeds of $9.3 million after deducting commissions and expenses of $0.5 million.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for each of the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $49.8 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $56.5 million and changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $0.7 million, both partially offset by non-cash charges of $7.4 million, including $6.3 million of stock-based compensation.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, operating activities used $51.0 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $59.0 million, partially offset by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $1.0 million and non-cash charges of $7.1 million, including $5.8 million of stock-based compensation expense.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities primarily consisted of the purchase of marketable securities totaling $35.9 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities primarily consisted of the purchase of property and equipment totaling $0.1 million.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $65.4 million, which primarily consisted of the net proceeds from the issuance of common stock.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $63.7 million, primarily consisting of net cash proceeds of $64.5 million from our IPO, partially offset by a $1.2 million payment of the success fee payable upon completion of our IPO pursuant to our loan and security agreement.
Loan and Security Agreement
At December 31, 2020, we had $26.0 million in outstanding long-term debt pursuant to our loan and security agreement. In accordance with the recent amendment of the loan and security agreement, the interest-only period was extended through January 31, 2022 as we achieved certain regulatory and clinical milestones. Monthly principal payments of $2.2 million will commence February 1, 2022 for 12 months as the loan matures on January 1, 2023. The interest-only period may be further extended through May 1, 2022, provided that we achieve a specified clinical milestone by September 30, 2021. The terminal interest fee of 6.35%, or $1.7 million, is due with the final principal payment of the loan. We granted the lender a first priority security interest in all of our assets, excluding intellectual property and granted a negative pledge on such intellectual property. There are no financial covenants under our loan and security agreement.
Funding Requirements
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2020 will be adequate to fund our operating expenses, capital expenditure requirements and debt service obligations through at least the next 12 months. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect. We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance existing product candidates into additional Clinical Trials and Clinical Studies and develop new product candidates. Our cash requirements depend on numerous factors, including, without limitation, expenditures in connection with our research and development programs, including with respect to the timing and progress of Clinical Trials, Clinical Studies and preclinical development activities; payments to CROs, CMOs and other third-party providers; the cost of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights; our ability to raise additional equity or debt financing; potential repayments of our long-term debt; and our ability to enter into collaboration or license agreements and our receipt of any upfront, milestone or other payments thereunder. Changes in our research and development plans or other changes affecting our operating expenses may result in changes in the timing and amount of expenditures of our capital resources. See “Risk Factors” for further discussion of these and additional risks and uncertainties that may significantly affect the timing and amount of expenditures of our capital resources.
We will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, strategic alliances and marketing and licensing arrangements. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all, including as a result of market volatility following the COVID-19 pandemic. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when, needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development and commercialization of one or more of our product candidates or delay our pursuit of potential in-licenses or acquisitions. We also intend to continue to evaluate options to refinance our outstanding long-term debt. The amounts involved in any such transactions, individually or in the aggregate, may be material.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advanced payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of these estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to vendors including CROs and CMOs for research and development services.
We base our expenses related to research and development on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with CROs that conduct and manage Clinical Trials, Clinical Studies and preclinical development activities on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients or subjects and the completion of clinical milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or the amount of prepaid expenses accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have not been any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation
We estimate the fair value of our stock-based awards to employees and non-employees using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including (a) the expected volatility of our stock, (b) the expected term of the award, (c) the risk-free interest rate, and (d) expected dividends. Due to the lack of company-specific historical and implied volatility data, we base our estimate of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a group of companies in the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries in a similar stage of development as us and that are publicly traded. For these analyses, we have selected companies with comparable characteristics to ours including enterprise value, risk profiles and with historical share price information sufficient to meet the expected life of the stock-based awards. We compute the historical volatility data using the daily closing prices for the selected companies' shares during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of our stock-based awards. We will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available. We have estimated the expected life of our employee stock options using the "simplified" method, whereby, the expected life equals the average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option. The risk-free interest rates for periods within the expected life of the option are based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect during the period the options were granted. We have elected to account for forfeitures as they occur.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under applicable SEC rules and regulations.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act, and we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies. We may take advantage of these exemptions until we are no longer an emerging growth company. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period afforded by the JOBS Act for the implementation of new or revised accounting standards. We have elected to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards and, as a result of this election, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates. We may take advantage of these exemptions up until the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of our IPO or such earlier time that we are no longer an emerging growth company. We would cease to be an emerging growth company if we have more than $1.07 billion in annual revenue, we have more than $700.0 million in market value of our stock held by non-affiliates (and we have been a public company for at least 12 months and have filed one annual report on Form 10-K) or we issue more than $1.0 billion of non-convertible debt securities over a three-year period.