Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Overview
We are a global medical technology company that develops and commercializes products to treat urinary and fecal dysfunction, including: (i) an implantable SNM to treat UUI and UUF, together referred to as OAB, as well as FI, and non-obstructive UR; and (ii) a urethral bulking agent to treat female SUI.
OAB affects an estimated 87 million adults in the United States and Europe. Another estimated 40 million adults are reported to suffer from FI. SNM therapy is an effective and durable treatment that has been widely used and reimbursed in Europe and the United States for the past two decades. SNM is the only OAB treatment with proven clinical superiority to standard medical therapy and OAB patients who receive SNM report significantly higher quality of life than patients undergoing drug treatment.
We estimate the global SNM market is now approximately $650 million to $700 million and believe it is a growing market that is currently about one to three percent penetrated. Until we entered the market, it was serviced by Medtronic as a single participant.
We believe our proprietary r-SNM System, the first rechargeable SNM system marketed worldwide, offers significant advantages, and is well positioned to capture market share and penetrate and grow this attractive market. Our r-SNM System is designed to last approximately 15 years in the human body, is only 5cc in volume, offers broad MRI access, ease of use, intuitive programmers, and the longest recharging interval among rechargeable SNM systems.
We have marketing approvals in Europe, Canada, and Australia for all relevant clinical indications and initiated limited commercial efforts in England, the Netherlands and Canada in late 2018. Revenue in 2020 from international operations in the Netherlands, England, Canada, Switzerland, Norway and Germany, was approximately $4.0 million.
Our initial PMA application for our r-SNM System for the treatment of FI was approved by the FDA on September 6, 2019, and our PMA application for our r-SNM System for the treatment of OAB and UR was approved by the FDA on November 13, 2019.
We are primarily focused on commercializing our products in the United States, which accounts for the vast majority of SNM sales worldwide. We have established a significant commercial infrastructure, with over 220 sales personnel and clinical specialists and we continue to make significant investments to build our commercial organization to market and support our products. When making hiring decisions for these roles, we prioritize individuals with strong sales backgrounds and experience in SNM therapy and other neurostimulation applications, and who also have existing relationships with urologists and urogynecologists.
Revenue in 2020 from accounts located across the United States was approximately $107.5 million.
In January 2020, the FDA approved an enhanced, second-generation programmer for our r-SNM System under a PMA supplement. The new programmer features, among other things, a predictive programming algorithm that translates intra-operative responses and suggests how to program the patient for optimum therapy, thereby reducing the need to adjust post-implant therapy.
In April 2020, the FDA approved a second-generation INS for our r-SNM System under a PMA supplement. The second-generation INS extends the recharge interval for patients to only once a month for about one hour and for some patients, up to once every two months. The second-generation INS began shipping to customers in the U.S. during the third quarter of 2020.
In June 2020, the FDA approved a new wireless patient remote control with SmartMRI™ technology for our r-SNM System under a PMA supplement. The new remote control simplifies the process by which patients can receive a full-body magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). An MRI technician can perform a simple check using a patient’s remote control immediately prior to an MRI, avoiding the need for the patient to visit their implanting physician’s office or involving our personnel.
In July 2020, the FDA approved 3T full-body MRI conditional labeling for our r-SNM System under a PMA supplement. With this incremental approval, our r-SNM System is MRI compatible for both 1.5T and 3T full-body scans.
In September 2020, Health Canada approved a second-generation rechargeable INS for our r-SNM System, which the Company began shipping upon approval.
In February 2021, the FDA approved a third-generation INS for our r-SNM System under a PMA supplement. The third-generation INS upgrades the embedded software in the INS and the functionality of the patient remote control. These modifications give patients the ability to make broader stimulation parameter
adjustments at home, including selecting a second therapy program that was set post-operatively based on interoperative findings.
Our ability to generate revenue and become profitable will depend on our ability to continue to successfully commercialize our r-SNM System and any product enhancements we may advance in the future. We expect to derive future revenue by increasing patient and physician awareness of our r-SNM System. If we are unable to accomplish any of these objectives, it could have a significant negative impact on our future revenue. If we fail to generate sufficient revenue in the future, our business, results of operations, financial condition, cash flows, and future prospects would be materially and adversely affected.
We also intend to continue to make investments in research and development efforts to develop improvements and enhancements to our r-SNM System.
In the United States, the cost required to treat each patient is reimbursed through various third-party payors, such as commercial payors and government agencies. Most large insurers have established coverage policies in place to cover SNM therapy. Certain commercial payors have a patient-by-patient prior authorization process that must be followed before they will provide reimbursement for SNM therapy. Outside the United States, reimbursement levels vary significantly by country and by region, particularly based on whether the country or region at issue maintains a single-payor system. SNM therapy is eligible for reimbursement in Canada, Australia, and certain countries in Europe, such as Germany, France, and the United Kingdom. Annual healthcare budgets generally determine the number of SNM systems that will be paid for by the payor in these single-payor system countries and regions.
We currently outsource the manufacture of the implantable components of our r-SNM System. We plan to continue with an outsourced manufacturing arrangement for the foreseeable future. Our contract manufacturers are all recognized in their field for their competency to manufacture the respective portions of our r-SNM System and have quality systems established that meet FDA requirements. We believe the manufacturers we currently utilize have sufficient capacity to meet our launch requirements and are able to scale up their capacity relatively quickly with limited capital investment.
Prior to obtaining FDA approval, we devoted substantially all of our resources to research and development activities related to our r-SNM System, including clinical and regulatory initiatives to obtain marketing approvals. We expect to spend a significant amount of our resources on sales and marketing activities as we commercialize and market our r-SNM System in the United States.
We incurred net losses of $54.9 million, $79.9 million, and $32.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, and had an accumulated deficit of $234.5 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to $179.6 million at December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had available cash and cash equivalents of approximately $241.2 million, current liabilities of approximately $45.7 million, and long-term liabilities of approximately $9.2 million.
Prior to our initial public offering (IPO), we financed our operations primarily through preferred stock financings and amounts borrowed under a Loan and Security Agreement, dated February 6, 2018, between us and Silicon Valley Bank (the Loan Agreement). Through our IPO in November 2018, an offering completed in November 2019 and an offering completed in May 2020, we received aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $405.1 million. We have invested heavily in product development and continuous improvement to our r-SNM System. We have also made significant investments in clinical studies to demonstrate the safety and effectiveness of our r-SNM System and to support regulatory submissions. Because of these and other factors, we expect to continue to incur net losses for the next few years and we may require additional funding, which may include future equity and debt financings. Adequate funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. Our failure to obtain sufficient funds on acceptable terms when needed could have a material and adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations.
Initial Public Offering
On November 2, 2018, we completed our IPO by issuing 9,200,000 shares of common stock, at an offering price of $15.00 per share, inclusive of 1,200,000 shares of our common stock issued upon the exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase additional shares. The gross proceeds from the IPO were $138.0 million and the net proceeds were approximately $126.0 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by us. In connection with the IPO, our outstanding shares of convertible preferred stock were automatically converted into an aggregate of 15,813,297 shares of common stock, and our outstanding warrants to purchase shares of Series C convertible preferred stock were automatically converted into warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 80,000 shares of common stock.
November 2019 Follow-On Offering
On November 22, 2019, we completed a follow-on offering by issuing 5,345,000 shares of common stock, at an offering price of $22.00 per share, inclusive of 750,000 shares of our common stock issued upon the exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase additional shares. The gross proceeds to us from this follow-on offering were $117.6 million and the net proceeds were approximately $110.4 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
May 2020 Follow-On Offering
On May 12, 2020, we completed a follow-on offering by issuing 4,600,000 shares of common stock, at an offering price of $32.50 per share, inclusive of 600,000 shares of our common stock issued upon the exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase additional shares. The gross proceeds to us from this follow-on offering were $149.5 million and the net proceeds were approximately $140.5 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted our sales, primarily in the second quarter of 2020, by significantly decreasing and delaying the number of procedures performed using our r-SNM System, and we expect that the pandemic could negatively impact our business, financial condition and results of operations. Similar to the general trend in elective and other surgical procedures, the number of procedures performed using our r-SNM System decreased significantly as healthcare organizations in the United States and globally, including in Europe and Canada, have prioritized the treatment of patients with COVID-19 or have altered their operations to prepare for and respond to the pandemic. Specifically, substantially all of the procedures using our r-SNM System were postponed or cancelled from middle of March 2020 through May 2020, but order flow began a gradual recovery in May 2020 and continued to improve in the second half of 2020.
To protect the health of our employees, their families, and our communities, we have restricted access to our offices to personnel who must perform critical activities that must be completed on-site, limited the number of such personnel that can be present at our facilities at any one time, requested that many of our employees work remotely, and implemented strict travel restrictions. These restrictions and precautionary measures have not adversely affected our operations. The full extent of COVID-19’s effect on our operational and financial performance will depend on future developments, including the duration, spread and intensity of the pandemic, and additional protective measures implemented by the governmental authorities, all of which are uncertain and difficult to predict considering the rapidly evolving landscape. However, if the pandemic continues to evolve into a long-term severe worldwide health crisis, there could be a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows.
AMF License Agreement
On October 1, 2013, we entered into the License Agreement, pursuant to which AMF granted us the AMF IP relating to AMF Licensed Products.
Under the License Agreement, for each calendar year beginning in 2018, we are obligated to pay AMF a royalty on an AMF Licensed Product-by-AMF Licensed Product basis if one of the following conditions applies: (i) one or more valid claims within any of the patents licensed to us by AMF covers such AMF Licensed Products or the manufacture of such AMF Licensed Products or (ii) for a period of 12 years from the first commercial sale
anywhere in the world of such AMF Licensed Product, in each case. The foregoing royalty is calculated as the greater of (a) 4% of all net revenue derived from the AMF Licensed Products, and (b) the Minimum Royalty, payable quarterly. The Minimum Royalty automatically increases each year, subject to a maximum amount of $200,000 per year. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, we have recorded royalties of $4.4 million, $0.6 million, and $0.1 million, respectively. We have 60 days to pay AMF the royalty amount due under the License Agreement, and if we fail to pay AMF within such 60-day period, AMF may, at its election, convert the exclusive license to a non-exclusive license or terminate the License Agreement.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Net Revenue
Revenue in 2020 from U.S. operations was $107.5 million.
Revenue in 2020 from international operations in the Netherlands, England, Canada, Switzerland, Norway and Germany, was approximately $4.0 million.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Margin
Cost of goods sold consists primarily of acquisition costs of the components of our r-SNM System, third-party contract labor costs, overhead costs, as well as distribution-related expenses such as logistics and shipping costs. The overhead costs include the cost of material procurement and operations supervision and management personnel. We expect overhead costs as a percentage of revenue to decrease as our sales volume increases. Cost of goods sold also include other expenses such as scrap and inventory obsolescence. We expect cost of goods sold to increase in absolute dollars primarily as, and to the extent, our revenue grows. We expect gross margin to vary based on regional differences in pricing and discounts negotiated by customers.
We calculate gross margin as gross profit divided by revenue. We expect future gross margin will be affected by a variety of factors, including manufacturing costs, the average selling price of our r-SNM System, the implementation of cost-reduction strategies, inventory obsolescence costs, which may occur when new generations of our r-SNM System are introduced, and to a lesser extent, the sales mix between the United States, Canada, Europe and Australia as our average selling price in the United States is expected to be higher than in Canada, Europe and Australia and foreign currency exchange rates. Our gross margin may increase over the long term to the extent our production volumes increase and we receive discounts on the costs charged by our contract manufacturers, thereby reducing our per unit costs. Additionally, our gross margin may fluctuate from quarter to quarter due to seasonality.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of employee compensation, including stock-based compensation, product development, including testing and engineering, and clinical studies to develop and support our r-SNM System, including clinical study management and monitoring, payments to clinical investigators, and data management. Other research and development expenses include consulting and advisory fees, royalty expense, travel expenses, and equipment-related expenses and other miscellaneous office and facilities expenses related to research and development programs. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. We expect to continue incurring research and development expenses in the future as we develop next generation versions of our r-SNM System and expand to new markets. We expect research and development expenses as a percentage of revenue to vary over time depending on the level and timing of initiating new product development efforts and new clinical development activities.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by functional area for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 (in thousands):
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee compensation, including stock-based compensation, and spending related to finance, information technology, human resource functions, consulting, legal, and professional service fees. Other general and administrative expenses include director and officer insurance premiums, investor relations costs, office-related expenses, facilities and equipment rentals, bad debt expense, and travel expenses. We expect our general and administrative expenses will significantly increase in absolute dollars as we increase our headcount and expand administrative personnel to support our growth and operations as a public company including finance personnel and information technology services. Additionally, we anticipate increased legal expenses associated with our patent infringement litigation with Medtronic. These expenses will further increase as we no longer qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups (JOBS) Act, which requires us to comply with certain reporting requirements effective December 31, 2020. We expect general and administrative expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue primarily as, and to the extent, our revenue grows.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of employee compensation, including stock-based compensation, trade shows, booth exhibition costs, and the related travel for these events. Other sales and marketing expenses include consulting and advisory fees. We expect sales and marketing expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we expand our commercial infrastructure to both drive and support our expected growth in revenue. However, we expect sales and marketing expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue in the long term primarily as, and to the extent, our revenue grows.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest income earned on cash equivalents and short-term investments, net of interest expense payable under the Loan Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense consists of state income taxes in California. We maintain a full valuation allowance for deferred tax assets including net operating loss carryforwards and research and development credits and other tax credits.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table shows our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands, except percentages):
Net Revenue
Net revenue was $111.5 million in fiscal year 2020 and was derived from the sale of our r-SNM Systems to customers in the United States, Europe and Canada. Net revenue was $13.8 million in fiscal year 2019 and was derived from the sale of our r-SNM Systems to customers in the United States, Europe and Canada. The increase in net revenue is primarily due to the commercial launch in the United States in the fourth quarter of 2019, partially offset by a decrease in sales in Europe and Canada as related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Margin
We incurred $44.4 million of cost of goods sold in fiscal year 2020, compared to $6.5 million in fiscal year 2019. Gross margin was 60.2% in fiscal year 2020, compared to 53.0% gross margin in fiscal year 2019. The increase in gross margin is primarily due to higher sales volume as well as the commercial launch in the United States in the fourth quarter of 2019, which has higher average sales prices.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased $9.0 million, or 44.5%, to $29.2 million in fiscal year 2020, compared to $20.2 million in fiscal year 2019. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily attributable to an increase of $5.5 million in contract fabrication and manufacturing costs related to product development projects and an increase of $4.0 million in contract research and development and consulting expenses,
partially offset by $0.9 million decrease in clinical development costs to demonstrate the safety and effectiveness of our r-SNM System and to support regulatory submissions.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $6.5 million, or 33.9%, to $25.6 million in fiscal year 2020, compared to $19.1 million in fiscal year 2019, primarily as a result of an increase of $2.4 million in personnel costs including salaries and wages, stock-based compensation and other employee-related benefits, an increase of $1.9 million in legal and consulting costs, and an increase of $1.0 million in rent expense.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased $17.5 million, or 35.9%, to $66.1 million in fiscal year 2020, compared to $48.7 million in fiscal year 2019. The increase in sales and marketing expenses was primarily due to an increase of $19.8 million related to personnel costs including salaries and wages, stock-based compensation and other employee-related benefits, partially offset by a decrease of $2.3 million in travel expenses.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other expense, net was $1.2 million in fiscal year 2020, consisting primarily of interest expense incurred related to the Loan Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank, partially offset by interest income earned on cash equivalents. Other income, net was $0.7 million in fiscal year 2019, consisting primarily of interest income earned on cash equivalents and short-term investments, partially offset by interest expense incurred related to the Loan Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense was minimal in fiscal year 2020 and 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We only began full-scale commercialization of our r-SNM System in late 2019. We have expended significant resources on research and development activities, growing our operations organization and building and training our sales organization.
We incurred net losses of $54.9 million, $79.9 million, and $32.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, and had an accumulated deficit of $234.5 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to $179.6 million at December 31, 2019. We expect to continue to spend a significant amount of our existing resources on sales and marketing activities as we continue to commercialize and market our products in the United States and internationally.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $241.2 million compared to cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $183.7 million at December 31, 2019. We expect that our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments on hand will be sufficient to fund our operations through at least the next 12 months. We fund our operations through a combination of proceeds from public offerings of our common stock, cash receipts from sales of our r-SNM System and proceeds from our Loan Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank. As of December 31, 2020, we had $21.5 million in outstanding borrowings, as discussed below under “Indebtedness,” which were repaid in January 2021.
In connection with the acquisition of Contura, on February 25, 2021, we entered into the Loan and Security Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank, as the administrative agent and collateral agent for the lenders, under which we obtained a loan in the principal amount of $75 million pursuant to the Loan. The Loan under the Loan and Security Agreement matures on February 1, 2024 (the Maturity Date), unless earlier accelerated upon an event of default. The Loan bears interest at a floating per annum rate equal to the greater of (a) 9.00% and (b) 5.75% above the current prime rate, with only interest due and payable monthly until September 1, 2022, at which time interest and principal will be due and payable monthly in equal monthly payments. The Loan and Security Agreement also sets out that the Loan is subject to a final payment fee equal to 6.00% of the aggregate principal amount of the Loan.
We may prepay amounts outstanding under the Loan and Security Agreement at any time with 5 days prior written notice to Silicon Valley Bank. In the event that we elect to prepay the Loan prior to the Maturity Date, we are required to pay a fee in the amount of (a) 2.00% of the outstanding principal balance if such prepayment occurs
prior to February 25, 2022 or (b) 1.00% of the outstanding principal balance if such prepayment occurs on or after February 25, 2022.
The Loan and Security Agreement contains customary covenants that include, among others, covenants that limit our and our subsidiaries’ ability to dispose of assets, conduct mergers or acquisitions, incur indebtedness, incur certain liens, pay dividends or make distributions on our capital stock, make certain investments, and enter into certain affiliate transactions, in each case subject to customary exceptions for a credit facility of this size and type.
The Loan and Security Agreement contains customary events of default that include, among others, non-payment defaults, covenant defaults, a default in the event a material adverse change occurs, defaults in the event our assets are attached or we are enjoined from doing business, bankruptcy and insolvency defaults, cross-defaults to certain other material indebtedness, material judgment defaults, and inaccuracy of representations and warranties. The occurrence of an event of default could result in an increase to the applicable interest rate of 5.00%, acceleration of and present occurrence of the Maturity Date, and the consequent obligation for us to repay in full in cash all amounts outstanding under the Loan and Security Agreement, and a right by the lenders to exercise all remedies available under the Loan and Security Agreement and related agreements, including the right to dispose of the collateral as permitted under applicable law.
We may need to raise additional financing in the future to facilitate our business operations. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders could experience dilution. Debt financing, if available, may involve covenants further restricting our operations or our ability to incur additional debt. Any debt financing or additional equity that we raise may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. Additional financing may not be available at all, or in amounts or on terms acceptable to us. If we are unable to obtain additional financing when needed to satisfy our liquidity requirements, we may be required to scale back our operations.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our cash flow for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Net cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $83.7 million in fiscal year 2020 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $54.9 million, a decrease from changes in net operating assets of $47.0 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $18.2 million. Net operating assets consisted primarily of inventory to support the commercial launch of our r-SNM System in the United States. Non-cash charges consisted primarily of stock-based compensation.
Net cash used in operating activities was $83.5 million in fiscal year 2019 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $79.9 million, a decrease in net operating assets of $14.4 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $10.9 million. Net operating assets consisted primarily of inventory to support the commercial launch of our r-SNM System in the United States. Non-cash charges consisted primarily of stock-based compensation.
Net cash used in operating activities was $31.4 million in fiscal year 2018 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $32.5 million, a decrease in net operating assets of $2.9 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $4.0 million. Net operating assets consisted primarily of inventory to support the planned launch of our commercial
operations. Non-cash charges consisted primarily of forgiveness of receivables for stock subscriptions, depreciation and amortization, and stock-based compensation.
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $9.7 million in fiscal year 2020 and consisted primarily of sales and maturities of short-term investments, partially offset by purchases of property and equipment. Not included is the approximately $141.3 million in cash paid and 1,096,583 shares of our common stock issued from the acquisition of Contura and its Bulkamid product.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $45.3 million in fiscal year 2019 and consisted primarily of sales and maturities of short-term investments, partially offset by purchases of short-term investments.
Net cash used in investing activities was $60.1 million in fiscal year 2018 and consisted primarily of purchases and sales of short-term investments.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $144.2 million in fiscal year 2020 and consisted primarily of $140.5 million in net proceeds received in the follow-on offering. Not included is the $75 million in proceeds from the Loan and Security Agreement.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $111.0 million in fiscal year 2019 and consisted primarily of $110.4 million in net proceeds received in the follow-on offering.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $165.3 million in fiscal year 2018 and consisted primarily of $126.0 million in net proceeds received in the IPO, $20.0 million of proceeds from our Term Loan with Silicon Valley Bank, and $20.1 million of proceeds from the issuance of shares of our Series C preferred stock.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined by applicable regulations of the SEC, that are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Contractual Obligations
Our principal contractual obligations consist of payments due under the Loan Agreement, including interest and principal payments and the final payment. The following table sets out, as of December 31, 2020, our contractual obligations due by period (in thousands):
(1) Our principal office is currently located at 26 Technology Drive, Irvine, California 92618, where we lease approximately 25,548 square feet of office space under a lease that terminates on October 31, 2027. In addition, we maintain offices at 15326 Alton Parkway, Irvine, California 92618, where we lease approximately 32,621 square feet of office space under a lease that terminates on January 31, 2028, and at 7575 Irvine Center Drive, Suite 200, Irvine, California 92618, where we lease approximately 12,215 square feet of space, and where we conduct the training of our sales team, under a lease that terminates on July 31, 2022.
(2) Purchase obligations represent open purchase orders primarily for component materials and third-party contract labor costs at the end of the fiscal year. These purchase orders can be impacted by various factors, including the timing of issuing orders, the timing of the shipment of orders, and currency fluctuations.
(3) Represents the Minimum Royalty due under the License Agreement.
(4) Includes interest payments at the prime rate plus 1.75%, prepayment fees, and the minimum final payment, consisting of a 7.5% premium principal amount paid off under the Loan Agreement, all of which were repaid in full in January 2021. Fees or payments under the Loan and Security Agreement are not included.
From time to time we enter into certain types of contracts that contingently require us to indemnify parties against third-party claims, including the License Agreement, the Loan Agreement, the Loan and Security Agreement and certain real estate leases, supply purchase agreements, and agreements with directors and officers. The terms of such obligations vary by contract and in most instances a maximum dollar amount is not explicitly stated therein. Generally, amounts under these contracts cannot be reasonably estimated until a specific claim is asserted, thus no liabilities have been recorded for these obligations on our balance sheets for any of the periods presented.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (GAAP) requires our management to make estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. The results of this evaluation then form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, and such differences may be material to our consolidated financial statements.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue recognized during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 relates entirely to the sale of our r-SNM System.
We have revenue arrangements that consist of a single performance obligation. We recognize revenue at the point in time when it transfers control of promised goods to its customers. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration it expects to receive in exchange for transferring goods. The amount of revenue that is recognized is based on the transaction price, which represents the invoiced amount and includes estimates of variable consideration such as discounts, where applicable. We do not offer rights of return or price protection. The amount of variable consideration included in the transaction price may be constrained and is included only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized under the contract will not occur in a future period. Payment terms, typically less than three months, are offered to our customers and do not include a significant financing component. We extend credit to our customers based upon an evaluation of the customer’s financial condition and credit history and generally require no collateral. We do not have any contract balances related to product sales. We also do not have significant contract acquisition costs related to product sales.
Shipping and handling costs incurred for the delivery of goods to customers are included in cost of goods sold. Amounts billed to customers for shipping and handling are included in net revenue.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We make estimates of the collectability of accounts receivable. Upon adoption of ASU 2016-13, we did not recognize an adjustment to the beginning balance of retained earnings as the impact from adoption was not material. Our estimate of future losses is made by management based upon historical bad debts, customer receivable balances, age of customer receivable balances, customers’ financial conditions and reasonable forecasted economic trends. Despite our efforts to minimize credit risk exposure, clients could be adversely affected if future economic and industry trends, including those related to COVID-19, change in such a manner as to negatively impact their cash
flows. The full effects of COVID-19 on our clients are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. As a result, our future collection experience can differ significantly from historical collection trends. If our clients experience a negative impact on their cash flows, it could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. A three-level fair value hierarchy prioritizes the inputs used to measure fair value. The hierarchy requires entities to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. The three levels of inputs used to measure fair value are as follows:
•Level 1: Inputs are unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
•Level 2: Inputs are quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets or quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active and model-derived valuations in which all significant inputs and significant value drivers are observable in active markets.
•Level 3: Inputs are unobservable inputs based on our assumptions and valuation techniques used to measure assets and liabilities at fair value. The inputs require significant management judgment or estimation.
Our assessment of the significance of an input to the fair value measurement requires judgment, which may affect the valuation of fair value assets and liabilities and their placement within the fair value hierarchy levels. The carrying amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements approximate the fair value for cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payables, and accrued expenses, due to their short-term nature. The carrying amount of our term loan, which is described below, approximates fair value, considering the interest rates are based on the prime interest rate.
Investment Securities
We classify our investment securities as available-for-sale. Those investments in debt securities with maturities less than 12 months at the date of purchase are considered short-term investments. Those investments in debt securities with maturities greater than 12 months at the date of purchase are considered long-term investments. Our investment securities classified as available-for-sale are recorded at fair value based on the fair value hierarchy (Level 1 and Level 2 inputs in the fair value hierarchy), and consists primarily of commercial paper, corporate notes and U.S. government and agency securities. Unrealized gains or losses, deemed temporary in nature, are reported as other comprehensive income within the consolidated statement of comprehensive income (loss).
Foreign Currency Translation
The functional currencies of the Company’s subsidiaries are currencies other than the U.S. dollar. The Company translates assets and liabilities of the foreign subsidiaries into U.S. dollars at the exchange rate in effect on the balance sheet date. Costs and expenses of the subsidiaries are translated into U.S. dollars at the average exchange rate during the period. Gains or losses from these translation adjustments are reported as a separate component of stockholders’ equity in accumulated other comprehensive loss until there is a sale or complete or substantially complete liquidation of the Company’s investment in the foreign subsidiary at which time the gains or losses will be realized and included in net income (loss).
Inventory, Net
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost computed on a first-in, first-out basis. We reduce the carrying value of inventories for items that are potentially excess, obsolete, or slow-moving based on changes in customer demand, technology developments, or other economic factors.
We capitalize inventory produced for commercial sale. We capitalize manufacturing costs as inventory following both the receipt of regulatory approval from regulatory bodies and our intent to commercialize. Costs associated with developmental products prior to satisfying our inventory capitalization criteria are charged to research and development expense as incurred.
Products that have been approved by certain regulatory authorities are also used in clinical programs to assess the safety and efficacy of the products for usage that have not been approved by the FDA or other regulatory authorities. The form of product utilized for both commercial and certain clinical programs is identical and, as a result, the inventory has an “alternative future use” as defined in authoritative guidance. Component materials and purchased products associated with clinical development programs are included in inventory and charged to research and development expense when the product enters the research and development process and no longer can be used for commercial purposes and, therefore, does not have an “alternative future use.”
For products that are under development and have not yet been approved by regulatory authorities, purchased component materials are charged to research and development expense when the inventory ownership transfers to us.
We analyze inventory levels to identify inventory that may expire prior to sale, inventory that has a cost basis in excess of its net realizable value, or inventory in excess of expected sales requirements. Although the manufacturing of the r-SNM System is subject to strict quality control, certain batches or units of product may no longer meet quality specifications or may expire, which would require adjustments to our inventory values. We also apply judgment related to the results of quality tests that are performed throughout the production process, as well as the understanding of regulatory guidelines, to determine if it is probable that inventory will be saleable. These quality tests are performed throughout the pre- and post-production processes, and we continually gather information regarding product quality for periods after the manufacturing date. The r-SNM System currently has a maximum estimated shelf life range of 12 to 36 months and, based on sales forecasts, we expect to realize the carrying value of the product inventory. In the future, reduced demand, quality issues, or excess supply beyond those anticipated by management may result in a material adjustment to inventory levels, which would be recorded as an increase to cost of sales.
The determination of whether or not inventory costs will be realizable requires estimates by our management. A critical input in this determination is future expected inventory requirements based on internal sales forecasts. Management then compares these requirements to the expiry dates of inventory on hand. To the extent that inventory is expected to expire prior to being sold, management will write down the value of inventory.
Intangible Asset
The intangible asset represents exclusive rights to an additional field-of-use on the patent suite within the License Agreement with AMF. The additional field-of-use was provided in exchange for 50,000 shares of Series A preferred stock, the fair value of which was $1.0 million in 2013. The intangible asset was recorded at its fair value of $1.0 million at the date contributed. In connection with our IPO, such shares of Series A preferred stock were converted into common stock. Amortization of this asset is recorded over the shorter of the patent or legal life on a straight-line basis. The weighted-average amortization period is 8.71 years. We will review the intangible asset for impairment whenever an impairment indicator exists. There have been no intangible asset impairment charges to date.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We review our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability is measured by comparing the carrying amount to the future net cash flows that the assets are expected to generate. If said assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment that would be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the projected discounted future net cash flows arising from the asset. There have been no such impairments of long-lived assets to date.
Leases
In accordance with ASU No. 2016-02, “Leases (Topic 842)”, components of a lease should be split into three categories: lease components, non-lease components, and non-components. The fixed and in-substance fixed contract consideration (including any consideration related to non-components) must be allocated based on the respective relative fair values to the lease components and non-lease components. Entities may elect not to separate lease and non-lease components. Rather, entities would account for each lease component and related non-lease component together as a single lease component. We have elected to account for lease and non-lease components together as a single lease component for all underlying assets and allocate all of the contract consideration to the lease component only. Topic 842 allows for the use of judgment in determining whether the assumed lease term is for a major part of the remaining economic life of the underlying asset and whether the present value of lease payments represents substantially all of the fair value of the underlying asset. We apply the bright line thresholds referenced in Topic 842 to assist in evaluating leases for appropriate classification. The aforementioned bright lines are applied consistently to our entire portfolio of leases.
Operating lease ROU asset and operating lease liabilities are recognized based on the present value of the future minimum lease payments over the lease term at commencement date. As our lease does not provide an implicit rate, we use our incremental borrowing rate, which is the rate for a fully collateralized amortizing loan with the same maturity as the lease term, based on the information available at commencement date in determining the present value of future payments. The operating lease ROU asset also includes any lease payments made and excludes lease incentives and initial direct costs incurred. The lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. Lease expense for minimum lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Research and Development
Research and development costs are charged to operations as incurred. Research and development costs include salary and personnel-related costs, costs of clinical studies and testing, supplies and materials, and outside consultant costs.
Advertising Expense
The Company expenses advertising costs as they are incurred.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method to compute the difference between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and the related financial amounts, using currently enacted tax rates. We have deferred tax assets. The realization of these deferred tax assets is dependent upon our ability to generate sufficient taxable income in future years. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that more likely than not will be realized. We evaluate the recoverability of the deferred tax assets annually, and maintain a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets. We recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. We are subject to transfer pricing and other tax regulations designed to ensure that appropriate levels of income are reported as earned by our U.S. and foreign entities and are taxed accordingly. In the normal course of business, we are audited by federal, state and foreign tax authorities, and subject to inquiries from those tax authorities regarding the amount of taxes due. These inquiries may relate to the timing and amount of deductions and the allocation of income among various tax jurisdictions. Our policy is to recognize interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits, if any, in income tax expense.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure the cost of employee and non-employee services in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of the award and recognize compensation cost over the requisite service period (typically the vesting period), generally four years. Forfeitures are estimated at the time of the grant and revised in subsequent periods to reflect differences between the estimates and the number of shares that actually become exercisable. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the fair value of stock options (as of the date of grant) that have service conditions for vesting. Stock options and restricted shares awards vest based on service conditions, typically over four years.
We also grant shares of performance-based restricted stock units that typically vest after one year only if we have also achieved certain performance objectives as defined and approved by our board of directors. The fair value of performance awards are determined based on the Company’s stock price at the date of grant and expensed over the performance period based on the probability of achieving the performance objectives. In addition, we also grant market-based restricted stock units that have combined market conditions and service conditions for vesting, for which we use the Monte Carlo valuation model to value equity awards (as of the date of grant).
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 1, Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report.