ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements about our plans and expectations of what may happen in the future. You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with “Item 6. Selected Financial Data,” “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” and our consolidated financial statements beginning on page of this report. Forward-looking statements are based on a number of assumptions and estimates that are inherently subject to significant risks and uncertainties, and our results could differ materially from the results anticipated by our forward-looking statements as a result of many known or unknown factors, including, but not limited to, those factors discussed in “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” See also the “Special Cautionary Notice Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” set forth at the beginning of this report.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company developing novel therapies for the management of central nervous system, or CNS, disorders for which there are limited treatment options. By focusing on this therapeutic area, we are addressing significant and growing markets where current treatment options are limited or inadequate. Our core CNS portfolio includes five CNS product candidates, AXS-05, AXS-07, AXS-09, AXS-12, and AXS-14 which are being developed for multiple indications. AXS-05 is being developed for the treatment of major depressive disorder, or MDD, for which we have completed a Phase 2 controlled trial and Phase 3 controlled trial, which we refer to as the ASCEND study and the GEMINI study, respectively, and a Phase 3 long-term open-label study, which we refer to as the COMET study. A New Drug Application, or NDA, has been submitted for AXS-05 for the treatment of MDD. AXS-05 is also under development for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease agitation, or AD agitation. We have completed one Phase 2/3 controlled trial, which we refer to as the ADVANCE study, for this indication. We are conducting a Phase 3 placebo-controlled, randomized withdrawal trial in AD agitation, which we refer to as the ACCORD study, and one open-label long-term safety study in AD agitation. AXS-05 is also being developed for smoking cessation and a Phase 2 trial in this indication has been completed. AXS-07 is being developed for the acute treatment of migraine, for which we have completed two Phase 3 controlled trials, which we refer to as MOMENTUM and INTERCEPT, and one Phase 3 long-term open-label trial, which we refer to as the MOVEMENT study. We plan to submit an NDA for AXS-07 for the acute treatment of migraine. AXS-09 is being developed for the treatment of CNS disorders. AXS-12 is being developed for the treatment of narcolepsy. We have completed a Phase 2 trial with AXS-12, which we refer to as the CONCERT study. A Phase 3 trial with AXS-12 in narcolepsy is planned. AXS-14 is being developed for the treatment of fibromyalgia. Additionally, we are currently evaluating other product candidates, which we intend to develop for CNS disorders. We aim to become a fully integrated biopharmaceutical company that develops and commercializes differentiated therapies that increase available treatment options and improve the lives of patients living with CNS disorders.
AXS-05 is a novel, oral, investigational NMDA receptor antagonist with multimodal activity under development for the treatment of CNS disorders. AXS-05 utilizes a proprietary formulation and dose of dextromethorphan and bupropion and utilizes our metabolic inhibition technology, to modulate the delivery of the components. We are developing AXS-05 initially for the following indications: MDD, AD agitation, and as an aid to smoking cessation. The dextromethorphan component of AXS-05 is an uncompetitive antagonist of the N-methyl-D-aspartate, or NMDA, receptor, also known as a glutamate receptor modulator, which is a novel mechanism of action, meaning it works differently than currently approved therapies for MDD. The dextromethrophan component of AXS-05 is also a sigma-1 receptor agonist. The bupropion component of AXS-05 serves to increase the bioavailability of dextromethorphan, and is also a norepinephrine and dopamine reuptake inhibitor. AXS-05 has been granted FDA Breakthrough Therapy designation for the treatment of MDD, and Breakthrough Therapy and Fast Track designations for the treatment of AD agitation. We are developing AXS-05 via the 505(b)(2) regulatory pathway.
AXS-07 is a novel, oral, rapidly absorbed, multi-mechanistic, investigational medicine under development for the acute treatment of migraine. AXS-07 consists of MoSEIC™ (Molecular Solubility Enhanced Inclusion Complex) meloxicam and rizatriptan. Meloxicam is a long-acting nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug, or NSAID, with COX-2, an enzyme involved in inflammation and pain pathways, preferential inhibition and potent pain-relieving effects. AXS-07 utilizes our proprietary MoSEIC™ technology to substantially increase the solubility and speed the absorption of meloxicam while potentially maintaining durability of action. Meloxicam is a new molecular entity for migraine enabled by our MoSEIC™ technology. Rizatriptan is a 5-HT1B/1D agonist that inhibits calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP)-mediated vasodilation, has been shown to have central trigeminal antinociceptive activity, and may reduce the release of
inflammatory mediators from trigeminal nerves. Rizatriptan is approved as a single agent for the acute treatment of migraine. We are developing AXS-07 via the 505(b)(2) regulatory development pathway.
AXS-09 is an oral, investigational NMDA receptor antagonist with multimodal activity consisting of esbupropion and dextromethorphan, which is being developed for the treatment of CNS disorders. AXS-09 contains esbupropion, the chirally pure S-enantiomer of bupropion, as compared to the company’s first generation product candidate AXS-05 which contains racemic bupropion, equal amounts of the S- and R-enantiomers. We have demonstrated in a Phase 1 trial that dextromethorphan plasma levels are substantially increased into a potentially therapeutic range with repeated administration of AXS-09. Results of this Phase 1 trial coupled with preclinical data also indicate the potential for enhanced absorption and therapeutic effect of the S-enantiomer as compared to the R-enantiomer.
AXS-12, reboxetine, is a novel, oral, investigational medicine in development for the treatment of narcolepsy. AXS-12 is a highly selective and potent norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor. AXS-12 has been granted Breakthrough Therapy designation and Orphan Drug Designation by the FDA for the treatment of cataplexy in narcolepsy.
AXS-14, esreboxetine, is a novel, oral, investigational medicine in development for the treatment of fibromyalgia. AXS-14 is a highly selective and potent norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor. Esreboxetine, the SS-enantiomer of reboxetine, is more potent and selective than racemic reboxetine.
Since our incorporation in January 2012, our operations to date have included organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, developing our compounds, and engaging in other discovery and preclinical activities. Prior to our initial public offering, or IPO, in November 2015, we financed our operations primarily through private placements of our convertible notes and subsequent to our IPO, through proceeds from sales of our common stock and warrants to purchase shares of our common stock to equity investors and debt borrowings. For a further discussion, see the section entitled “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below.
Our ability to become profitable depends on our ability to generate revenue. We do not expect to generate significant revenue unless and until we obtain marketing approval for and successfully commercialize one of our product candidates.
We have incurred significant operating and net losses since inception. We incurred net losses of $102.9 million, $68.3 million, and $31.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Our accumulated deficit as of December 31, 2020 was $278.8 million, and we expect to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for the foreseeable future. We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, as we continue the development and clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for our current product candidates and any other product candidates that we develop or in-license and advance to clinical development. If we obtain regulatory approval for a product candidate, we expect to incur significant expenses in order to create an infrastructure to support the commercialization of the product candidate, including manufacturing, sales, marketing, and distribution functions. Further, we have incurred and will continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. Accordingly, we may need additional financing to support our continuing operations. We may seek to fund our operations through public or private equity, debt financings, or other sources. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy. We will need to generate significant revenue to achieve profitability, and we may never do so.
Financial Overview
Revenue
We have not generated any revenue and have incurred significant operating losses since inception, and we do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of any products unless or until we obtain regulatory approval. If we fail to complete the development of our product candidates in a timely manner or obtain regulatory approval for them, our ability to generate future revenue, and our results of operations and financial position, would be materially and adversely affected. If we enter into licensing or collaboration arrangements, such agreements may generate revenue in the future.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses primarily include preclinical studies, clinical trials, manufacturing costs, employee salaries and benefits, stock-based compensation expense, contract services, including external research and development expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, such as contract research organizations, or CROs, facilities costs, overhead costs, depreciation, and other related costs.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. We will incur substantial costs beyond our present and planned clinical trials in order to file a new drug application, or NDA, for any of our product candidates. It is difficult to determine with certainty the costs and duration of our current or future clinical trials and preclinical studies, or if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates if we obtain regulatory approval. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval. The duration, costs, and timing of clinical trials and development of our product candidates will depend on a variety of factors, including the uncertainties of future clinical trials and preclinical studies, uncertainties in clinical trial enrollment rate, and significant and changing government regulation. In addition, the probability of success for each product candidate will depend on numerous factors, including competition, manufacturing capability, and commercial viability. We will determine which programs to pursue and how much to fund each program in response to the scientific and clinical success of each product candidate, as well as an assessment of each product candidate’s commercial potential.
Management considers many factors in developing the estimates and assumptions that are used in the preparation of these financial statements. Management must apply significant judgment in this process. In addition, other factors may affect estimates, including expected business and operational changes, sensitivity and volatility associated with the assumptions used in developing estimates, and whether historical trends are expected to be representative of future trends. The estimation process often may yield a range of potentially reasonable estimates of the ultimate future outcomes and management must select an amount that falls within that range of reasonable estimates. This process may result in actual results differing materially from those estimated amounts used in the preparation of the financial statements if these results differ from historical experience, or other assumptions do not turn out to be substantially accurate, even if such assumptions are reasonable when made.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by program for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
Other research and development expenses primarily consist of employee salaries and benefits, facilities and overhead costs, and expenses for terminated programs. For the year ended December 31, 2018, all employee salaries and
benefits were allocated to Other research and development expenses whereas for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, a majority of employee salaries and benefits were allocated between the respective programs in the table above.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of salaries and related costs for personnel in executive, finance, commercial and operational functions, including stock based compensation and travel expenses. Other general and administrative expenses include pre-commercialization costs, facility related costs, insurance expense, professional fees for legal and accounting services and patent filing and prosecution costs. General and administrative expenses are expensed when incurred.
Interest and Amortization of Debt Discount Expense
Interest and amortization of debt discount expense primarily consists of cash interest and non-cash costs related to our term loans (see “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for a further discussion). We amortize these costs over the term of our debt agreements as interest expense in our consolidated statement of operations. Interest and amortization of debt discount expense also includes interest income earned on cash.
Tax Credit
The tax credits represent the receipt by Axsome Therapeutics Australia PTY, LTD, our Australian subsidiary, of the Australia Tax Incentive Credit, related to allowable research and development expenses incurred for our product candidates.
Loss on extinguishment of debt
We recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt in connection with the repayment and retirement of our previous SVB Loan. The new Hercules Term Loan was considered substantially different from the SVB Loan, as such, the repayment qualified for extinguishment accounting. The loss on extinguishment of debt recorded represents the prepayment premium, the unamortized discount of the SVB Loan and the write-off of deferred financing costs.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liability
The warrants to purchase our common stock issued as part of the registered direct stock offering in December 2017 were classified as a warrant liability and recorded at fair value. The warrant liability was subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date and any change in fair value was recognized in our statements of operations as a change in fair value of the warrant liability. The warrants expired on December 11, 2018.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America, or GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reported period. In accordance with GAAP, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this report, we believe the following accounting policies are the most critical to the judgments and estimates we use in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for our research and development employees, costs incurred to third-party service providers
for the conduct of research, preclinical and clinical studies, laboratory supplies, product license fees, consulting and other related expenses. We estimate research, preclinical and clinical study expenses based on services performed, pursuant to contracts with third-party research and development organizations that conduct and manage research, preclinical and clinical activities on our behalf. We estimate these expenses based on discussions with internal management personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of services and the contracted fees to be paid for such services. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the original estimates, we will adjust the accrual accordingly. Payments associated with licensing agreements to acquire licenses to develop, use, manufacture and commercialize products that have not reached technological feasibility and do not have alternative future use are expensed as incurred. Payments made to third parties under these arrangements in advance of the performance of the related services by the third parties are recorded as prepaid expenses until the services are rendered.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to the differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, operating losses, and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Valuation allowances are provided if, based upon the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination based on the technical merits of the position as well as consideration of the available facts and circumstances. When uncertain tax positions exist, we recognize the tax benefit of tax positions to the extent that the benefit will more likely than not be realized. As of December 31, 2020, we do not believe any material uncertain tax positions are present.
As of December 31, 2020, we had U.S. federal net operating loss, or NOL carryforwards of approximately $249 million. NOLs amounting to $60 million generated before the 2018 tax year will start expiring beginning 2032, and the NOLs of approximately $189 million generated in 2018 and later have an indefinite carryforward period.
Utilization of the NOLs may be subject to a substantial annual limitation due to ownership change limitations provided by the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. The annual limitation for net operating losses incurred before the 2018 tax year may result in expiration before we can use them. We have recorded a valuation allowance on all of our deferred tax assets.
Stock-based compensation
For issued stock options, we estimate the grant date fair value of each option using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The Black-Scholes model takes into account the expected volatility of our common stock, the risk-free interest rate, the estimated life of the option, the closing market price of our common stock, expected dividend yield and the exercise price. The estimates utilized in the Black-Scholes calculation involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. In addition, we recognize expense for equity award forfeitures as they occur. For awards subject to service-based vesting conditions, we recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting term. For awards subject to performance-based vesting conditions, we recognize stock-based compensation expense using the accelerated attribution method when it is probable that the performance condition will be achieved. The expense related to the stock-based compensation is recorded within the financial statement line item the grantee’s cash compensation is recorded in.
Our policy upon exercise of stock options is that shares will be issued as new shares drawing on our 2015 Omnibus Incentive Compensation Plan share pool that was adopted by the stockholders in November 2015.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Research and Development Expenses. Our research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $70.2 million, compared to $53.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $16.6 million. R&D expense during the 2020 fiscal year included a one-time charge of $10.2 million for the Pfizer license agreement, of which $7.2 million was non-cash related. The remaining increase was due primarily to spend for clinical trials active in the beginning of the year which included the ADVANCE-1, INTERCEPT, and STRIDE-1 trials, close-out costs for our previously completed GEMINI, MOMENTUM, and CONCERT trials, costs associated with the COMET and MOVEMENT open-label safety and efficacy studies, and costs of studies to support our anticipated new drug application submissions for AXS-05 and AXS-07.
General and Administrative Expenses. Our general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $28.9 million, compared to $13.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $15.3 million. The increase was primarily due to increased stock compensation expense, along with the build-out of the commercial function.
Interest and Amortization of Debt Discount Expense. Interest and amortization of debt discount expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2.6 million, compared to $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $1.4 million. The increase was driven by a higher outstanding principal amount on our debt in 2020 as compared to 2019. The higher principal balance reflects our September 2020 loan and security agreement with Hercules from which we have drawn down $50 million as of December 31, 2020.
Tax Credit. Tax credit income for the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 was $0.1 million. This income represents the receipt by Axsome Therapeutics Australia PTY LTD, our Australian subsidiary, of the Australia Tax Incentive Credit related to the 2019 and 2018 research and development expenses incurred for our product candidates.
Loss on extinguishment of debt. In September 2020, we entered into the Loan Agreement with Hercules. A portion of the first tranche, which was funded upon execution of the 2020 Term Loan, was used to repay our 2019 Term Loan with SVB. As a result of the repayment of the 2019 Term Loan, we recorded a loss on the extinguishment of debt of approximately $1.2 million representing the difference between the amount paid to SVB and the carrying amount of the 2019 Term Loan. Included in the loss on extinguishment of debt is the prepayment premium, the unamortized discount and the write-off of deferred financing costs.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018:
Research and Development Expenses. Our research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $53.6 million, compared to $23.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $30.1 million. This increase was primarily due to trials that were initiated and completed in 2019, which included the GEMINI, MOMENTUM, and CONCERT trials, along with the initiation of the INTERCEPT and AXS-05 and AXS-07 open-label safety studies in 2019. Additionally, the 2019 expense included ongoing spend for our previously initiated clinical trials, which included STRIDE-1 and ADVANCE-1.
General and Administrative Expenses. Our general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $13.6 million, as compared to $9.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $4.2 million. The change was primarily due to personnel costs, mainly associated with an increase in stock compensation expense, along with the build-out of the commercial function.
Interest and Amortization of Debt Discount Expense. Interest and amortization of debt discount expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $1.2 million, as compared to $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $0.1 million. The increase was primarily related to higher interest expense and amortization of the debt discount associated with our March 2019 loan and security agreement with SVB for $20 million, offset by interest income from our cash sweep account.
Tax Credit. Tax credit income for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $0.1 million, as compared to $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, a decrease of $0.1 million. This decrease reflects the receipt by Axsome Therapeutics Australia PTY LTD, our Australian subsidiary, of the Australia Tax Incentive Credit related to the 2018 and 2017 research and development expenses incurred for our product candidates.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liability. For the year ended December 31, 2018, we recorded income of $2.8 million from the change in fair value of our warrant liability in connection with the warrants issued as part of our December 2017 registered direct offering. The change in fair value in 2018 is due to the decrease of our closing stock price over the course of the year, from when the warrants were initially issued in December 2017. These warrants expired in December 2018.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception through December 31, 2020, we have financed our operations primarily through proceeds from equity offerings and debt borrowings. See discussion below.
In November 2015, we completed our IPO, in which we sold 5,666,667 shares of common stock at an offering price to the public of $9.00 per share. We received gross proceeds of approximately $51.0 million and net proceeds of approximately $45.5 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering-related transaction costs.
In November 2016, we entered into a loan and security agreement with SVB for a term loan of up to $20.0 million, which we refer to as the Original Term Loan. The initial tranche of $10.0 million was funded shortly after executing the loan agreement. Because we did not achieve the conditional criteria to access the second and third tranches before the specified dates, the $10.0 million in additional term loan advances expired. In November 2018, we amended the loan and security agreement with SVB to provide an additional $4 million growth capital loan, related to our narcolepsy clinical program with AXS-12. We refer to this amendment as the First Amendment to the Original Term Loan. The additional capital was available to be drawn, at our option, subject to the achievement of a specified clinical milestone. Our obligations under the loan and security agreement, as amended, along with our ability to draw down on the additional $4.0 million tranche, were subsequently extinguished in connection with the establishment of a new term loan facility with SVB during March 2019 (see below).
On December 1, 2016, we filed a shelf registration statement with the SEC for the issuance of common stock, preferred stock, warrants, rights, debt securities and units up to an aggregate amount of $150.0 million, which we refer to as the 2016 Shelf Registration Statement. On December 16, 2016, the 2016 Shelf Registration Statement was declared effective by the SEC. As discussed in greater detail below, we completed an offering of common stock in March 2017, entered into a sales agreement in October 2017 pursuant to which we sold shares of our common stock from time to time in an at-the-market offering until completion of the offering in January 2019, completed a registered direct offering priced at the market in December 2017 and September 2018, entered into a sales agreement in May 2019 pursuant to which we sold shares of our common stock from time to time in an at-the-market offering each utilizing the 2016 Shelf Registration Statement. The 2016 Shelf Registration expired in December 2019.
In March 2017, we completed an underwritten public offering, whereby we sold 4,304,813 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $3.74 per share. We received gross proceeds of approximately $16.1 million and net proceeds of approximately $14.8 million, net of underwriting discounts and offering expenses.
In October 2017, we entered into an “at-the-market” sales agreement, or the Sales Agreement, with Leerink Partners LLC, or now known as SVB Leerink, pursuant to which we could sell up to $30 million in shares of our common stock from time to time through SVB Leerink, acting as our sales agent, in one or more at-the-market offerings. In January 2019, we raised approximately $25.8 million in gross proceeds through the sale of 3,164,015 shares under the Sales Agreement. Upon completion of this final sale, the Sales Agreement was automatically terminated. SVB Leerink received a commission of 3.0% of the gross proceeds for all shares sold under the Sales Agreement.
In December 2017, we completed a registered direct offering priced at the market, whereby we sold an aggregate of $9.5 million worth of units, or Units, at a purchase price of $5.325 per Unit, with each Unit consisting of (i) one share of our common stock, and (ii) a warrant to purchase one share of our common stock, or Common Warrant, at an exercise price equal to $5.25 per share. We sold an aggregate of 1,783,587 Units in the offering for gross proceeds of approximately $9.5 million and net proceeds of approximately $8.8 million, net of underwriting discounts and offering expenses. Additionally, we issued warrants to purchase up to 107,015 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $6.6562 per share to certain investors affiliated with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC, placement agent for the offering, which we refer to as the Placement Agent Warrants. The Placement Agent Warrants had the same terms as the Common Warrants, except for the difference in exercise price noted above. Both the Common Warrants and the Placement Agent Warrants expired on December 11, 2018.
In September 2018, we entered into a purchase agreement with certain institutional and accredited investors, which we refer to as the RDO Investors, for the sale by us directly to the RDO Investors of an aggregate of 2,966,667 shares of our common stock, at a purchase price of $3.00 per share, which we refer to as the 2018 Registered Direct Offering, for gross proceeds of approximately $8.9 million. The 2018 Registered Direct Offering closed on October 1, 2018, and we received estimated net proceeds of approximately $8.8 million, after deducting transaction expenses. The 2,966,667 shares of common stock sold in the 2018 Registered Direct Offering were offered and sold by us directly to the RDO Investors, without a placement agent, underwriter, broker or dealer.
In March 2019, we entered into a loan and security agreement, the 2019 Term Loan with SVB and WestRiver Innovation Lending Fund VIII, L.P., or WestRiver, for a term loan up to $24.0 million. The initial tranche of $20.0 million was funded shortly after executing the loan agreement. The second tranche of $4.0 million was available to be drawn, at our option, subject to the achievement of positive data, on or prior to August 15, 2019, with respect to our ongoing Phase 2 clinical trial for AXS-12 in narcolepsy, sufficient to submit a Phase 3 protocol to FDA, provided that we had not received any objections from the FDA within thirty days after submission of such Phase 3 protocol A portion of the initial tranche was used to satisfy our existing obligations under our November 2016 term loan facility with SVB, as amended in November 2018, and such obligations are considered fully repaid and extinguished. In September 2020, we terminated and repaid all amounts outstanding under 2019 Term Loan in connection with our entry into the Loan Agreement (see below).
In May 2019, we entered into the May 2019 Sales Agreement with SVB Leerink, pursuant to which we may sell up to $50 million in shares of our common stock from time to time through SVB Leerink, acting as our sales agent, in one or more at-the-market offerings utilizing the 2016 Shelf Registration Statement. SVB Leerink is entitled to receive a commission of 3.0% of the gross proceeds for any shares sold under the May 2019 Sales Agreement. Due to expiration of the 2016 Shelf Registration Statement, the shares that were unsold under the May 2019 Sales Agreement, were rolled over to the December 2019 Sales Agreement (see below).
In July 2019, we entered into the first amendment to the 2019 Term Loan, or the First Amendment to the 2019 Term Loan. Under the First Amendment to the 2019 Term Loan, the interest-only monthly payment period of the 2019 Term Loan was extended to 18 months after the date of the 2019 Term Loan, which could have been further extended to 24 months upon receipt by us of the Term B Loan Advance. Our ability to draw down the Term B Loan Advance was extended to December 31, 2019, subject to our achievement of the Milestone Event prior to or on December 31, 2019. The Loan Advances mature on February 1, 2023. See the subsection titled “July 2019 First Amendment to Loan and Security Agreement - Silicon Valley Bank” under the “Contractual Obligations and Commitments” section below for a further description of the First Amendment to the 2019 Term Loan.
On December 5, 2019, we filed an automatic shelf registration statement with the SEC for the issuance of common stock, preferred stock, warrants, rights, debt securities and units up to an unlimited amount, which we refer to as the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement. It was declared effective by the SEC upon filing. As discussed in greater detail below, we entered into a sales agreement in December 2019 pursuant to which we sold shares of our common stock from time to time in an at-the-market offering and completed an offering of common stock in December 2019, each utilizing the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement. In the future, we may conduct additional offerings of one or more of these securities utilizing the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement in such amounts, prices and terms to be announced when and if the securities are offered. At the time any of our securities covered by the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement are offered for sale, a prospectus supplement will be prepared and filed with the SEC containing specific information about the terms of any such offering.
In December 2019, we entered into the December 2019 Sales Agreement with SVB Leerink, pursuant to which we may sell up to $80 million in shares of our common stock from time to time through SVB Leerink, acting as our sales agent, in one or more at-the-market offerings utilizing the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement. SVB Leerink is entitled to receive a commission of 3.0% of the gross proceeds for any shares sold under the December 2019 Sales Agreement. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company received approximately $14.6 million in gross proceeds through the sale of 167,243 shares, of which net proceeds were approximately $14.1 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we received approximately $7.3 million in gross proceeds through the sale of 89,390 shares, of which net proceeds were approximately $7.1 million.
In December 2019, we completed an underwritten public offering, whereby we sold 2,300,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $87.00 per share. We received gross proceeds of approximately $200.1 million and net proceeds of approximately $187.1 million, net of underwriting discounts and offering expenses.
In September 2020, we entered into the Loan Agreement with Hercules for the 2020 Term Loan, which consists of several tranches in an aggregate amount of up to $225.0 million. The first tranche consists of term loans in the amount of $60.0 million, of which $50.0 million was funded shortly after executing the Loan Agreement and the remaining $10.0 million is available at our option at any time through September 15, 2021. A portion of the initial tranche was used to repay the 2019 Term Loan along with associated final payment fees. The remaining $115 million may be drawn at our option, in three separate tranches, as described below under “Contractual Obligations - September 2020 Loan and Security Agreement - Hercules.” An additional $50 million is available, subject to the approval of Hercules, to support future strategic initiatives, including further pipeline advancement or expansion. The 2020 Term Loan bears interest at a calculated prime-based variable rate currently at 9.15%. It matures in October 2025 and has an initial interest-only payment period of 30 months, which may be extended to up to 48 months upon the drawing of future tranches.
In the future, we may conduct additional offerings of one or more of the securities covered by the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement in such amounts, prices and terms to be announced when and if the securities are offered. At the time any of our securities covered by the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement are offered for sale, a prospectus supplement will be prepared and filed with the SEC containing specific information about the terms of any such offering.
We believe our current cash, along with the committed capital from the Hercules Loan Agreement, will be sufficient to fund our anticipated operations, based on our current operating plans which includes costs for the commercial launch of AXS-05 in MDD and AXS-07 in migraine into at least 2024. Because the process of commercializing products and evaluating product candidates in clinical trials is costly and the timing of progress in these trials is uncertain, it is possible that the assumptions upon which we have based this estimate may prove to be wrong, and we could use our capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our primary sources and uses of cash for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities. Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $78.5 million as compared to $46.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $32.1 million in net cash used was primarily related to higher research and development spend related to multiple product candidates in clinical trials as well as costs related to preparations for our anticipated NDA submissions, the build-out of the commercial function and the upfront cash payment of $3.0 million to Pfizer.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $46.4 million as compared to $30.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase of $16.3 million in net cash used was primarily related to higher research and development spend related to multiple product candidates in clinical trials.
Investing Activities. Cash used in investing activities for the purchase of equipment was less than $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $42.4 million, which included proceeds from the 2020 Term Loan of $50.0 million, net proceeds from the sale of common stock through the December 2019 Sales Agreement of $14.1 million and proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon exercise of employee stock options of $1.0 million. These proceeds were offset by the repayment of the March 2019 term loan with SVB of $21.7 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $252.4 million, which includes net proceeds from the sale of common stock in the December 2019 public offering of $187.1 million, $51.6
million in proceeds from sales made through at-the market offerings, $1.4 million from the exercise of options and warrants, and $20.0 million in proceeds from our March 2019 term loan which was partially offset by principal repayment on our term loan of $7.2 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2018 was $10.0 million, which includes net proceeds from the sale of common stock in the October 2018 registered direct offering of $8.8 million, $4.1 million in proceeds from sales made through at-the-market offerings, as well as $0.5 million from the exercise of options and warrants, partially offset by principal repayment on our term loan of $3.3 million.
Funding requirements
We have not achieved profitability since our inception and we expect to continue to incur significant losses for the foreseeable future. We expect our losses to increase as we continue the development of and seek regulatory approvals for our product candidates and begin to commercialize any approved products. We are subject to all of the risks pertinent to the development of new product candidates, and we may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays, and other unknown factors that may harm our business.
We may need to raise additional financing in the future to fund our operations. In the event that we need additional financing, we may incur additional debt, license certain intellectual property, and seek to sell additional equity or convertible securities that may result in dilution to our stockholders. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of equity or convertible securities, these securities could have rights or preferences senior to those of our common stock and could contain covenants that restrict our operations. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional equity or debt financing on terms acceptable to us, if at all. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
the scope, rate of progress, results, and cost of our clinical studies and other related activities;
•
our ability to enter into collaborative agreements for the development and commercialization of our product candidates;
•
the number and development requirements of any other product candidates that we pursue;
•
the costs, timing, and outcome of regulatory reviews of our product candidates;
•
the costs and timing of future commercialization activities, including product manufacturing, marketing, sales, and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
•
any product liability or other lawsuits related to our product candidates;
•
the expenses needed to attract and retain skilled personnel;
•
the general and administrative expenses related to being a public company;
•
the revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval; and
•
the costs involved in preparing, filing, and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights, and defending our intellectual property-related claims.
Please see “Risk Factors” for additional risks associated with our substantial capital requirements.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following is a summary of our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
License agreement with Pfizer
In January 2020, we entered into a license agreement with Pfizer. Under the terms of our exclusive license agreement with Pfizer, Pfizer received 82,019 shares of our common stock having a value of $8.0 million, based on the average closing price of the Company’s common stock for the 10 prior trading days of $97.538, in consideration for the license and rights. Pfizer also received an upfront cash payment of $3.0 million and will also receive up to $323 million upon the achievement of certain regulatory and sales milestones, and tiered mid-single to low double-digit royalties on future sales. Pfizer will also have a right of first negotiation on any potential future strategic transactions involving AXS-12 and AXS-14. For a more detailed description of these agreements, please see “Business-Material License Agreements.”
License agreements with Antecip Bioventures
Under three exclusive license agreements with Antecip Bioventures II LLC, or Antecip, an entity owned by our Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board, Herriot Tabuteau, M.D., we are obligated to make specified royalty payments ranging from 1.5% to 4.5%, subject to up to a 50% reduction depending on required payments to third parties, on net sales of licensed products. The amount, timing, and likelihood of such payments are not known. For a more detailed description of these agreements, please see “Business-Material License Agreements.”
November 2016 Loan and Security Agreement-Silicon Valley Bank
In November 2016, we entered into the 2016 Original Term Loan with SVB and Life Sciences Loans, LLC, for a term loan of up to $20.0 million. The initial tranche of $10.0 million was funded shortly after executing the loan agreement. We were scheduled to make interest only payments on the loan until December 1, 2017, which could have been extended under certain circumstances. Under the terms of the loan, we had the opportunity, but not the obligation to, draw two additional tranches of $5.0 million each prior to November 9, 2017 and December 31, 2017, subject to the achievement of certain clinical and financial milestones. Because we did not achieve the conditional criteria to access the second and third tranches before the specified dates, the $10.0 million in additional term loan advances expired.
The 2016 Original Term Loan accrued interest at an annual rate equal to 4.50% plus the prime rate, which was the greater of 3.50% or the Wall Street Journal prime rate, and was payable monthly. Following the interest only payment period, we began making monthly payments of principal and interest. In addition, we were required to pay a final payment fee of 8.5% of the principal amount extended to us on the date of repayment of the outstanding loan.
We were permitted to prepay all, but not less than all, of the 2016 Original Term Loan subject to a prepayment premium of 3.0% of the outstanding principal if prepaid within two years of the effective date of the loan, 2.0% of the outstanding principal if prepaid during the third year of the loan, and 1.0% of the outstanding principal if prepaid after the third year. The term loan was collateralized by a security interest in all of our assets except intellectual property. Our intellectual property was subject to a negative pledge.
In connection with the loan, SVB and Life Science Loans, LLC, received warrants to purchase an aggregate 65,228 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $7.41 per share, which were exercisable for seven years from the date of issuance.
We allocated the proceeds of $10.0 million based on the relative fair values of the debt instrument and the warrant instrument. The relative fair value of the warrants of approximately $0.3 million at the time of issuance, which
was determined using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, was recorded as additional paid-in capital and reduced the carrying value of the debt. The discount on the debt was being amortized to interest expense over the term of the debt.
In November 2018, we amended the 2016 Original Term Loan with SVB and WestRiver Innovation Lending Fund VIII, L.P, to provide an additional $4 million growth capital loan, related to our narcolepsy clinical program with AXS-12. The additional capital was available to be drawn, at our option, subject to the achievement of a specified clinical milestone. In connection with the 2016 Amended Term Loan, SVB and WestRiver received warrants to purchase an aggregate 15,750 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $3.06 per share, which were exercisable for seven years from the date of issuance.
Our obligations under the 2016 Amended Term Loan, along with the ability to draw down on the additional $4.0 million tranche, were considered to be performed and completed in connection with the establishment of the 2019 Term Loan during March 2019.
March 2019 Loan and Security Agreement-Silicon Valley Bank
In March 2019, we entered into the 2019 Term Loan with SVB and WestRiver consisting of an initial $20.0 million tranche, which was funded shortly upon closing, with the remaining $4.0 million available to be drawn, at our option, subject to the achievement of positive data, on or prior to August 15, 2019, with respect to our ongoing Phase 2 clinical trial for AXS-12 in narcolepsy, sufficient to submit a Phase 3 protocol to the FDA, provided that we have not received any objections from the FDA within thirty days after submission of such Phase 3 protocol. A portion of the first tranche was used to satisfy our then-existing obligations under our 2016 Amended Term Loan and such obligations are considered to be fully repaid and completed.
The 2019 Term Loan accrued interest on the unpaid principal balance of the outstanding loan advances at a floating per annum rate equal to the greater of (i) seven and one-half of one percent (7.50%) and (ii) two percent (2.0%) above the prime rate and is payable monthly. The 2019 Term Loan initially had an interest-only monthly payment period for twelve months which was extendable to 18 months upon drawing of the second tranche. Following the interest only payment period, we would have begun making monthly payments of principal and interest. In addition, we were initially required to pay a final payment fee of 6.0% of the principal amount extended to us on the date of repayment of the outstanding loan, which was increased to 6.3% in connection with the First Amendment to the 2019 Term Loan, as described below.
We were permitted to prepay all, but not less than all, of the 2019 Term Loan, subject to a prepayment premium of 3.0% of the outstanding principal if prepaid within one year of the effective date of the loan, 2.0% of the outstanding principal if prepaid after the first anniversary of the effective date but on prior to the second anniversary of the effective date, and 1.0% of the outstanding principal if prepaid after the second anniversary of the effective date. The term loan was collateralized by a security interest in all of our assets except intellectual property. Our intellectual property was subject to a negative pledge.
In connection with the 2019 Term Loan, SVB and WestRiver received warrants, or the March 2019 Warrants, to purchase an aggregate 70,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $8.10 per share, which were exercisable for seven years from the date of issuance. The warrants were to be earned based upon the usage of the facility and are exercisable until March 4, 2026. The warrants were classified as a component of stockholders’ equity, of which 58,332 warrants were immediately exercisable and the remaining 11,668 warrants would be earned upon drawing of the second $4.0 million tranche under the loan. In connection with the First Amendment to the 2019 Term Loan, the shares of common stock issuable under each of the March 2019 Warrants were fixed at 29,167 shares, as described further below.
We allocated the proceeds of $20.0 million based on the relative fair values of the debt instrument and the warrant instrument. The relative fair value of the warrants of approximately $0.4 million at the time of issuance, which was determined using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, was recorded as additional paid-in capital and reduced the carrying value of the debt. The discount on the debt was amortized to interest expense over the term of the debt.
July 2019 First Amendment to Loan and Security Agreement-Silicon Valley Bank
In July 2019, we entered into the First Amendment to the 2019 Term Loan. Under the First Amendment to the 2019 Term Loan, the interest-only monthly payment period of the 2019 Term Loan was extended to 18 months after the date of the 2019 Term Loan, which may be further extended to 24 months upon receipt by us of the Term B Loan Advance. Our ability to draw down the Term B Loan Advance was extended to December 31, 2019, subject to our achievement of the Milestone Event prior to or on December 31, 2019. The Loan Advances matured on February 1, 2023.
Pursuant to the 2019 Term Loan, as amended by the First Amendment to the 2019 Term Loan, following the interest-only payment period, we would have begun making monthly payments of principal in equal monthly installments for 30 consecutive months (provided, that, upon the occurrence of the Milestone Event, the repayment schedule will be decreased to 24 consecutive months) and monthly payments of interest, until the Maturity Date. Interest accrued on the unpaid principal balance of the outstanding Loan Advances at a floating per annum rate equal to the greater of (i) seven and one-half of one percent (7.50%) and (ii) two percent (2.0%) above the prime rate. The First Amendment to the 2019 Term Loan increased the final payment fee, payable upon our repayment of the Loan Advances from 6.0% to 6.30% of the original principal amount of the Loan Advances.
We could have prepaid all, but not less than all of the Loan Advances, subject to a prepayment fee of 3.0% of any amount prepaid prior to the first anniversary of July 25, 2019, or the First Amendment Effective Date, 2.0% of the amount prepaid if the prepayment occurs after the first anniversary of the First Amendment Effective Date through and including the second anniversary of the First Amendment Effective Date, or 1.0% of the amount prepaid if the prepayment occurs after the second anniversary of the First Amendment Effective Date, but prior to the Maturity Date. These percentages were unchanged from the original 2019 Term Loan.
In connection with the First Amendment to the 2019 Term Loan, the March 2019 Warrants were amended to fix the number of shares that may be issued upon exercise of each such March 2019 Warrant at 29,167 shares of common stock, and SVB and WestRiver were issued the July 2019 Warrants, which become exercisable only upon funding of the Term B Loan Advance, to purchase 5,750 shares of our common stock at a price per share equal to $25.71. The July 2019 Warrants replace the portion of the March 2019 Warrants that could originally be earned by SVB and WestRiver upon funding of the Term B Loan Advance. The July 2019 Warrants, if earned, would have been exercisable until July 24, 2026 and would be exercised automatically on a net issuance basis if not exercised prior to the expiration date and if the then-current fair market value of one share of our common stock is greater than the exercise price then in effect.
September 2020 Loan and Security Agreement - Hercules
In September 2020, we entered into the Loan Agreement with Hercules, in its capacity as administrative agent and collateral agent and as a lender, and the other financial institutions that may from time to time become parties to the Loan Agreement as lenders, which we collectively refer to as the Lenders. The Loan Agreement provides for term loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $225.0 million under multiple tranches. The tranches consist of (i) a first tranche consisting of term loans in an aggregate principal amount of $60.0 million, of which $50.0 million, or the First Advance, was funded at closing, and of which the remaining $10.0 million is available at our option at any time through September 15, 2021; (ii) subject to the FDA approval of our AXS-05 product candidate for the treatment of major depressive disorder, or the First Milestone, a second tranche consisting of additional term loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $35.0 million, available at our option beginning on the date that the First Milestone is achieved through the earlier of (A) 181 days following such date and (B) June 30, 2022; (iii) subject to the approval of our AXS-07 product candidate for the treatment of migraine, or the Second Milestone, a third tranche consisting of additional term loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $20.0 million, available at our option beginning on the date that the Second Milestone is achieved through the earlier of (A) 181 days following such date and (B) June 30, 2022; (iv) subject to the achievement of either the First Milestone or the Second Milestone and so long as we are in compliance with a required ratio of Lender indebtedness to net product revenue, a fourth tranche consisting of additional term loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $60.0 million, available at our option beginning on January 1, 2022 and continuing through March 31, 2023; and (v) subject to approval by the Lenders in their discretion, a fifth tranche of additional term loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $50.0 million, available through December 31, 2023. We intend to use the proceeds of the Term Loan Advances for working capital and general corporate purposes. In addition, approximately $21.7 million of the proceeds from the First Advance was used to satisfy in full and retire our indebtedness under the 2019 Term Loan, as amended.
The outstanding principal balance of the term loans bears interest at an annual rate equal to the greater of either (i) the prime rate as reported in The Wall Street Journal plus 5.90% or (ii) 9.15%, subject to an ability by us, during certain periods, each such period a PIK Deferral Period, to request a reduction of the then-effective cash-pay interest rate by up to 1.00% per annum, which we refer to as the Cash Interest Reduction Amount. Accrued interest is payable monthly following the funding of each term loan. During each PIK Deferral Period, the term loans will bear cash-pay interest, at the reduced amount, and will accrue paid-in-kind interest at a rate equal to the Cash Interest Reduction Amount multiplied by 1.15, which amount will be capitalized and added to the outstanding principal balance of the term loans on each monthly interest payment date during the PIK Deferral Period. We are required to repay the term loans in equal installments of principal and interest commencing on May 1, 2023 through October 1, 2025, which is the Maturity Date. However, if either the First Milestone or the Second Milestone are achieved prior to May 1, 2023, and no default exists, the amortization commencement date will be automatically extended to November 1, 2023; if both the First Milestone and the Second Milestone are achieved prior to November 1, 2023, and no default exists, the amortization commencement date will be further automatically extended to May 1, 2024 and if any term loans are funded under the fourth tranche noted above prior to May 1, 2024, and no default exists, the amortization commencement date will be further automatically extended to November 1, 2024. On the Maturity Date, all unpaid term loans will be due and payable.
As collateral for the obligations, we have granted to Hercules a senior security interest in all our right, title, and interest in, to and under all of our property, inclusive of intellectual property, which includes one of our existing license agreements with Antecip, subject to limited exceptions. Antecip consented to the collateral assignment of the License Agreement, among other things, under a Direct Agreement with us and Hercules.
The Loan Agreement contains customary representations, warranties and covenants, including covenants by us limiting additional indebtedness, liens (including a negative pledge on intellectual property and other assets), guaranties, mergers and consolidations, substantial asset sales, investments and loans, certain corporate changes, transactions with affiliates and fundamental changes. At the initial closing, there were no applicable financial covenants contained in the Loan Agreement. Only after additional amounts are drawn down by us in the future, if we decide to do so, under the terms set forth in the Loan Agreement, there will be certain limited financial covenants that will apply, including:
•
Effective upon the date the outstanding principal amount of the advances under the Loan Agreement equals or exceeds $55.0 million, which has not yet occurred, we at all times thereafter must maintain cash in an account or accounts in which Hercules has a first priority security interest, in an aggregate amount greater than or equal to $15.0 million, plus the amount of our accounts payable under U.S. GAAP not paid after the 180th day following the invoice for such account payable which amount we refer to as the Qualified Cash A/P Amount.
•
Effective upon the later of (i) the last calendar month of the calendar quarter that is twelve months following the earlier of (x) the date that the First Milestone is achieved and (y) the date that the Second Milestone is achieved, or (ii) the date on which the outstanding principal amount of the term loan advances under the Loan Agreement is equal to or greater than $65.0 million, we are required to (A) ensure that at all times its market capitalization exceeds $2.0 billion, and that it maintains cash in an account which Hercules has a first priority security interest in an amount not less than 65% of the sum of the outstanding principal amount of the term loan advances plus the Qualified Cash A/P Amount, (B) ensure that at all times that it maintains cash in an account which Hercules has a first priority security interest in an amount not less than 100% of the sum of the outstanding principal amount of the term loan advances plus the Qualified Cash A/P Amount, or (C) achieve at least 60% of the net product revenue solely from the sale of AXS-05 and AXS-07 (which may include royalty, profit sharing, or sales-based milestone revenue recognized in accordance with GAAP, but will not include any upfront or non-sales-based milestone payments under business development or licensing transactions), measured on a trailing six-month basis as of the date of our most recent quarterly financial statement, determined on a quarterly basis.
•
Restrictions on our ability to incur additional indebtedness, pay dividends, encumber its intellectual property, or engage in certain fundamental business transactions, such as mergers or acquisitions of other businesses, with certain exceptions.
Our obligations under the Loan Agreement are subject to acceleration upon the occurrence of specified events of default, including payment default, insolvency and a material adverse change in our business, operations or financial or other condition.
In addition, we are required to pay a final payment fee equal to the greater of (A) $2,910,000 and (B) 4.85% of the aggregate amount of all term loan advances minus the aggregate amount of repayments made. The final payment fee is being accreted and amortized into interest expense using the effective interest rate method over the term of the loan.
We may, at our option prepay the term loans in full or in part, subject to a prepayment penalty equal to (i) 2.0% of the principal amount prepaid if the prepayment occurs prior to the first anniversary of the initial closing, (ii) 1.5% of the principal amount prepaid if the prepayment occurs on or after the first anniversary and prior to the second anniversary of the initial closing, and (iii) 1.0% of the principal amount prepaid if the prepayment occurs on or after the second anniversary and prior to the third anniversary of the initial closing.
Shelf Registration Statement
On December 5, 2019, we filed a Form S-3ASR (File No. 333-235372) with the SEC, or the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement, for the issuance of common stock, preferred stock, warrants, rights, debt securities and units, which became effective immediately upon filing. At the time any of the securities covered by the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement are offered for sale, a prospectus supplement will be prepared and filed with the SEC containing specific information about the terms of any such offering.
Impact of the CARES Act
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was enacted and signed into law, and GAAP requires recognition of the tax effects of new legislation during the reporting period that
includes the enactment date. The CARES Act, among other things, includes changes to the tax provisions that benefits business entities and makes certain technical corrections to the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, including, permitting net operating losses (“NOLs”), carryovers and carrybacks to offset 100% of taxable income for taxable years beginning before 2021. In addition, the CARES Act allows NOLs incurred in 2018, 2019, and 2020 to be carried back to each of the five preceding taxable years to generate a refund of previously paid income taxes. The CARES Act provides other reliefs and stimulus measures. We have evaluated the impact of the CARES Act, however, at present we do not expect that any provision of the CARES Act would result in a material cash benefit to us or have a material impact on our financial statements or internal controls over financial reporting.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
In December 2019, a novel coronavirus known as SARS-CoV-2 was first detected in Wuhan, Hubei Province, People’s Republic of China, causing outbreaks of the coronavirus disease, known as COVID-19, that has now spread globally. On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared COVID-19 a public health emergency. The Secretary of Health and Human Services declared a public health emergency in the United States on January 31, 2020, under section 319 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247d), in response to the COVID-19 outbreak. On March 11, 2020, the WHO declared COVID-19 a pandemic.
Operations and Liquidity
The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is unknown and rapidly evolving. While the potential economic impact brought by and over the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic may be difficult to assess or predict, the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in significant disruption of global financial markets, which could in the future negatively affect our liquidity. In addition, a recession or market volatility resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic could affect our business. We have taken proactive, aggressive action throughout the COVID-19 pandemic to protect the health and safety of our employees, and expect to continue to implement these measures until we determine that the COVID-19 pandemic is adequately contained for purposes of our business. We may take further actions as government authorities require or recommend or as we determine to be in the best interests of our employees. To date, the COVID-19 pandemic has not had significant effects on the progression of our clinical trials. Given the nature and type of our short-term investments, we do not believe that the COVID-19 pandemic will have a material impact on our current investment liquidity.
Outlook
Although there is uncertainty related to the anticipated impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our future results, we believe our current cash reserves, coupled with our access to additional capital through the December 2019 Sales Agreement, leave us well-positioned to manage our business through this crisis as it continues to unfold. However, the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic are broad-reaching and continuing and the financial impacts associated with the COVID-19 pandemic are still uncertain.
As a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and its dynamic nature, including uncertainties relating to the ultimate geographic spread of the virus, the severity of the disease, the duration of the pandemic, and actions that have been or may be taken by governmental authorities to contain the pandemic or to treat its impact, it is difficult to forecast the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results for the fiscal year ending December 31, 2020.
Despite the economic uncertainty resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, we intend to continue to focus on the development of our product candidates. We continue to monitor the rapidly evolving situation and guidance from international and domestic authorities, including federal, state and local public health authorities and we may take additional actions based on their recommendations. In these circumstances, there may be developments outside of our control requiring us to adjust our operating plan. As such, given the dynamic nature of this situation, we cannot reasonably estimate the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows in the future.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined by applicable SEC regulations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements.