ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following management’s discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our historical financial statements and the related notes thereto. This management’s discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Any statements that are not statements of historical fact are forward-looking statements. When used, the words “believe,” “plan,” “intend,” “anticipate,” “target,” “estimate,” “expect” and the like, and/or future tense or conditional constructions (“will,” “may,” “could,” “should,” etc.), or similar expressions, identify certain of these forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, including those under “Risk Factors” in our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) that could cause actual results or events to differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors. See “Forward-Looking Statements.”
References in this management’s discussion and analysis to “we,” “us,” “our,” “our Company” or “AYRO” refer to AYRO, Inc. and its subsidiaries.
Overview
Merger
On May 28, 2020, pursuant to the previously announced Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated December 19, 2019 (the “Merger Agreement”), by and among AYRO, Inc., a Delaware corporation previously known as DropCar, Inc., ABC Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“Merger Sub”), and AYRO Operating Company (“AYRO Operating”), a Delaware corporation previously known as AYRO, Inc., Merger Sub was merged with and into AYRO Operating, with AYRO Operating continuing after the merger as the surviving entity and a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (the “Merger”). At the effective time of the Merger, without any action on the part of any stockholder, each issued and outstanding share of AYRO Operating’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share (“AYRO Operating Common Stock”), including shares underlying AYRO Operating’s outstanding equity awards and warrants, was converted into the right to receive 1.3634 pre-split and pre-stock dividend shares (the “Exchange Ratio”) of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (“Company Common Stock”). As part of the Merger, we received cash of $3.06 million in consideration for 2,337,663 shares of common stock. Upon completion of the Merger and the transactions contemplated in the Merger Agreement and assuming the exercise in full of all pre-funded warrants issued pursuant thereto, (i) the former AYRO Operating equity holders (including the investors in a bridge financing and private placements that closed prior to closing of the Merger) owned approximately 79% of the outstanding equity of the Company; (ii) former DropCar stockholders owned approximately 18% of the outstanding equity of the Company; and (iii) a financial advisor to DropCar and AYRO owned approximately 3% of the outstanding equity of the Company.
The Merger was treated as a reverse recapitalization effected by a share exchange for financial accounting and reporting purposes because substantially all of DropCar, Inc.’s operations were disposed of as part of the consummation of the Merger and therefore no goodwill or other intangible assets were recorded by the Company as a result of the Merger. AYRO Operating was treated as the accounting acquirer as its stockholders controlled the Company after the Merger, even though DropCar, Inc. was the legal acquirer. As a result, the assets and liabilities and the historical operations that are reflected in our consolidated financial statements are those of AYRO Operating as if AYRO Operating had always been the reporting company.
Reverse Stock Split and Stock Dividend
On May 28, 2020, immediately following the effective time of the Merger, we effected a reverse stock split of the issued and outstanding shares of our common stock, at a ratio of one share for ten shares (the “Reverse Stock Split”). Immediately following the Reverse Stock Split, we issued a stock dividend of one share of the Company’s common stock for each outstanding share of common stock to all holders of record immediately following the effective time of the Reverse Stock Split (the “Stock Dividend”). The net result of the Reverse Stock Split and the Stock Dividend was a 1-for-5 reverse stock split. We made proportionate adjustments to the per share exercise price and/or the number of shares issuable upon the exercise or vesting of all stock options, restricted stock units (if any) and warrants outstanding as of the effective times of the Reverse Stock Split and the Stock Dividend in accordance with the terms of each security based on the split or dividend ratio. Also, we reduced the number of shares reserved for issuance under our equity compensation plans proportionately based on the split and dividend ratios. Except for adjustments that resulted from the rounding up of fractional shares to the next whole share, the Reverse Stock Split and Stock Dividend affected all stockholders uniformly and did not change any stockholder’s percentage ownership interest in the Company. The Reverse Stock Split did not alter the par value of Company Common Stock, $0.0001 per share, or modify any voting rights or other terms of the common stock. Except as otherwise set forth herein, share and related option or warrant information presented in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations have been adjusted to reflect the reduced number of shares outstanding, the increase in share price which resulted from these actions or otherwise to give effect to the Reverse Stock Split and the Stock Dividend.
Transactions Related to the Merger
Simultaneous with the signing of the Merger Agreement, accredited investors, including certain investors in DropCar, purchased $1.0 million of AYRO Operating’s convertible bridge notes bearing interest at the rate of 5% per annum (the “Bridge Notes”). The Bridge Notes automatically converted into 1,030,585 shares of AYRO Operating Common Stock immediately prior to the consummation of the Merger representing an aggregate of 7.45% of the outstanding common stock of the combined company after giving effect to the Merger. Pursuant to the terms of the Bridge Notes, immediately prior to the closing of the Merger, the five lenders received warrants to purchase 1,030,585 shares of AYRO Operating Common Stock at an exercise price of $1.1159 per share. In conjunction with the bridge notes, we issued Palladium Capital Advisors, LLC (together with its affiliates, “Palladium”), our advisor, a warrant to purchase 72,141 shares of the Company’s common stock at an exercise price of $1.1159 per share.
In addition, immediately prior to the execution and delivery of the Merger Agreement, AYRO Operating entered into agreements with accredited investors, including certain stockholders of DropCar, pursuant to which such investors agreed to purchase, prior to the consummation of the Merger, 543,179 shares of AYRO Operating Common Stock (or common stock equivalents or pre-funded warrants to purchase 429,305 shares of Company Common Stock) representing an aggregate of 16.55% of the outstanding common stock of the combined company after giving effect to the Merger and warrants to purchase an equivalent number of shares of AYRO Operating Common Stock for an aggregate purchase price of $1.2 million (the “AYRO Private Placement”). Pursuant to the terms of the AYRO Private Placement, immediately prior to the closing of the Merger, the investors received warrants to purchase 972,486 shares of AYRO Operating Common Stock at an exercise price of $1.3599 per share. On the closing date of the Merger, AYRO Operating issued to the investors party to this second AYRO Operating Private Placement SPA (i) an aggregate of approximately 1,030,039 shares of common stock and pre-funded warrants to purchase 286,896 shares of Company Common Stock for an aggregate of $0.85 million and warrants to purchase 1,316,936 shares of AYRO Operating Common Stock at an exercise price of $0.7423 per share. In conjunction with the AYRO Private Placement, we issued Palladium, our advisor, a warrant to purchase 92,186 shares of the Company’s common stock at an exercise price of $0.7423 per share and a warrant to purchase 68,074 shares of the Company’s common stock at an exercise price of $1.3599 per share.
As additional consideration to the lead investor in the AYRO Private Placement, AYRO Operating also entered into a stock subscription agreement with the lead investor, pursuant to which, immediately prior to the Merger, AYRO Operating issued pre-funded warrants to purchase an aggregate of 477,190 shares of AYRO Operating Common Stock for the nominal per share purchase price of $0.000367 per share.
As part of the Merger, the Company issued to Palladium Holdings, LLC, its advisor, 415,000 shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.0001 per share.
On December 19, 2019, AYRO Operating entered into a letter agreement with ALS Investment, LLC (“ALS”), pursuant to which AYRO Operating issued ALS 622,496 shares of AYRO Operating Common Stock, which equaled 4.5% of the outstanding shares of common stock of the combined company giving effect to the Merger. In addition to introducing AYRO Operating and DropCar, ALS agreed to provide, as an independent contractor, consulting services to us relating to financial, capital market and investor relations for twelve months following the closing of the Merger.
In February 2020, AYRO Operating received a $0.5 million secured loan from certain existing investors in DropCar and AYRO Operating, and, in connection therewith, we received $10,000 upon exercise of the previously issued warrants to purchase 100,000 shares of common stock. The entire amount of the loan was paid off upon closing of the Merger.
In April 2020, AYRO Operating issued a secured promissory note payable to an individual investor providing $0.6 million of short-term financing. The note carried an interest rate of fifteen percent (15%) and was to be repaid upon the earlier of (1) closing date of the pending the Merger and (2) July 14, 2020. Fifty percent (50%) of the principal amount was personally guaranteed by Mark Adams, a former director of AYRO Operating and AYRO. In conjunction with the notes 553,330 shares of common stock (276,665 shares of common stock representing two percent (2%) of the combined company’s post-merger outstanding common stock each) were issued to the lender and to Mr. Adams as compensation for his personal guarantee. The entire amount of the loan was paid off upon the closing of the Merger.
Other AYRO Operating Warrants
At the effective time of the Merger, each AYRO Operating warrant that was outstanding and unexercised immediately prior to the effective time was converted pursuant to its terms and became a warrant to purchase Company Common Stock.
Closing of Asset Purchase Agreement
On December 19, 2019, DropCar entered into an asset purchase agreement (the “Asset Purchase Agreement”) with DC Partners Acquisition, LLC (“DC Partners”), Spencer Richardson and David Newman, pursuant to which DropCar agreed to sell substantially all of the assets associated with its business of providing vehicle support, fleet logistics and concierge services for both consumers and the automotive industry to an entity controlled by Messrs. Richardson and Newman, the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and Chief Business Development Officer at the time, respectively. The aggregate purchase price for the purchased assets consisted of the cancellation of certain liabilities pursuant to those certain employment agreements by and between DropCar and each of Messrs. Richardson and Newman, plus the assumption of certain liabilities relating to, or arising out of, workers’ compensation claims that occurred prior to the closing date of the Asset Purchase Agreement. On May 28, 2020, the parties to the Asset Purchase Agreement entered into Amendment No. 1 to the Asset Purchase Agreement (the “Asset Purchase Agreement Amendment”), which Asset Purchase Agreement Amendment (i) provides for the inclusion of up to $0.03 million in refunds associated with certain insurance premiums as assets being purchased by DC Partners, (ii) amends the covenant associated with the funding of the DropCar business, such that DropCar provided the DropCar business with additional funding of approximately $0.18 million at the closing of the transactions contemplated by the Asset Purchase Agreement and (iii) provides for a current employee of the Company being transferred to DC Partners to provide transition services to the Company for a period of three months after the closing of the transactions contemplated by the Asset Purchase Agreement. The Asset Purchase Agreement closed on May 28, 2020, immediately following the consummation of the Merger.
Business
Prior to the Merger, DropCar provided consumer and enterprise solutions to urban automobile-related logistical challenges. Following the Merger, we design, manufacture and market three- and four-wheeled purpose-built electric vehicles primarily to commercial customers. These vehicles allow the end user an environmentally friendly alternative to internal combustion engines for light duty uses, including logistics, maintenance and cargo services, at a lower total cost of ownership. Our four-wheeled vehicles are classified as low-speed vehicles (LSVs) based on federal and state regulations and are ideal for both college and corporate campuses. We are currently developing our next generation three-wheeled vehicle that we expect to be classified as a motorcycle for federal purposes and an autocycle in states that have passed certain autocycle laws, allowing the user to operate the vehicle with a standard automobile driver’s license. Our next generation three-wheeled vehicle is not expected to be an LSV and is expected to be ideal for last-mile delivery applications. The majority of our sales are comprised of sales of our four-wheeled vehicle to Club Car, a division of Ingersoll Rand, Inc., through a strategic arrangement entered in early 2019. We plan to continue growing our business through our experienced management team by leveraging our supply chain, allowing us to scale production without a large capital investment.
We have also developed a strategic partnership with Autonomic, a division of Ford. Pursuant to our agreement with Autonomic, we received a license to use Autonomic’s transportation mobility cloud and have agreed to jointly develop the monetization of cloud-based vehicle applications with Autonomic.
Manufacturing Agreement with Cenntro
In April 2017, AYRO Operating entered into a Manufacturing Licensing Agreement (the “MLA”) with Cenntro Automotive Group, Ltd. (“Cenntro”), one of our equity holders, that provides for its four-wheel sub-assemblies to be licensed and sold to us for final manufacturing and sale in the United States.
Under the MLA, in order for us to maintain our exclusive territorial rights pursuant to the MLA, for the first three years after March 22, 2020, we must meet the following minimum purchase requirements, which we believe we satisfied for the initial period: (i) a minimum of 300 units sold by the first anniversary of the effective date of the MLA; (ii) a minimum of 800 units sold by the second anniversary of the effective date of the MLA; and (iii) a minimum of 1,300 units sold by the third anniversary of the effective date of the MLA. Cenntro will determine the minimum sale requirements for the years thereafter. Should any event of default occur, the other party may terminate the MLA by providing written notice to the defaulting party, who will have 90 days from the effective date of the notice to cure the default. Unless waived by the party providing notice, a failure to cure the default(s) within the time 90-day time frame will result in the automatic termination of the MLA. Events of default under the MLA include a failure to make a required payment when due, the insolvency or bankruptcy of either party, the subjection of either party’s property to any levy, seizure, general assignment for the benefit of creditors, and a failure to make available or deliver the products in the time and manner provided for in the MLA. We are dependent on the MLA, and in the event of its termination our manufacturing operations and customer deliveries would be seriously impacted.
Master Procurement Agreement with Club Car
In March 2019, AYRO Operating entered into a five-year Master Procurement Agreement (the “MPA”), with Club Car for the sale of our four-wheeled vehicle. The MPA grants Club Car the exclusive right to sell our four-wheeled vehicle in North America, provided that Club Car orders at least 500 vehicles per year. Although Club Car did not meet the volume threshold for 2020, we currently have no intentions of selling our four-wheeled vehicles other than exclusively through Club Car. Under the terms of the MPA, we receive orders from Club Car dealers for vehicles of specific configurations, and we invoice Club Car once the vehicle has shipped. The MPA has an initial term of five (5) years commencing January 1, 2019 and may be renewed by Club Car for successive one-year periods upon 60 days’ prior written notice. Pursuant to the MPA, we granted Club Car a right of first refusal for sales of 51% or more of AYRO Operating’s assets or equity interests, which right of first refusal is exercisable for a period of 45 days following AYRO Operating’s delivery of an acquisition notice to Club Car. We also agreed to collaborate with Club Car on new products similar to our four-wheeled vehicle and improvements to existing products and granted Club Car a right of first refusal to purchase similar commercial utility vehicles we develop during the term of the MPA. We are currently engaged in discussions with Club Car to develop additional products to be sold by Club Car in Europe and Asia but there can be no assurance that these discussions will be successful. For the year ended December 31, 2020, revenues from Club Car constituted approximately 68% of our revenue, as compared to 75% in 2019. Any loss of, or a significant reduction in purchases by, Club Car that constitutes a significant portion of our sales could have an adverse effect on our financial condition and operating results.
Recent Developments
On June 17, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional and accredited investors, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell in a registered direct offering an aggregate of 2,200,000 shares of our common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, at an offering price of $2.50 per share, for gross proceeds of approximately $5.50 million before the deduction of fees and offering expenses.
On July 6, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional and accredited investors, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell in a registered direct offering an aggregate of 3,157,895 shares of our common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, at an offering price of $4.75 per share, for gross proceeds of approximately $15.00 million before the deduction of fees and offering expenses.
On July 21, 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with certain existing investors, pursuant to which we sold, in a registered direct offering an aggregate of 1,850,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, at an offering price of $5.00 per share for gross proceeds of $9.25 million before the deduction of fees and offering expenses. Each purchaser also had the right to purchase, on or before October 19, 2020, additional shares of common stock (the “Additional Shares”) equal to the full amount of 75% of the common stock it purchased at the initial closing, or an aggregate of 1,387,500 shares, at an offering price of $5.00 per share. On October 16, 2020, the Company entered into an addendum to the Agreement (the “Addendum”), which extended the deadline for each purchaser to exercise the right to purchase the Additional Shares by one year, to October 19, 2021. As of December 31, 2020, investors had elected to purchase 420,000 of the Additional Shares of common stock of AYRO, par value $0.0001 per share, at an offering price of $5.00 per share, for gross proceeds of approximately $2.10 million before the deduction of fees and offering expenses. Between January 1, 2021 and March 30, 2021, investors had elected to purchase an additional 302,500 of the Additional Shares of common stock of AYRO, par value $0.0001 per share, at an offering price of $5.00 per share, for gross proceeds of approximately $1.51 million before the deduction of fees and offering expenses.
On September 25, 2020, we entered into a Master Manufacturing Services Agreement (the “Karma Agreement”) with Karma Automotive, LLC (“Karma”). The term of the contract is for 12 months. Pursuant to the agreement Karma will provide certain manufacturing services, starting in 2021, under an attached statement of work including final assembly, raw material storage and logistical support of our vehicles in return for compensation of $1.68 million. We paid Karma an amount of $0.52 million and issued warrants to an advisor to the transaction with a fair value of $0.07 million due at signing of the contract. The payment was recorded as prepaid expense as of December 31, 2020. Pursuant to the Karma Agreement, we paid cash of $0.08 and issued a warrant (the “September Warrants”) to purchase 31,348 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $3.19 per share to a vendor for facilitating a manufacturing agreement. The September Warrant is immediately exercisable and expires on September 25, 2025.
On November 22, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional and accredited investors, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell in a registered direct offering an aggregate of 1,650,164 shares of our common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, at an offering price of $6.06 per share, for gross proceeds of approximately $10.0 million before the deduction of fees and offering expenses of $0.85 million. Pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement, the Company agreed to issue to the investors, unregistered Series A Warrants to purchase up to 1,237,624 shares of common stock and unregistered Series B Warrants to purchase up to 825,084 shares of common stock. The Series A Warrants are exercisable immediately upon issuance and terminate six months following issuance and are exercisable at an exercise price of $8.09 per share, subject to adjustment as set forth therein. The Series B Warrants are exercisable immediately upon issuance and terminate five years following issuance and are exercisable at an exercise price of $8.90 per share, subject to adjustment as set forth therein. Subject to certain limitations, we have a call right with respect to the warrants.
On January 25, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional and accredited investors, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell in a registered direct offering an aggregate of 3,333,334 shares at an offering price of $6.00 per share, for gross proceeds of approximately $20.0 million before the deduction of fees and offering expenses. In a concurrent private placement, we sold to such investors warrants to purchase, at any time on or after July 26, 2021 and on or before July 26, 2023, additional shares of common stock equal to the full amount of the common stock it purchased at the initial closing, or an aggregate of 3,333,334 shares, at an exercise price of $6.93 per share.
Additionally, AYRO issued Palladium a warrant to purchase 233,334 shares of common stock (which equals 7.0% of the aggregate number of shares of common stock sold in the January 2021 registered direct offering). The warrants issued to Palladium have the same terms as the warrants issued in January 2021.
On February 11, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional and accredited investors, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell in a registered direct offering an aggregate of 4,400,001 shares of common stock at an offering price of $9.50 per share, for gross proceeds of approximately $41.8 million before the deduction of fees and offering expenses. Each purchaser was also granted an option to purchase, on or before February 16, 2022, additional shares of common stock equal to the full amount of 75% of the common stock it purchased at the initial closing, or an aggregate of 3,300,000 shares, at an exercise price of $11.50 per share.
Palladium and Spartan Capital Securities, LLC “Spartan,” or collectively with Palladium, the “Financial Advisors” are entitled to a fee equal to 8% of the gross proceeds raised in the February 2021 registered direct offering, or an aggregate of approximately $3.3 million, and warrants to purchase an aggregate of 271,158 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $10.925 per share and 35,885 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $10.45 per share. The warrants are exercisable immediately following issuance and terminate five years following issuance.
Factors Affecting Results of Operations
Master Procurement Agreement
In March 2019, we entered into the MPA with Club Car. In partnership with Club Car and in interaction with its substantial dealer network, we have redirected our business development resources towards supporting Club Car’s enterprise and fleet sales function as Club Car proceeds in its new product introduction initiatives.
COVID-19 Pandemic
Our business, results of operations and financial condition have been adversely impacted by the recent coronavirus outbreak both in China and the United States. This has delayed our ability to timely procure raw materials from our supplier in China, which in turn, has delayed shipments to and corresponding revenue from customers. The pandemic and social distancing directives have interfered with our ability, and the ability of our employees, workers, contractors, suppliers and other business partners to perform our and their respective responsibilities and obligations relative to the conduct of our business. The COVID-19 pandemic poses restrictions on our employees’ and other service providers’ ability to travel on pre-sales meetings, customers’ abilities to physically meet with our employees and the ability of our customers to test drive or purchase our vehicles and shutdowns that may be requested or mandated by governmental authorities, and we expect these restrictions to continue at least until the second quarter of 2021. The pandemic adversely impacted our sales and the demand for our products in 2020 and is expected to continue adversely impacting demand for our products in 2021.
AYRO
We previously manufactured and sold the AYRO 311 Autocycle, a compact, three-wheeled electric vehicle. As the AYRO 311 was nearing end-of-life, on August 17, 2020 we sold our remaining AYRO 311 Fleet inventory to a third party for $0.12 million (the “311 Fleet Sale”). Upon such sale, we sustained a loss on disposal of $0.28 million. Subsequent to the 311 Fleet Sale, on February 12, 2021, we entered into an agreement with Arcimoto, Inc. to settle certain patent infringement claims (the “Arcimoto Settlement”), pursuant to which we agreed to cease the production, importation and sale of the AYRO 311, among other things. Accordingly, we would not be contractually permitted to resume production of the AYRO 311. We are continuing the development of an all-new, three-wheeled electric vehicle, which we intend to replace the AYRO 311 as our three-wheeled electric vehicle product offering. We expect to begin manufacturing our next generation three-wheeled vehicle in the first half of 2022.
Components of Statements of Operations
Revenue Recognition
We derive revenue from the sale of our three-and four-wheeled electric vehicles, and, to a lesser extent, shipping, parts and service fees. In the past we also derived rental revenue from vehicle revenue sharing agreements with our tourist destination fleet operators, or Destination Fleet Operators (“DFOs”), and, to a lesser extent, shipping, parts and service fees. Provided that all other revenue recognition criteria have been met, we typically recognize revenue upon shipment, as title and risk of loss are transferred to customers and channel partners at that time. Products are typically shipped to dealers or directly to end customers, or in some cases to our international distributors. These international distributors assist with import regulations, currency conversions and local language. Our vehicle product sales revenues vary from period to period based on, among other things, the customer orders received and our ability to produce and deliver the ordered products. Customers often specify requested delivery dates that coincide with their need for our vehicles.
Because these customers may use our products in connection with a variety of projects of different sizes and durations, a customer’s orders for one reporting period generally do not indicate a trend for future orders by that customer. Additionally, order patterns do not necessarily correlate amongst customers.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold primarily consists of costs of materials and personnel costs associated with manufacturing operations, and an accrual for post-sale warranty claims. Personnel costs consist of wages and associated taxes and benefits. Cost of goods sold also includes freight and changes to our warranty reserves. Allocated overhead costs consist of certain facilities and utility costs. We expect cost of revenue to increase in absolute dollars, as product revenue increases.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of general and administrative, sales and marketing and research and development expenses. Salaries and personnel-related costs, benefits, and stock-based compensation expense are the most significant components of each category of operating expenses. Operating expenses also include allocated overhead costs for facilities and utility costs.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense consists primarily of employee compensation and related expenses, prototype expenses, depreciation associated with assets acquired for research and development, amortization of product development costs, product strategic advisory fees, third-party engineering and contractor support costs and allocated overhead. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest in new and existing products.
Sales and Marketing Expense
Sales and marketing expense consist primarily of employee compensation and related expenses, sales commissions, marketing programs, travel and entertainment expenses and allocated overhead. Marketing programs consist of advertising, tradeshows, events, corporate communications and brand-building activities. We expect sales and marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we expand our sales force, expand our product lines, increase marketing resources, and further develop sales channels.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense consists primarily of employee compensation and related expenses for administrative functions including finance, legal, human resources and fees for third-party professional services, and allocated overhead. We expect our general and administrative expense to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest in growing our business.
Stock-based compensation
We account for stock-based compensation expense in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for share-based awards based on the estimated fair value on the date of grant.
The fair value of each stock option granted to employees is estimated on the date of the grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and the related stock-based compensation expense is recognized over the vesting period during which an employee is required to provide service in exchange for the award. The fair value of the options granted to non-employees is measured and expensed as the options vest.
Restricted stock grants are stock awards that entitle the holder to receive shares of our common stock as the award vests over time. The fair value of each restricted stock grant is based on the fair market value price of common stock on the date of grant, and it is measured and expensed as the options vest.
Other (Expense) Income
Other (expense) income consists of income received or expenses incurred for activities outside of our core business, including forgiveness of our PPP loan. Other expense consists primarily of interest expense, discount on debt amortization and the related loss on extinguishment of debt as it applies to the debt discount.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes consists of estimated income taxes due to the United States government and to the state tax authorities in jurisdictions in which we conduct business. In the case of a tax deferred asset, we reserve the entire value for future periods.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year ended December 31, 2019.
The following table sets forth our results of operations for each of the periods set forth below:
Revenue
Revenue was $1.60 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $0.89 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of 80.2%, or $0.71 million. The increase in revenue was the result of an increase in sales of our vehicles, deriving from our Master Agreement with Club Car, related powered-food box sales and other vehicle options for the year ended December 31, 2020. Additionally, we recorded a one-time sale of the remaining vehicles, raw materials, and parts from our AYRO 311 product of $0.12 million. We also had revenue of $0.09 million from shipping and a de minimis amount for service revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020. As discussed under “Factors Affecting Results of Operations,” the COVID-19 pandemic adversely impacted sales and the demand for our vehicles during 2020.
Cost of goods sold and gross profit
Cost of goods sold increased by $1.08 million, or 155.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due to an increase in vehicle sales and an increase in time-of order options for our vehicles and specialty products. Of this increase, $0.38 million was recorded for the one-time sale of the remaining vehicles, raw materials and parts from our AYRO 311 product line.
Gross margin percentage was (10.4)% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 22.3% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in gross margin percentage in the core business was primarily due to an increase in tariffs on raw materials imported from China, an increase in shipping costs due to the global COVID-19 pandemic and an increase in overhead allocation resulting from the move to our new facility in January 2020. In 2020, we phased-out the production of our AYRO 311 line of vehicles in order to develop our next generation three-wheeled vehicle. The change in production did not represent a strategic shift that will have a major effect on our operations or financial results. Our end-of-life product costs of the AYRO 311 decreased our gross profit margin by 16.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Vehicle prices increased in January 2021 to offset the standard cost increases.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expense was $1.92 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $0.71 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $1.21 million, or 168.9%. The increase was primarily due to research and development (“R&D”) expenses related to personnel costs for our engineering, design, and research teams as we expanded the suite of option packages for our vehicles and initiated development of our next-generation three-wheeled vehicle. We had an increase in salaries and related expenses of $0.56 million, an increase of $0.46 million from R&D contracting for professional service and design costs and an increase in stock-based compensation of $0.11 million.
Sales and marketing expense
Sales and marketing expense increased by $0.12 million, or 8.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, as we redirected our marketing focus in-house rather than outsourced contractors and marketing programs. Salaries and wages increased by $0.40 million and stock-based compensation increased by $0.11 million due to the addition of our Chief Marketing Officer and Chief of Business Development in late 2019 as well as the addition of other sales and marketing resources. Discretionary marketing programs decreased by $0.03 million and contracting for professional marketing services decreased by $0.47 million. These reductions in 2020 relative to 2019 were due to the redirection of our marketing focus in-house. Additionally, depreciation expense for demonstration vehicles assigned to the sales and marketing team increased by $0.12 million as compared to 2019 due to a reclassification from general and administration expenses to sales and marketing expense for demonstration vehicles assigned to the sales and marketing team.
General and administrative expenses
The majority of our operating losses from continuing operations resulted from general and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of costs associated with our overall operations and with being a public company. These costs include personnel, legal and financial professional services, insurance, investor relations, and compliance related fees. General and administrative expense was $6.60 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $6.68 million for 2019, a decrease of $0.07 million. Contractor and consulting expenses decreased by $1.77 million. Contractor and consulting expenses for 2019 included $2.64 million of stock-based compensation paid to Christian Okonsky and Mark Adams, founders of AYRO and former board members and we also incurred an expense of $0.27 million for warrants issued for advisory services in 2019. Neither of these equity-related expenses were repeated in 2020. The reduction in contractor and consulting expenses was offset by an increase in contracting for professional services of $1.14 million, primarily a result of additional audit, legal and investor relations expenses incurred to support public reporting requirements. Board compensation expense increased by $0.22 million. Salaries and related costs increased by $0.17 million due to corporate expansion. Other public company-related expenses increased by $0.46 million. Stock-based compensation expense increased by $1.17 million, primarily due to the expense of director and employee equity awards in 2020. Depreciation decreased by $0.41 million, primarily driven by fully depreciating the tooling for our AYRO 311 product line during 2019 and the reclassification of the $0.12 million depreciation expense for demonstration vehicles assigned to the sales and marketing team due to our redirection of our marketing focus in-house.
Other income and expense
Other income increased by $0.23 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily due to the forgiveness of our Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan in the amount of $0.22 million in principal and interest effective December 29, 2020. In addition, we received $0.02 million during 2020 as an incentive for hiring additional personnel in the city of Round Rock, Texas under the city’s standard economic development grant. Interest expense increased $0.15 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily due to the increase in the discount on debt recorded from the equity issuances associated with certain debt instruments issued prior to the Merger. Interest expense also included noncash amortization of warrant discounts issued in conjunction with certain debt offerings. A loss on the extinguishment of debt related to the early redemptions of a note in the principal amount of $0.14 million previously converted from a vendor payable was recorded for $0.02 million, a loss on the extinguishment of debt for a bridge note in the principal amount of $0.60 million was recorded for $0.35 million and a loss on the extinguishment of debt for a bridge note in the principal amount of $0.50 million was recorded for $0.19 million.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure
We present Adjusted EBITDA because we consider it to be an important supplemental measure of our operating performance, and we believe it may be used by certain investors as a measure of our operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as income (loss) from operations before interest income and expense, income taxes, depreciation, amortization of intangible assets, amortization of discount on debt, impairment of long-lived assets, stock-based compensation expense and certain non-recurring expenses.
Adjusted EBITDA is not a measurement of financial performance under generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. Because of varying available valuation methodologies, subjective assumptions and the variety of equity instruments that can impact our non-cash operating expenses, we believe that providing a non-GAAP financial measure that excludes non-cash and non-recurring expenses allows for meaningful comparisons between our core business operating results and those of other companies, as well as providing us with an important tool for financial and operational decision making and for evaluating our own core business operating results over different periods of time.
Adjusted EBITDA may not provide information that is directly comparable to that provided by other companies in our industry, as other companies in our industry may calculate non-GAAP financial results differently, particularly related to non-recurring, unusual items. Adjusted EBITDA is not a measurement of financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to operating income or as an indication of operating performance or any other measure of performance derived in accordance with GAAP. We do not consider Adjusted EBITDA to be a substitute for, or superior to, the information provided by GAAP financial results.
Below is a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss to common stockholders:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $36.54 million in cash and working capital of $38.50 million. As of December 31, 2019, we had $0.64 million in cash and working capital deficit of $0.40 million. The increase in cash and working capital was primarily a result of our capital raising activities from June 2020 through December of 2020 in addition to cash received as a result of the Merger.
Our sources of cash since inception have been predominantly from the sale of equity and debt.
In October 2019, we raised $0.50 million in a 120-day short-term loan from Mark Adams, a former director of AYRO Operating and AYRO. This loan had a 14% interest rate per annum, was payable quarterly and an equity incentive of 143,795 shares of AYRO Operating common stock. In December 2019, this loan term was extended to April 30, 2021 in exchange for the issuance of 136,340 shares of AYRO Operating common stock. The loan was repaid September 30, 2020.
In December 2019, a local marketing firm agreed to convert 90% of trade accounts payable the Company owed that firm to a term loan with a principal amount of $137,729.03 and bearing interest at the rate of 15% per annum, payable quarterly, with a maturity date of May 31, 2021. The Company also issued the marketing firm 66,000 shares of common stock in conjunction with this term loan. A discount on debt of $46,683 was recorded in the transaction and is being amortized over the life of the debt. The loan was repaid September 30, 2020.
In December 2019, we entered into a convertible bridge loan with five institutional lenders totaling $1.0 million. On May 28, 2020, immediately prior to the closing of the Merger, the five lenders received warrants (the “Bridge Loan Warrants”) to purchase 1,030,585 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $1.1159 per share. The Bridge Loan Warrants had full ratchet anti-dilution price protection with respect to future issuances of securities at an effective price below the exercise price, with the exercise price per share reducing to such exercise price and the number of shares deliverable upon exercise of the warrants increasing such that the aggregate exercise price under each warrant remains constant. The Bridge Loan Warrants would have terminated after a period of five years on May 28, 2025. All Bridge Loan Warrants were exercised prior to December 31, 2020.
In February 2020, we entered into secured promissory notes with three institutional lenders totaling $0.50 million. On May 28, 2020, immediately after the closing of the Merger, pursuant to and in connection with the issuance of these notes, we issued warrants (the “Secured Loan Warrants”) to purchase an aggregate of 100,000 shares of common stock to the three lenders for an aggregate purchase price of $0.01 million. Proceeds from the Merger were used to fully repay the $0.50 million promissory note on May 28, 2020. The Secured Loan Warrants were exercised in full during the three months ended June 30, 2020.
In April 2020, the Company issued a secured promissory note payable to an individual investor providing $600,000 of short-term financing. The notes carried an interest rate of fifteen percent (15%) and were to be repaid upon the earlier of (1) closing date of the pending the Merger and (2) July 14, 2020. Fifty percent (50%) of the principal amount was personally guaranteed by Mark Adams, a former director of AYRO Operating and AYRO. In conjunction with the notes, 553,330 shares of common stock (276,665 shares of common stock representing two percent (2%) of the combined company’s post-merger outstanding common stock each) were issued to the lender and to Mr. Adams as compensation for his personal guarantee.
On May 28, 2020, we completed our reverse merger with DropCar, which resulted in cash received from the merger of $3.1 million, represented by 2,337,663 shares of common stock.
On May 28, 2020, we entered into the first AYRO Operating Private Placement SPA with current stockholders of the Company and AYRO Operating, pursuant to which such stockholders agreed to purchase, prior to the consummation of the Merger, shares of AYRO Operating Common Stock and warrants (the “First Private Placement Warrants”) to purchase AYRO Operating’s common stock for an aggregate purchase price of $1.2 million. Prior to the closing of the Merger, AYRO Operating issued to the investors party to this first AYRO Private Placement SPA (i) an aggregate of approximately 543,179 shares of common stock and pre-funded warrants to purchase 429,305 shares of Company Common Stock at an exercise price of $0.000367 per share, and (ii) First Private Placement Warrants to purchase 972,486 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $1.3599 per share. The First Private Placement Warrants issued pursuant to the first AYRO Operating Private Placement SPA had full ratchet anti-dilution price protection with respect to future issuances of securities at an effective price below the exercise price with the exercise price per share reducing to such exercise price and the number of shares deliverable upon exercise of the warrant increasing such that the aggregate exercise price under each warrant remains constant. The First Private Placement Warrants would have terminated after a period of five years on May 28, 2025. All First Private Placement Warrants were exercised prior to December 31, 2020.
On May 28, 2020, we entered into the second AYRO Operating Private Placement SPA with current investors of the Company and AYRO Operating, pursuant to which such investors agreed to purchase, prior to the consummation of the Merger, shares of AYRO Operating Common Stock and warrants (the “Second Private Placement Warrants”) to purchase AYRO Operating Common Stock for an aggregate purchase price of $0.85 million. On the closing date of the Merger, AYRO Operating issued to the investors party to this second AYRO Operating Private Placement SPA (i) an aggregate of approximately 1,030,039 shares of common stock and pre-funded warrants to purchase 286,896 shares of Company Common Stock at an exercise price of $0.000367 per share, and (ii) Second Private Placement Warrants to purchase 1,316,936 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.7423 per share. The Second Private Placement Warrants issued pursuant to the second AYRO Operating Private Placement SPA had full ratchet anti-dilution price protection with respect to future issuances of securities at an effective price below the exercise price with the exercise price per share reducing to such exercise price and the number of shares deliverable upon exercise of the warrant increasing such that the aggregate exercise price under each warrant remains constant. The Second Private Placement Warrants would have terminated after a period of five years on May 28, 2025. All Second Private Placement Warrants were exercised prior to December 31, 2020.
In May 2020, the Company entered into a Paycheck Protection Program Term Note (the “PPP Note”) with Pacific Western Bank, NA in the amount of $218,000. The PPP Note was issued to the Company pursuant to the Coronavirus, Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act’s (the “CARES Act”) (P.L. 116-136) Paycheck Protection Program (the “Program”). The PPP Note carries a maturity date of May 20, 2022, at a 1% interest rate. On December 29, 2020, notice of the PPP Note forgiveness was granted to the Company. The forgiveness amount of $218,000 in principal and $1,363 in interest was recorded in the other income line item on the statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
On June 17, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional and accredited investors, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell in a registered direct offering an aggregate of 2,200,000 shares of common stock at an offering price of $2.50 per share, for gross proceeds of approximately $5.50 million before the deduction of fees and offering expenses of $0.44 million.
On July 6, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional and accredited investors, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell in a registered direct offering an aggregate of 3,157,895 shares of our common stock at an offering price of $4.75 per share, for gross proceeds of approximately $15.00 million before the deduction of fees and offering expenses of $1.25 million.
On July 21, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain existing investors, pursuant to which we sold, in a registered direct offering an aggregate of 1,850,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, at an offering price of $5.00 per share for gross proceeds of $9.25 million before offering expenses of $0.74 million. Each purchaser also had the right to purchase, on or before October 19, 2020, additional shares of common stock (the “Additional Shares”) equal to the full amount of 75% of the common stock it purchased at the initial closing, or an aggregate of 1,387,500 shares, at price of $5.00 per share. On October 16, 2020, we entered into an addendum to the Agreement (the “Addendum”), which extended the deadline for each purchaser to exercise the right to purchase the Additional Shares by one year, to October 19, 2021. As of December 31, 2020, investors had elected to purchase 420,000 of the Additional Shares of common stock of AYRO, par value $0.0001 per share, at an offering price of $5.00 per share, for gross proceeds of approximately $2.10 million before offering expenses of $0.17 million. Between January 1, 2021 and March 30, 2021, investors had elected to purchase an additional 302,500 of the Additional Shares of common stock of AYRO, par value $0.0001 per share, at an offering price of $5.00 per share, for gross proceeds of approximately $1.51 million before the deduction of fees and offering expenses.
On November 22, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional and accredited investors, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell in a registered direct offering an aggregate of 1,650,164 shares of our common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, at an offering price of $6.06 per share, for gross proceeds of approximately $10.00 million before the deduction of fees and offering expenses of $0.85 million. Pursuant to the securities purchase agreement, we issued to the investors unregistered Series A Warrants to purchase up to 1,237,624 shares of common stock and unregistered Series B Warrants to purchase up to 825,084 shares of common stock. The Series A Warrants are exercisable immediately upon issuance and terminate six months following issuance and are exercisable at an exercise price of $8.09 per share, subject to adjustment as set forth therein. The Series B Warrants are exercisable immediately upon issuance and terminate five years following issuance and are exercisable at an exercise price of $8.90 per share, subject to adjustment as set forth therein. In addition, subject to certain limitations, we have a call right with respect to the warrants.
On January 25, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional and accredited investors, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell in a registered direct offering an aggregate of 3,333,334 shares at an offering price of $6.00 per share, for gross proceeds of approximately $20.00 million before the deduction of fees and offering expenses. In a concurrent private placement, we sold to such investors warrants to purchase, at any time on or after July 26, 2021 and on or before July 26, 2023, additional shares of common stock equal to the full amount of the common stock it purchased at the initial closing, or an aggregate of 3,333,334 shares, at an exercise price of $6.93 per share.
On February 11, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional and accredited investors, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell in a registered direct offering an aggregate of 4,400,001 shares of common stock at an offering price of $9.50 per share, for gross proceeds of approximately $41.8 million before the deduction of fees and offering expenses. Each purchaser was also granted the option to purchase, on or before February 16, 2022, additional shares of common stock equal to the full amount of 75% of the common stock it purchased at the initial closing, or an aggregate of 3,300,000 shares, at a purchase price of $11.50 per share.
Between May 28, 2020 (the Merger closing) and December 31, 2020, holders of warrants have exercised warrants to purchase an aggregate of 5,074,645 shares of our common stock for aggregate net proceeds to us of $3.93 million. This is inclusive of warrants exercised as noted above.
Our business is capital intensive, and future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of our sales and marketing teams, the timing of new product introductions and the continuing market acceptance of our products and services. We may also use capital for strategic acquisitions or transactions. We are subject to a number of risks similar to those of earlier stage commercial companies, including dependence on key individuals and products, the difficulties inherent in the development of a commercial market, the potential need to obtain additional capital, competition from larger companies, other technology companies and other technologies. Based on the foregoing, management believes that the existing cash at December 31, 2020, together with net proceeds of approximately $56.8 million raised through registered direct offerings in January 2021 and February 2021, will be sufficient to fund operations for at least the next twelve months following the date of this report.
Summary of Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows:
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $10.02 million in cash in operating activities, an increase in use of $5.92 million when compared to the cash used in operating activities of $4.10 million during the same period in 2019. The increase in cash used in operating activities was primarily a result of prepayments for inventory and manufacturing services, an increase in accounts receivable, payments of accrued expenses, purchases of inventory and an increase in our operating loss as we continue to build our core business. This was offset by a reduction in cash used from our payments of outstanding accounts payable to Cenntro in March 2019 that did not occur in 2020.
Our ability to generate cash from operations in future periods will depend in large part on profitability, the rate and timing of collections of our accounts receivable, inventory turns and our ability to manage other areas of working capital.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we were provided cash of $2.54 million from investing activities as compared to $0.37 million cash used in investing activities during 2019, an increase of $2.91 million. The net increase was primarily due to proceeds of $3.06 million from the Merger.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received net proceeds of an aggregate of $39.86 million from the issuance of common stock, net of fees and expenses, $0.02 million from the exercise of options to purchase additional shares of common stock, and $3.93 million from the exercise of warrants for cash. In addition, during 2020, we received $0.50 million of debt financing from certain DropCar investors and $0.60 million of debt financing from a private investor, both of which notes were repaid upon closing of the Merger. Additionally, in May 2020, we received $0.22 million in a PPP loan from our bank, which was forgiven in December 2020. In December 2020, we were notified that the PPP loan principal and accrued interest were forgiven in full under the PPP terms, which is reflected in the non-cash section of cash flows from operating activities. The debt proceeds were netted with $1.74 million of loan repayments. During the year ended December 31, 2019, $2.52 million was generated through the sale of AYRO Operating’s Preferred Stock. Additionally, during 2019 $0.80 million in proceeds were received from the sale of promissory notes convertible into AYRO Operating’s Series Seed 2 Preferred Stock, $0.33 million in proceeds were received from the sale of promissory term notes, $0.50 million in proceeds were received from the sale of a promissory note to Mark Adams, a former AYRO board member, $1.00 million in proceeds were received from the sale of promissory notes from certain DropCar investors, convertible into the Company’s common stock upon the Merger, and a short-term loan of $0.05 million was received and repaid in the first quarter of 2019, netted with $0.12 million of repayment of loan principal. No warrants were exercised in 2019.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We have made certain indemnities, under which we may be required to make payments to an indemnified party, in relation to certain transactions. We indemnify our directors and officers to the maximum extent permitted under the laws of the State of Delaware. In connection with our facility leases, we have indemnified our lessors for certain claims arising from the use of the facilities. The duration of the indemnities vary and, in many cases, are indefinite. These indemnities do not provide for any limitation of the maximum potential future payments we could be obligated to make. Historically, we have not been obligated to make any payments for these obligations and no liabilities have been recorded for these indemnities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Other than business and certain indemnification provisions, we do not have any off-balance sheet financing arrangements or liabilities, guarantee contracts, retained or contingent interests in transferred assets, or any obligation arising out of a material variable interest in an unconsolidated entity. Other than AYRO Operating Company, Inc. and DropCar Operating Company, Inc., we do not have any subsidiaries to include or otherwise consolidate into the consolidated financial statements. Additionally, we do not have interests in, nor relationships with, any special purpose entities.
Related Party Transactions
Supply Chain Agreements
In 2017, we executed a supply chain contract with Cenntro Automotive Group (“Cenntro”), our primary supplier, a manufacturer located in the People’s Republic of China. Through our partnership with Cenntro, Cenntro acquired 19% of AYRO Operating’s common stock in 2017. As of December 31, 2020, Cenntro beneficially owned approximately 4.38% of our common stock. Currently, we purchase 100% of our vehicle chassis, cabs and wheels through this supply chain relationship with Cenntro. We must sell a minimum number of units in order to maintain our exclusive supply chain contract. We were in default of the original exclusive term of the contract; however, in 2019 and 2020, the contract was amended to remove the default clause. In December 2019, Cenntro agreed to convert $1.10 million of trade accounts payable due from us to 299,948 shares of AYRO Operating’s Seed Preferred Stock. The parties also agreed that any accrued interest on the trades payable as a result of this conversion would be forgiven, which resulted in a recapture of interest expense in the amount of $0.17 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the amounts outstanding to Cenntro as a component of accounts payable were $0.05 million and $0.08 million, respectively. Under a memorandum of understanding signed between us and Cenntro on March 22, 2020, upon availability of the 411x product, we agreed to purchase 300 units within the twelve months following the signing of the memorandum of understanding, and 500 units and 800 units in each of the following respective twelve-month periods. On July 9, 2020, in exchange for certain percentage discounts for raw materials, we made a $1.2 million prepayment for inventory. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the prepayment deposits were $0.98 million and $0.05 million.
In October 2019, we borrowed $0.50 million under a bridge loan from Mark Adams, a founding board member. As an inducement for the bridge loan, we granted Mr. Adams 143,975 shares of common stock and in December 2019, the Company granted an additional 136,340 shares of common stock to Mr. Adams as consideration for extending the term date of the loan to April 30, 2021. In September 2020, the loan principal and accrued interest were paid in full.
On March 1, 2017, we entered into a royalty-based agreement with Sustainability Initiatives, LLC (“SI”) an entity that is controlled by Mark Adams, a former director of AYRO and AYRO Operating, and Christian Okonsky, a former director of AYRO Operating in the effort to accelerate our operations. Royalties accrued were included as a component of research and development expense in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations. In return for acceleration assistance and for serving as our Chief Visionary Officer, the agreement provided for a monthly retainer. On a quarterly basis, we remitted a royalty of a percentage (see table below) of company revenues less the retainer amounts.
Effective January 1, 2019, we agreed to an amendment with SI to reduce the royalty percentage to 0.5%. In relation to this amendment, we granted the SI members an additional 381,752 stock options to vest over a nine-month vesting term. On October 15, 2019, we and the SI members agreed to terminate the agreement in full in exchange for 231,778 shares of the Company’s common stock. Stock-based compensation of $0.91 million was recorded on the transaction in October 2019.
On December 9, 2019, we and the SI members agreed to cancel the outstanding options to purchase 477,190 shares of our common stock in exchange for 434,529 shares of our common stock. Stock-based compensation of $1.50 million was recorded for the transaction in December 2019.
On April 1, 2017, we entered into a fee-for-service agreement with SI. In return for accounting, marketing, graphics and other services, we pay fixed, market-standard hourly rates under the shared services agreement as services are rendered. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had a balance outstanding to SI for $0.01 million for both periods included in accounts payable. Total expenses paid or payable to SI were $0 and $0.06 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
In January 2019, we entered into a fee-for-service consulting agreement with Sustainability Consultants, LLC, (“SCLLC”) an entity that is controlled by Mark Adams, Will Steakley and John Constantine, who were principal stockholders of AYRO Operating. In exchange for consulting services provided, we paid $0.19 million in consulting fees to the firm during the year ended December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, the balance due to SCLLC is zero. Additionally, we granted warrants to purchase 177,924 shares of our common stock. The warrants have an exercise price of $7.33 per share with a five-year life. Stock-based compensation consulting expense of $0.27 million was recorded in the general and administrative expenses on the statement of operations in the fourth quarter of 2019 in conjunction with the warrant grant - see Note 11 - Stock Based Compensation, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. We also granted 67,488 shares of our common stock and recorded stock-based compensation of $0.23 million in the general and administrative expenses on the statement of operations for the fourth quarter of 2019 related to the common stock transaction.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We base our assumptions, estimates and judgments on historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be relevant at the time our consolidated financial statements are prepared. Accordingly, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 which are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe that the following accounting estimates are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results. There have been no changes to estimates during the periods presented in the filing. Historically, changes in management estimates have not been material.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements, in conformity with GAAP, requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Our most significant estimates include allowance for doubtful accounts, valuation of inventory reserve, valuation of deferred tax asset allowance, and the measurement of stock-based compensation expenses. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Reclassification
Certain reclassifications have been made to the prior period financial statements to conform to the current period financial statement presentation. These reclassifications had no effect on net earnings or cash flows as previously reported.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, the core principle of which is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To achieve this core principle, five basic criteria must be met before revenue can be recognized: (1) identify the contract with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when or as we satisfy a performance obligation.
Warrants and Preferred Shares
We account for warrants issued for performance of services under fair value recognition provisions. We calculate the fair value of the warrant utilizing the Black-Scholes pricing based upon the estimated fair value of the underlying common stock.
The accounting treatment of warrants and preferred share series issued is determined pursuant to the guidance provided by ASC 470, Debt, ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging, as applicable. Each feature of a freestanding financial instruments including, without limitation, any rights relating to subsequent dilutive issuances, dividend issuances, equity sales, rights offerings, forced conversions, optional redemptions, automatic monthly conversions, dividends and exercise are assessed with determinations made regarding the proper classification in the consolidated financial statements.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”). Under the fair value recognition provisions, stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, based on the terms of the awards. We calculate the fair value of option grants utilizing the Black-Scholes pricing model based upon the estimated fair value of the common stock.
In June 2018, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued ASU 2018-07, Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting (“ASU 2018-07”). ASU 2018-07 expands the guidance in ASC 718 to include share-based payments for goods and services to non-employees and generally aligns it with the guidance for share-based payments to employees. In accordance with ASU 2018-07, these stock options and warrants issued as compensation for services provided to us are accounted for based upon the fair value of the underlying equity instrument. The attribution of the fair value of the equity instrument is charged directly to compensation expense over the period during which services are rendered.
Basic and Diluted Loss Per Share
Basic and diluted net loss per share is determined by dividing net loss by the weighted average ordinary shares outstanding during the period. For all periods presented with a net loss, the shares underlying the ordinary share options and warrants have been excluded from the calculation because their effect would be anti-dilutive. Therefore, the weighted-average shares outstanding used to calculate both basic and diluted loss per share are the same for periods with a net loss.