Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing strategy, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read the “Risk Factors” section of this Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Objective
The purpose of the Management Discussion and Analysis (the “MD&A”) is to present information that management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our results of operations and cash flows for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 and our financial condition as of June 30, 2021. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our financial statements and notes. The MD&A is organized in the following sections:
● Overview
● Significant Developments. We discuss (i) impact of COVID-19 on our operations and (ii) material acquisitions and divestitures.
● Liquidity and Capital Resources. We discuss (i) sources of our liquidity, (ii) cash flows, (iii) obligations due on our debt obligations and (iv) expected payments under contractual obligations, commitments and contingencies.
● Results of Operations. We discuss year-over-year changes in our statements of operations line items, including the major drivers of these changes for fiscal year 2021, as compared with 2020.
● Critical Accounting Estimates. We discuss the critical accounting policies and estimates that require significant management judgment.
Overview
We are commercial-stage specialty pharmaceutical company focused on commercializing novel therapeutics and consumer healthcare products. We operate through two business segments: Aytu BioPharma segment, consisting of various prescription pharmaceutical products sold through third party wholesalers, and Aytu Consumer health segment, which consists of various consumer health products sold directly to consumers. We generate revenue by selling our products through third party intermediaries in our marketing channels as well as directly to our customers. We develop and manufacture our ADHD products at our manufacturing facilities, and use third party manufacturers for our other prescription and consumer health products.
We have incurred significant losses in each year since inception. Our net losses were $58.3 million and $13.6 million for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $178.3 million and $120.0 million, respectively. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses in connection with our ongoing activities, including the successful integration of our acquisitions.
Significant Developments
Below are significant developments in our business and other factors affecting our business during the fiscal year 2021.
COVID-19
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact the global economy and create economic uncertainties during fiscal years 2020 and 2021. The federal government and states imposed restrictions on travel and business operations and placed limitations on the size of public and private gatherings. However, beginning the third quarter of fiscal 2021, with the introduction of vaccines under emergency use authorizations, these restriction began to wind down and business operating environments have improved.
We believe COVID-19 has negatively impacted the overall market for prescription products. The extent to which COVID-19 continues to negatively impact our business in the future will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the duration of the outbreak, new information that may emerge concerning the severity of the new variants of coronavirus, the actions taken to contain the coronavirus or treat its impact, and the continued impact of each of these items on the economies and financial markets in the United States and abroad. While states and jurisdictions have rollbacked stay-at-home and quarantine orders and reopened in phases, it is difficult to predict what the lasting impact of the pandemic will be, and if we or any of the third parties with whom we engage were to experience additional shutdowns or other prolonged business disruptions, our ability to conduct our business in the manner and on the timelines presently planned could have a material adverse impact on our business, results of operation and financial condition. In addition, a recurrence or impact from new strains of COVID-19 cases could cause other widespread or more severe impacts depending on where infection rates are highest. We will continue to monitor developments as we deal with the disruptions and uncertainties relating to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Acquisitions and Divestitures
On April 12, 2021, we closed on an asset purchase agreement with Rumpus Therapeutics, LLC through an asset purchase agreement with Rumpus VEDS, LLC, Rumpus Therapeutics, LLC, Rumpus Vascular, LLC (together with Rumpus VEDS, LLC and Rumpus Therapeutics LLC, “Rumpus”), pursuant to which we acquired certain rights and other assets, including key commercial global licenses, relating primarily to the pediatric-onset rare disease development asset enzastaurin (now referred to as AR101), which is a pivotal study-ready therapeutic being studied for the treatment of vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome or vEDS. This asset was acquired for $1.5 million in cash, payment of aggregated fees of $0.6 million and, upon the achievement of certain regulatory and commercial milestones, up to $67.5 million in earn-out payments, which are payable in cash or shares of our common stock, generally at our option.
On March 31, 2021, we terminated the Natesto license agreement previously entered into on July 1, 2016 as amended on July 29, 2019. With the acquisition of Neos Therapeutics, Inc. (“Neos”), we believe that this divestiture will not have significant impact on our financials, and will also allow us to focus on and further develop our prescription pharmaceutical products (“Rx Portfolio”).
On March 19, 2021, we acquired Neos (the “Neos Merger”), a commercial-stage pharmaceutical company developing, manufacturing and commercializing Adzenys XR-ODT, Cotempla XR-ODT and Adzenys ER in the U.S. using Neos' internal commercial organization. These commercial products are extended-release (“XR”) medications in patient-friendly, orally disintegrating tablet (“ODT”) or oral suspension dosage forms that utilize our microparticle modified-release drug delivery technology platform. Neos received approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) for these three products. In addition, Neos manufactures and sells generic Tussionex, an extended-release oral suspension for the treatment of cough and upper respiratory symptoms of a cold.
We incurred restructuring costs as a result of our merger and acquisitions. These costs are primarily related to severance payments to employees affected by the change in business structure. During the year ended June 30, 2021, we incurred $4.9 million in severance cost, all of which was paid during the year ended June 30, 2021.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020.
Product revenue. Total net product revenue was $65.6 million during the year ended June 30, 2021, an increase of approximately $38.0 million, or 138%, compared to $27.6 million during the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by the full year contributions from our fiscal year 2020 acquisitions and the partial year revenue generated from the ADHD product portfolio of Neos, which was acquired on March 19, 2021, as well as additional revenues from COVID-19 test kit sales. Due to our entry into a termination and transition agreement with Acerus Pharmaceuticals Corporation, on March 31, 2021, terminating the License and Supply Agreement related to Natesto, we will no longer recognize revenue related to Natesto as of April 1, 2021.
Cost of sales. Total cost of sales was $36.4 million during the year ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $28.1 million, or 340%, compared to $8.3 million during the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by the full year operations of our fiscal year 2020 acquisitions and the partial year costs incurred for the production and sale of ADHD product portfolio of Neos, which was acquired on March 19, 2021. In addition, we recognized approximately $7.3 million in write-downs for slow moving inventory during the year ended June 30, 2021. Neos manufactures the ADHD products at its Grand Prairie, Texas facilities, and as such, allocates a significant portion of its intangible assets amortization and fixed assets depreciation into cost of sales.
Research and development. Total research and development expense was $5.6 million during the year ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $3.9 million, or 192%, compared to $1.7 million during the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was due primarily to $2.9 million in costs related to the acquisition of in-process research and development that we determined to have no alternative future use at the time of purchase and was expensed as incurred, and costs associated with our Healight Platform license and initial research and development costs, as well as the acquisition of
Neos on March 19, 2021, which incurs costs related to product development and FDA-required post-marketing clinical trials.
Advertising and direct marketing. Advertising and direct marketing expenses include direct-to-consumer marketing, advertising, sales and customer support and processing fees related to our consumer health segment. Total advertising and direct marketing expense was $20.6 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $14.2 million, or 222%, compared to $6.4 million during the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by the inclusion of full year operations of the consumer health segment, which was acquired on February 14, 2020.
Other selling and marketing. Total other selling and marketing expense was $9.7 million during the year ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $4.7 million, or 95%, compared to $5.0 million during the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by the partial year commercialization of the ADHD product portfolio of Neos, which was acquired on March 19, 2021.
General and administrative. Total general and administrative expense was $25.5 million during the year ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $5.8 million, or 30%, compared to $19.7 million during the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by the full year operations of our fiscal year 2020 acquisitions and the partial year expenses of Neos, which was acquired on March 19, 2021.
Acquisition related costs. Acquisition related costs was $2.9 million during the year ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $0.6 million, or 24%, compared to $2.3 million during the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was due primarily to the Neos Merger on March 19, 2021. Such costs include legal fees, due diligence expenses and financial advisory fees.
Restructuring costs. Restructuring costs was $4.9 million during the year ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $4.2 million, compared to $0.7 million during the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was due primarily to the Neos Merger on March 19, 2021. Such costs primarily consisted of severance payments for terminated employees.
Impairment of intangible assets. Total impairment expense of intangible assets was $12.8 million during the year ended June 30, 2021, and increase of $12.6 million, compared to $0.2 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was due primarily to the $8.5 million write-off of the licensed intangible asset related to Tuzistra as a result of the impact of COVID-19 and other factors negatively impacting product sales, and $4.3 million write-off of licensed intangible asset related to the March 30, 2021 Natesto divestiture.
Amortization of intangible assets. Total amortization expense of intangible assets was $6.0 million during the year ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $1.5 million, or 34%, compared to $4.5 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was due primarily to the full year amortization of intangible assets related to our fiscal year 2020 acquisitions and the partial year expense for Neos, which was acquired on March 19, 2021.
Other (expense) income, net. Total other (expense) income, net during the year ended June 30, 2021 was expense of approximately $2.1 million, a decrease of $0.5 million, or 21%, compared to other expense of $2.6 million during the year ended June 30, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to an increase in other income of $0.8 million from partial proceeds from the Natesto divestiture, partially offset by an increase in interest expense from the increase in debt as a result of the Neos Merger on March 19, 2021.
Gain (Loss) from contingent consideration. Gain from contingent considerations during the year ended June 30, 2021 was $4.5 million, a decrease of $5.9 million, or 57%, compared to $10.4 million during the year ended June 30, 2020. Of the $4.5 million gain during the year ended June 30, 2021, $1.3 million gain was attributable to change in change in the fair value of the ZolpiMist and Tuzistra contingent consideration liabilities and $3.2 million gain was attributable to change in fair value of the contingent value rights ("CVR's") liability related to the Innovus Merger (see Note 10 - Fair Value Considerations).
Loss on debt extinguishment. During the year ended June 30, 2021, we recognized $1.3 million loss from modification of our obligations under Fixed Payment Arrangement and $0.3 million loss from conversion of outstanding debt to our shares of common stock.
Income tax expense. Our provision for income taxes during the year ended June 30, 2021 was $0.3 million at effective tax rate of 0.45%, primarily comprised of deferred taxes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
We finance our operations through a combination of public offerings of our common stock and warrants, borrowings under our line of credit facility and cash generated from operations.
In June 2020, we initiated an at-the-market offering program ("ATM"), which allow us to sell and issue shares of our common stock from time-to-time. Since initiated in June 2020 through June 30, 2021, we issued a total of 3,093,539 shares of common stock for aggregate proceeds of $23.1 million before estimated offering costs of $2.6 million.
We entered into three separate registered direct stock offerings on March 10, 2020, March 12, 2020 and March 19, 2020 (the “March Offerings”) in which we issued a combination of common stock and warrants. In July 2020, we issued 92,302 warrants to purchase 92,302 shares of our common stock with a weighted-average exercise price of $15.99 to an investment bank. The warrants have a term of one year from the issuance date. These warrants had at issuance a fair value of approximately $0.4 million and were valued using a Black-Scholes model.
In December 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC (“Wainwright”) (as amended and restated, the “Underwriting Agreement”), pursuant to which the underwriter exercised its over-allotment option in full and purchased 4,791,667 shares of our common stock for total proceeds of $28.8 million before estimated offering costs of $2.6 million. Effective June 2, 2021, we terminated the Underwriting Agreement with Wainwright, and pursuant to such termination, there will be no future sales of our common stock under the agreement.
On June 2, 2021, we terminated our “at-the-market” sales agreement with Jefferies LLC. On June 4, 2021, we entered into a Controlled Equity OfferingSM Sales Agreement (the “Cantor Sales Agreement”) with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. (“Cantor”), pursuant to which we agreed to sell up to $30.0 million of our common stock from time to time in “at-the-market” offerings.
In October 2019, our Neos subsidiary entered into a senior secured credit agreement with Encina Business Credit, LLC (“Encina”) as agent for the lenders (the “Loan Agreement”). Under the Loan Agreement, Encina will extend up to $25.0 million in secured revolving loans to us (the “Revolving Loans”), of which up to $2.5 million may be available for short-term swingline loans, against 85% of eligible accounts receivable (see Note 18).
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for the periods indicated:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities during these periods primarily reflected our net losses, partially offset by changes in working capital and non-cash charges including inventory write-down, changes in fair values of various liabilities, stock-based compensation expense, depreciation, amortization and accretion and other charges.
During fiscal 2021, net operating cash outflows totaled $26.0 million. The use of cash was approximately $32.3 million less than the net loss due primarily to non-cash charges of depreciation, amortization and accretion, impairment of intangible assets, stock-based compensation, inventory write-down and loss on debt extinguishment. These charges were offset by gains from change in fair values of contingent consideration and contingent value rights. In addition, our use of cash decreased due to changes in working capital including decreases in accounts receivable and inventory, offset by a decrease in accounts payable.
During fiscal 2020, net operating cash outflows totaled $28.4 million. The use of cash was approximately $14.8 million greater than the net loss due primarily to non-cash gains from change in fair value of contingent consideration and derecognition of contingent consideration. In addition, our use of cash increased due to changes in working capital including increases in accounts receivable, inventory, prepaid and other assets. These charges were offset by depreciation, amortization and accretion and an increase in accrued liabilities and accrued compensation.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities is generally related to our merger and acquisitions as well as purchase of assets to support our operations.
Net cash used in investing activities of $2.8 million during the year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily due to $15.5 million principally for the paydown of debt of Neos as part of the Neos Merger, $2.3 million for the Rumpus asset acquisition and $0.7 million payment of contingent considerations, partially offset by $15.7 million cash acquired due to the Neos Merger.
Net cash used in investing activities of $5.7 million during the year ended June 30, 2020 was primarily due to $1.4 million cash paid for the Innovus merger, $4.5 million for the acquisition of the Pediatric Portfolio from Cerecor, and $0.2 million payment of contingent consideration, partially offset by $0.4 million cash acquired due to the Innovus merger.
Net Cash from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $30.3 million during the year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily from $28.8 million gross proceeds from public offering of our shares in December 2020, offset by $2.6 million in related offering costs and $16.3 million gross proceeds from issuance of our common stock under the ATM, offset by $2.3 million in related offering costs. These increases were partially offset by $6.1 million in payments of fixed payment arrangements, $2.7 million paydown on the revolving loan and $1.0 million repayment of term loans.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $71.1 million during the year ended June 30, 2020. This was primarily related to the (i) October 2019 Offering for gross proceeds of $10.0 million, offset by the offering cost of $0.7 million which was paid in cash; (ii) $49.0 million raised in the March 2020 Offerings, offset by offering costs of approximately $4.5 million, (iii) $27.0 million raised as the result of warrant exercises in March 2020, and (iv) gross proceeds of $6.8 million from the at-the-market offering program in June 2020, offset by offering costs of $0.2 million.
Capital Resources
We have obligations related to our loan and credit facilities, contingent considerations related to our acquisitions, milestone payments and purchase commitments.
Loan and Credit
Upon closing of the Neos Merger, we indirectly assumed $15.6 million principal and $1.0 million in exit fee obligation under Neos’ credit facility with Deerfield. As of June 30, 2021, outstanding under the Deerfield facility, including the exit fee was $16.0 million. Interest is due quarterly at a rate of 12.95% per year. Payment on the Deerfield facility, including the exit fee and any unpaid interest, is due on May 11, 2022. If all or any of the principal is prepaid or required to be prepaid prior to December 31, 2021, then we shall pay, in addition to such prepayment and accrued interest thereon, a prepayment premium equal to 6.25% of the amount of principal prepaid.
Our Neos subsidiary’s Loan Agreement with Encina, provide us with up to $25.0 million in Revolving Loans, of which up to $2.5 million may be available for short-term swingline loans, against 85% of eligible accounts receivable. The Revolving Loans bear variable interest through maturity at the one-month London Interbank Offered Rate, plus an applicable margin of 4.50%. In addition, we are required to pay an unused line fee of 0.50% of the average unused portion of the maximum revolving facility amount during the immediately preceding month. Interest is payable monthly in arrears, upon a prepayment of a loan and on the maturity date. The maturity date under the Loan Agreement is May 11, 2022.
We may permanently terminate the Loan Agreement by prepaying all outstanding principal amounts and accrued interest at any time, subject to at least five (5) business days prior notice to the lender and the payment of a prepayment fee equal to (i) 1.0% of the aggregate principal amount prepaid if such prepayment occurs after October 2, 2020 but on or before October 2, 2021, and (ii) 0.5% of the aggregate principal amount prepaid if such prepayment occurs after October 2, 2021 but before May 11, 2022.
Contractual Obligations, Commitments and Contingencies
As a result of our acquisitions and licensing agreements, we are contractually and contingently obliged to pay, when due, various fixed and milestone payments (see Note 16 - Commitments and Contingencies for additional information).
Upon closing of the Pediatric Portfolio acquisition in October 2019, we assumed fixed payment obligations that required us to make a payment of $4.1 million in the fiscal year 2022, $3.1 million in fiscal year 2023 and annual payments of $2.1 million in each of the fiscal years 2024 and 2025. In addition, in fiscal year 2022, upon occurrence of certain events, we may be required to pay approximately $3.0 million in milestone payments.
In February 2020, upon closing of our Innovus Merger, all of Innovus shares were converted to our common stock and CVRs, which represents contingent additional consideration of up to $16.0 million payable to satisfy future performance milestones. Depending on satisfaction of these conditions, we may be required to pay $2.0 million in fiscal year 2022 and additional $5.0 million in each of the fiscal years 2023 and 2024.
Our Innovus subsidiary is also contractually obliged for inventory purchase commitments, for which we are expected to pay approximately $0.7 million in July 2021 and $0.7 million in fiscal year 2022.
In February 2015, Innovus acquired Novalere, which included the rights associated with distributing FlutiCare. As part of the Novalere acquisition, Innovus is obligated to make five payments of $0.5 million, between fiscal year 2026 through fiscal year 2033, when certain levels of FlutiCare sales are achieved.
In connection with our acquisition of the Rumpus assets, as discussed above under the section “Acquisitions and Divestitures”, we are required to make a payment of $0.6 for an option license fee in April 2022.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments
that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of any contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as reported revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments. We base our estimates on our historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to the notes to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10 K, we believe the following accounting policies to be critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue recognition
We generate revenue from product sales through our Aytu BioPharma segment and Aytu Consumer Health Segment. We recognize revenue when all of the following criteria are satisfied: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations, including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) as each performance obligation is individually satisfied.
Revenue from our Aytu BioPharma segment involves significant judgment and estimates of the net sales price, including estimates of variable consideration (e.g., savings offers, prompt payment discounts, product returns, wholesaler (distributor) fees, wholesaler chargebacks and estimated rebates) to be incurred on the respective product sales, and we recognize the estimated amount as revenue when control of the product is transferred to our customers (e.g., upon delivery). Variable consideration is determined using either an expected value or a most likely amount method. The estimate of variable consideration is also subject to a constraint such that some or all of the estimated amount of variable consideration will only be included in the transaction price to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue (in the context of the contract) will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. Estimating variable consideration and the related constraint requires the use of significant management judgment and other market data. We provide for prompt payment discounts, wholesaler fees and wholesaler chargebacks based on customer contractual stipulations. We analyze recent product return history to determine a reliable return rate. Additionally, management analyzes historical savings offers and rebate payments based on patient prescriptions and information obtained from third party providers to determine these respective variable considerations.
Savings offers
We offer savings programs for our patients covered under commercial payor plans in which the cost of a prescription to such patients is discounted. The amount of redeemed savings offers is recorded based on information from third-party providers against the estimated discount recorded as accrued expenses. The estimated discount is recorded as a gross to net sales adjustments at the time revenue is recognized. Historical trends of savings offers will be regularly monitored, which may result in adjustments to such estimates in the future.
Prompt payment discounts
Prompt payment discounts are based on standard programs with wholesalers and are recorded as a discount allowance against accounts receivable and as a gross to net sales adjustments at the time revenue is recognized.
Wholesale distribution fees
Wholesale distribution fees are based on definitive contractual agreements for the management of our products by wholesalers and are recorded as accrued expenses and as a gross to net sales adjustment at the time revenue is recognized.
Rebates
The Rx Portfolio products are subject to commercial managed care and government managed Medicare and Medicaid programs whereby discounts and rebates are provided to participating managed care organizations and federal and/or state governments. Calculations related to rebate accruals are estimated based on information from third-party providers. Estimated rebates are recorded as accrued expenses and as a gross to net sales adjustment at the time revenue is recognized. Historical trends of estimated rebates will be regularly monitored, which may result in adjustments to such estimates in the future.
Returns
Wholesalers’ contractual return rights are limited to defective product, product that was shipped in error, product ordered by customer in error, product returned due to overstock, product returned due to dating or product returned due to recall or other changes in regulatory guidelines. The return policy for expired product allows the wholesaler to return such product starting six months prior to expiry date to twelve months post expiry date. Estimated returns are recorded as accrued expenses and as a gross to net sales adjustments at the time revenue is recognized. We analyzed return data available from sales since inception date to determine a reliable return rate.
Wholesaler chargeback
The Rx Portfolio products are subject to certain programs with wholesalers whereby pricing on products is discounted below wholesaler list price to participating entities. These entities purchase products through wholesalers at the discounted price, and the wholesalers charge the difference between their acquisition cost and the discounted price back to us. Estimated chargebacks are recorded as a discount allowance against accounts receivable and as a gross to net sales adjustment at the time revenue is recognized based on information provided by third parties.
Inventories
Inventories consist of raw materials, work in process and finished goods and are recorded at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost determined on a first-in, first-out basis. Until objective and persuasive evidence exists that regulatory approval has been received and future economic benefit is probable, pre-launch inventories are expensed into research and development. Post-FDA approval, manufacturing costs for the production of our products are being capitalized into inventory. We periodically review the composition of our inventories in order to identify obsolete, slow-moving, excess or otherwise unsaleable items. Unsaleable items will be written-down to net realizable value in the period identified.
Stock-based compensation expense
Stock-based compensation awards, including grants of stock options, restricted stock and restricted stock units, and modifications to existing awards, are recognized in the statement of operations based on their fair values on the date of grant. Stock option grants are valued on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and compensation costs are recognized ratably over the period of service using the graded method. Restricted stock and restricted stock unit grants are valued based on the estimated grant date fair value of the Company’s common stock and recognized ratable over the requisite service period. Forfeitures are adjusted for as they occur.
We calculated the fair value of options using the Black Scholes option pricing model. Restricted stock and restricted stock unit grants are valued based on the estimated grant date fair value of our common stock. The Black Scholes option pricing model requires the input of subjective assumptions, including stock price volatility and the expected life of stock options. The application of this valuation model involves assumptions that are highly subjective, judgmental and sensitive in the determination of compensation cost. We have not paid and do not anticipate paying cash dividends. Therefore, the expected dividend rate is assumed to be 0%. The expected stock price volatility for stock option awards is based on our stock price volatility in the valuation model. The risk-free rate was based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect commensurate with the expected life assumption. The average expected life of stock options was determined according to the “simplified method” as described in SAB Topic 110, which is the midpoint
between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term. The risk-free interest rate was determined by reference to implied yields available from U.S. Treasury securities with a remaining term equal to the expected life assumed at the date of grant. Forfeitures are adjusted for as they occur.
There is a high degree of subjectivity involved when using option pricing models to estimate stock-based compensation. There is currently no market-based mechanism or other practical application to verify the reliability and accuracy of the estimates stemming from these valuation models, nor is there a means to compare and adjust the estimates to actual values. Although the fair value of employee stock-based awards is determined using an option pricing model, such a model value may not be indicative of the fair value that would be observed in a market transaction between a willing buyer and willing seller. If factors change and we employ different assumptions when valuing our options, the compensation expense that we record in the future may differ significantly from what we have historically reported.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
We assess impairment of long-lived assets when events or changes in circumstances indicates that their carrying value amount may not be recoverable. Long-lived assets consist of property and equipment, net and goodwill and other intangible assets, net. Circumstances which could trigger a review include, but are not limited to: (i) significant decreases in the market price of the asset; (ii) significant adverse changes in the business climate or legal or regulatory factors; (iii) or expectations that the asset will more likely than not be sold or disposed of significantly before the end of its estimated useful life. If the estimated future undiscounted cash flows, excluding interest charges, from the use of an asset are less than the carrying value, a write-down would be recorded to reduce the related asset to its estimated fair value.
Contingent considerations
We classify contingent consideration liabilities related to business acquisitions within Level 3 as factors used to develop the estimated fair value are unobservable inputs that are not supported by market activity. We estimate the fair value of contingent consideration liabilities based on projected payment dates, discount rates, probabilities of payment, and projected revenues. Projected contingent payment amounts are discounted back to the current period using a discounted cash flow methodology.
The fair value of the contingent value rights was based on a model in which each individual payout was deemed either (a) more likely than not to be paid out or (b) less likely than not to be paid out. From there, each obligation was then discounted at a 30% discount rate to reflect the overall risk to the contingent future payouts pursuant to the CVRs. This value is then remeasured for future expected payout as well as the increase in fair value due to the time value of money. These gains or losses, if any, are included as a component of operating cash flows.
Fixed payment arrangements are comprised of minimum product payment obligations relating to either make whole payments or fixed minimum royalties arising from a business acquisition. The fixed payment arrangements were recognized at their amortized cost basis using a market appropriate discount rate and are accreted up to their ultimate face value over time. The liabilities related to fixed payment arrangements are not remeasured at each reporting period, unless we determine the circumstances have changed such that the fair value of these fixed payment obligations would have changed due to changes in company specific circumstances or interest rate environments.
Warrants
We account for liability classified warrants by recording the fair value of each instrument in its entirety and recording the fair value of the warrant derivative liability. The fair value of liability classified derivative financial instruments were calculated using a lattice valuation model. Equity classified warrants are valued using a Black-Scholes model. Changes in the fair value of liability classified derivative financial instruments in subsequent periods were recorded as derivative income or expense for the warrants and reported as a component of cash flows from operations.