Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements regarding our
business and operations. Our actual results may differ materially from those we currently anticipate as a result of the factors we describe under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations as well as our liquidity and capital resources for fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 can be found under Item 7 in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended February 29, 2020, which is available on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and our Investor Relations website at www.azz.com/investor-relations.
Overview
We are a global provider of galvanizing and a variety of metal coating solutions, welding solutions, specialty electrical equipment and highly engineered services to the power generation, transmission, distribution, refining and industrial markets. We operate two distinct business segments, the Metal Coatings segment and the Infrastructure Solutions segment. Our discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is divided by each of our segments, along with corporate costs and other costs not specifically identifiable to a segment. For a reconciliation of segment operating income to consolidated operating income, see Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements. References herein to fiscal years are to the twelve-month periods that end in February of the relevant calendar year. For example, the twelve-month period ended February 28, 2021 is referred to as “fiscal 2021” or “fiscal year 2021.”
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the viral strain of coronavirus ("COVID-19") a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide. The spread of COVID-19 has resulted in most governments issuing restrictive orders, including “shelter in place” orders around the globe to assist in mitigating the spread of the virus.
Subsequently, in March 2020, the Department of Homeland Security’s Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) department issued guidance clarifying that critical infrastructure industries have a responsibility to maintain operations while these restrictive measures are in place. The Company, based on input from the government as well as our customers, has continued most operations under the CISA guidelines in an effort to support critical infrastructure in the areas where we are either required to do so, or where we are able.
While we continue to support our customers, there remains uncertainties regarding the duration and, to what extent, if any, that the COVID-19 pandemic, or newly identified variants, will ultimately have on the demand for our products and services or with our supply chain. We continue to closely monitor the situation as information becomes readily available and continue to take actions to provide for the safety of our personnel, and to support the requirements under CISA.
Our operations remain open globally and the impact to our personnel and operations has been limited by the effects of COVID-19. The most significant impact to us has been our ability to serve customers at their business locations. We have experienced limited customer order deferrals, but there have been few outright customer order cancellations. While governments have taken actions, including the approval of vaccines to limit the impacts of COVID-19, we cannot reasonably estimate the length or severity of this pandemic, or the extent to which the disruption may materially impact our consolidated balance sheet, statements of income or statements of cash flows for fiscal year 2022.
In addition, in March 2020, the U.S. government enacted the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), which among other things, provides employer payroll tax credits for wages paid to employees who are unable to work during the COVID-19 pandemic and options to defer payroll tax payments. Based on an evaluation of the CARES Act, we qualified for the deferral of payroll and other tax payments and we continue to evaluate certain employer payroll tax credits.
Results of Operations
For the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021, we recorded sales of $838.9 million compared to prior year’s sales of $1.062 billion. Of total sales for fiscal 2021, approximately 54.6% were generated from the Metal Coatings segment and approximately 45.4% of our sales were generated from the Infrastructure Solutions segment. Net income for fiscal 2021 was $39.6 million compared to $48.2 million for fiscal 2020. Net income as a percentage of sales was 4.7% for fiscal 2021 as compared to 4.5% for fiscal 2020. Diluted earnings per share decreased by 17.4%, to $1.52 per share for fiscal 2021, compared to $1.84 per share for fiscal 2020.
During fiscal 2021, we divested two businesses and closed a small number of under-performing operations. See "Restructuring and Impairment charges" below.
Backlog
Our backlog relates entirely to our Infrastructure Solutions segment and is inclusive of transaction taxes for certain foreign subsidiaries. As of February 28, 2021, our backlog was $186.1 million, a decrease of $57.7 million, or 23.7%, compared to fiscal 2020. The book to sales ratio increased in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020. The book to sales ratio was 0.94 to 1 for fiscal 2021 and 0.92 to 1 for fiscal 2020. The increase in book to sales ratio in fiscal 2021 resulted from certain multi-year international electrical projects booked in the prior year for which sales were recognized in fiscal 2021.
The following table reflects bookings and sales for fiscal 2021 and 2020 (in thousands, except ratios).
Sales
Our total sales for fiscal 2021 decreased by $222.9 million, or 21.0%, as compared to fiscal 2020.
The following table reflects the breakdown of revenue by segment (in thousands):
Sales for the Metal Coatings segment decreased $41.2 million, or 8.3%, to $457.8 million, from the prior year’s sales of $499.0 million. The decrease in sales was due to lower volumes of steel processed, partially offset by an increase in the selling price of galvanized steel. We believe the lower volumes of steel processed was due to the slowdown of the economy as a result of COVID-19.
Sales for the Infrastructure Solutions segment decreased $181.7 million, or 32.3%, to $381.1 million for fiscal 2021, compared to $562.8 million for fiscal 2020. The decrease in sales for fiscal 2021 was attributable to lower sales volume resulting from certain large international electrical projects recognized in the prior year with no corresponding projects in the current year. In addition, lower sales were due to a significant downturn in the oil and gas markets resulting from the slowdown in the economy driven by COVID-19, and the divestitures in fiscal 2020 and 2021, which accounted for approximately 30% of the decrease.
Operating Income
The following table reflects the breakdown of operating income (loss) by segment (in thousands):
(1) Operating income for the Infrastructure Solutions segment for fiscal 2020 includes impairment charges of $9.2 million, of
which $7.2 million are included in Selling, general and administrative expense, and $2.0 million are included in Cost of
sales.
Operating income for the Metal Coatings segment decreased $12.0 million, or 11.1%, for fiscal 2021, to $95.9 million, as compared to $107.9 million for the prior year. Operating margins decreased slightly to 21.0% for fiscal 2021, as compared to 21.6% for fiscal 2020. These decreases were primarily attributable to the decrease in volume of steel processed, partially offset by a decline in zinc costs and impairment charges, which are described below. The decrease in operating margins was partially offset by cost containment measures that were implemented due to COVID-19.
Operating income for the Infrastructure Solutions segment decreased $26.4 million for fiscal 2021, to $6.5 million, as compared to $32.8 million for the prior year. Operating margins for this segment were 1.7% for fiscal 2021, as compared to 5.8% for fiscal 2020. The decrease in operating income was primarily attributable to decreased sales as noted above and the divestitures in fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2021. Selling, general and administrative costs decreased due to cost containment measures that were implemented due to COVID-19. In addition, we recognized impairment charges and the loss on the sale of a subsidiary of $9.2 million for fiscal 2021. See "Restructuring and Impairment charges" below.
Corporate expenses decreased $2.0 million, to $40.8 million for fiscal 2021, compared to $42.8 million for fiscal 2020. The decrease is primarily due to lower payroll, travel and administrative costs.
Restructuring and Impairment Charges
During fiscal 2021, the board of directors approved a plan to divest certain non-core businesses within the Company. We closed on the sale of two businesses, one in each of our Metal Coatings and Infrastructure Solutions segments. We also sold one non-operating location in our Metal Coatings segment, and have one operating and one non-operating location classified as held for sale. The assets and liabilities of the businesses expected to be disposed of within the next twelve months are included in "Assets held for sale" in the accompanying consolidated balance sheet. In addition, we closed a small number of Metal Coatings locations that were in underperforming and lower growth geographies.
During fiscal 2021, we recorded certain charges related to these restructuring activities, which are summarized in the table below:
In February 2020, we completed the sale of our nuclear logistics business in our Infrastructure Solutions segment, and recognized a loss on disposal of $18.6 million. The strategic decision to divest of the business reflects our long-term strategy to focus on core businesses and markets.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for fiscal 2021 decreased $3.8 million, or 28.3%, to $9.6 million, as compared to $13.5 million in fiscal 2020. This decrease is primarily attributable to lower average outstanding debt balances and favorable interest rates on our variable-rate revolving credit facility. As of February 28, 2021, we had gross outstanding debt of $179.0 million compared to $203.0 million at the end of fiscal 2020. AZZ's debt to equity ratio was 0.29 to 1 at the end of fiscal 2021, compared to 0.32 to 1 at the end of fiscal 2020, as we reduced debt during the year and refinanced our existing senior notes. For additional information on outstanding debt, see Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements.
Other (Income) Expense, Net
For fiscal 2021, other expense, net remained flat, at $1.0 million. The activity for both years consisted primarily of foreign currency losses resulting from unfavorable movements in exchange rates.
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes reflected an effective tax rate of 22.3% for fiscal 2021 and 25.7% for fiscal 2020. The decrease is due primarily to unfavorable return to provision adjustments related to tax credits in the prior year and statute lapses of uncertain tax positions in the current year.
In March 2020, subsequent to the end of our fiscal year 2020, the CARES Act was enacted into law to provide emergency assistance and health care response for businesses and others affected by the 2020 coronavirus pandemic. Significant changes impacting businesses include, but are not limited to (i) the businesses' ability to temporarily increase the allowable interest deduction by raising the interest expense limitation from 30% of adjusted taxable income ("ATI") to 50% of ATI for tax years beginning in 2019 and 2020, (ii) temporary suspension of the 80% taxable income limitation to allow net operating losses to fully offset taxable income for taxable years before 2021, (iii) a technical correction to the applicability of 100% bonus depreciation for qualified improvement property, and (iv) a provision for a retention credit for certain qualified wages paid by a qualified employer to an employee. We will continue to evaluate the CARES Act for the fiscal year 2021 tax return.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have historically met our cash needs through a combination of cash flows from operating activities along with bank and bond market debt. Our cash requirements are generally for operating activities, cash dividend payments, capital improvements, debt repayment and acquisitions. We believe that our cash position, cash flows from operating activities and our expectation of continuing availability to draw upon our credit facilities are sufficient to meet our cash flow needs for the foreseeable future.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows by category for the periods presented (in thousands):
Net cash provided by operating activities for fiscal 2021 was $92.0 million, compared to $142.3 million for fiscal 2020. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities for fiscal 2021 is primarily attributable to a decrease in non-cash charges, related primarily to the loss on disposal of businesses and other impairment charges, and the impact of decreases in working capital, primarily due to changes in inventories, accounts payable and accrued expenses, partially offset by changes in contract assets and liabilities.
Net cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2021 was $28.6 million, compared to $69.3 million for fiscal 2020. The decrease in cash used during fiscal 2021 was primarily attributable to decreased acquisition activity, partially offset by higher capital expenditures and a decrease in net proceeds received from divestitures. The breakdown of capital spending by segment for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019 can be found in Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements.
Net cash used in financing activities for fiscal 2021 was $88.4 million, compared to $59.7 million for fiscal 2020. The decrease in cash used for financing activities during fiscal 2021 was primarily attributable to an increase in net payments on the revolver, and repurchases of shares of Company common stock, partially offset by an increase of $25.0 million in debt, following the Company's repayment of its 2011 Senior Notes and the funding of the 2020 Senior Notes. See "Financing and Capital" and “Share Repurchases” sections below for additional information.
Financing and Capital
2017 Revolving Credit Facility
On March 27, 2013, the Company entered into a credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with Bank of America and other lenders. The Credit Agreement provided for a $75.0 million term facility and a $225.0 million revolving credit facility that included a $75.0 million “accordion” feature. The Credit Agreement is used to provide for working capital needs, capital improvements, dividends, future acquisitions and letter of credit needs.
On March 21, 2017, the Company executed the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “2017 Credit Agreement”) with Bank of America and other lenders. The 2017 Credit Agreement amended the following provisions of the Credit Agreement: (i) extending the maturity date until March 21, 2022, (ii) providing for a senior revolving credit facility in a principal amount of up to $450 million, with an additional $150 million accordion, (iii) including a $75 million sublimit for the issuance of standby and commercial letters of credit, (iv) including a $30 million sublimit for swing line loans, (v) restricting indebtedness incurred in respect of capital leases, synthetic lease obligations and purchase money obligations not to exceed $20 million, (vi) restricting investments in any foreign subsidiaries not to exceed $50 million in the aggregate, and (vii) including various financial covenants and certain restricted payments relating to dividends and share repurchases as specifically set forth in the 2017 Credit Agreement. The balance due on the $75.0 million term facility under the previous Credit Agreement was paid in full as a result of the execution of the 2017 Credit Agreement.
The financial covenants, as defined in the 2017 Credit Agreement, require the Company to maintain on a consolidated basis a Leverage Ratio not to exceed 3.25:1.0 and an Interest Coverage Ratio of at least 3.00:1.0. The Line of Credit will be used to finance working capital needs, capital improvements, dividends, future acquisitions, letter of credit needs and share repurchases.
Interest rates for borrowings under the 2017 Credit Agreement are based on either a Eurodollar Rate or a Base Rate plus a margin ranging from 0.875% to 1.875% depending on our Leverage Ratio (as defined in the 2017 Credit Agreement). The Eurodollar Rate is defined as LIBOR for a term equivalent to the borrowing term (or other similar interbank rates if LIBOR is unavailable). The Base Rate is defined as the highest of the applicable Fed Funds rate plus 0.50%, the Prime rate, or the Eurodollar Rate plus 1.0% at the time of borrowing. The 2017 Credit Agreement also carries a Commitment Fee for the unfunded portion ranging from 0.175% to 0.30% per annum, depending on our Leverage Ratio. The effective interest rate was 2.75% as of February 28, 2021.
As of February 28, 2021, we had $29.0 million of outstanding debt against the 2017 Credit Agreement and letters of credit outstanding under the 2017 Credit Agreement in the amount of $9.6 million, which left approximately $411.4 million of additional credit available.
2011 Senior Notes
On January 21, 2011, the Company entered into a Note Purchase Agreement, pursuant to which the Company issued $125.0 million aggregate principal amount of its 5.42% unsecured Senior Notes (the “2011 Senior Notes”), through a private placement. Amounts under the agreement were due in a balloon payment on the January 2021 maturity date.
The Company repaid the 2011 Senior Notes upon maturity in January 2021 with the proceeds from the 2020 Senior Notes, which are described below.
2020 Senior Notes
On October 9, 2020, the Company completed a private placement transaction and entered into a Note Purchase Agreement, whereby the Company agreed to borrow $150.0 million of senior unsecured notes (the “2020 Senior Notes”), consisting of two separate tranches:
•7-year borrowing: $70.0 million priced at 2.77% coupon, and
•12-year borrowing: $80.0 million priced at 3.17% coupon.
The proceeds of the $80.0 million tranche was funded on December 17, 2020. The $70.0 million tranche was funded in January 2021. The Company used the proceeds to repay the existing $125.0 million 5.42% Senior Notes maturing on January 20, 2021, as well as for general corporate purposes. Interest on the 2020 Senior Notes will be paid semi-annually.
The Company's debt agreements require the Company to maintain certain financial ratios. As of February 28, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all covenants or other requirements set forth in the debt agreements.
Share Repurchases
On January 19, 2012, the Company's Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to ten percent of the then outstanding shares of the Company's common stock (the "2012 Authorization"). The 2012 Authorization did not have an expiration date, and the amount and prices paid for any future share purchases under the authorization were to be based on market conditions and other factors at the time of the purchase. Repurchases under the 2012 Authorization were made through open market purchases or private transactions.
On November 10, 2020, the Company's Board of Directors authorized a $100 million share repurchase program pursuant to which the Company may repurchase its common stock (the “2020 Authorization”). Repurchases under the 2020 Authorization will be made through open market and/or private transactions, in accordance with applicable federal securities laws, and could include repurchases pursuant to Rule 10b5-1 trading plans, which allows stock repurchases when the Company might otherwise be precluded from doing so.
During fiscal 2021, the Company repurchased 882,916 of its common shares in the amount of $32.3 million at an average purchase price of $36.60 under the 2012 Authorization. The Company purchased 330,829 of its common shares in the amount of $16.0 million at an average purchase price of $48.36 under the 2020 Authorization during fiscal 2021.
Other Exposures
We have exposure to commodity price increases in both segments of our business, primarily copper, aluminum, steel and nickel based alloys in the Infrastructure Solutions segment and zinc and natural gas in the Metal Coatings segment. We attempt to minimize these increases through escalation clauses in customer contracts for copper, aluminum, steel and nickel based alloys, when market conditions allow and through fixed cost contract purchases on zinc. In addition to these measures, we
attempt to recover other cost increases through improvements to our manufacturing process, supply chain management, and through increases in prices where competitively feasible.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Commitments
As of February 28, 2021, the Company did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under SEC rules. Specifically, there were no off-balance sheet transactions, arrangements, obligations (including contingent obligations), or other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons that have, or may have, a material effect on the financial condition, changes in financial condition, sales or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources of the Company.
The following summarizes our operating lease obligations, purchase commitments, debt principal payments and interest payments for the next five years and beyond (in thousands):
_______________________
(1) The Company has entered into a new lease in Poland that commenced in March 2021, and will result in contractual obligations of approximately $3.3 million over the 15-year lease term, which is not included in the table above.
(2) Purchase commitments consist of non-cancelable forward contracts to purchase zinc at various volumes and prices. All such contracts expire in fiscal 2022.
(3) For variable-rate debt, interest payments are calculated using current interest rates.
In addition, as of February 28, 2021, we had total outstanding letters of credit in the amount of $24.7 million. These letters of credit are issued for a number of reasons, but are most commonly issued in lieu of customer retention withholding payments covering warranty or performance periods.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates that affect the reported value of assets, liabilities, sales and expenses. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances and form the basis for our conclusions. We continually evaluate the information used to make these estimates. With the global economic contraction and uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, certain of our accounting estimates, particularly estimates involving prospective financial information, may change as business and economic conditions change. Such changes, if they were to occur, could be material to the Company’s financial statements. Accounting policies and estimates considered most critical are allowances for doubtful accounts, accruals for contingent liabilities, revenue recognition, impairment of long-lived assets, identifiable intangible assets and goodwill, including purchase accounting and accounting for income taxes. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The development and selection of the critical accounting policies and the related disclosures below have been reviewed with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. More information regarding significant accounting policies can be found in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements.
Allowance for Credit Losses
The carrying value of our accounts receivable is periodically evaluated based on the likelihood of collection. An allowance is maintained for estimated credit losses resulting from our customers’ inability to make contracted payments. The allowance is determined by historical experience of uncollected accounts, the level of past due accounts, overall level of outstanding accounts receivable, information about specific customers with respect to their inability to make payments and future expectations of conditions that might impact the collectability of accounts receivable. If the financial condition of our
customers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, additional allowances could be required.
Accruals for Contingent Liabilities
Accruals for contingent liabilities, including estimated claims, such as self-insurance programs, warranty, environmental and other contingent liabilities, are estimated based on management's judgments regarding the amount of expenses that will ultimately be incurred. We use past history and experience and other specific circumstances surrounding these claims to evaluate the amount of liability that should be recorded. Actual results may be different than the amounts we estimate.
Revenue recognition
We recognize revenue when all five of the following criteria have been satisfied:
1)Identification of the contract with a customer;
2)Identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
3)Determination of the transaction price;
4)Allocation of the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract; and
5)Fulfillment of performance obligations.
Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. The amount and timing of revenue recognition varies by segment based on the nature of the goods or services provided and the terms and conditions of the customer contract.
Metal Coatings Segment
Our Metal Coatings segment is a provider of hot dip galvanizing, powder coating and other metal coating applications to the steel fabrication and other industries. Within this segment, our contracts are typically governed by a customer purchase order or work order. The contract generally specifies the delivery of what constitutes a single performance obligation consisting of metal coating services. We combine contracts for revenue recognition purposes that are executed with the same customer within a short timeframe from each other and that purport to be for a single commercial objective.
We recognize sales over time as the metal coating is applied to customer provided material as our process enhances a customer controlled asset. Contract modifications are rare within the Metal Coatings segment and most contracts in this segment are on a fixed price basis with no variable consideration.
Infrastructure Solutions segment
Our Infrastructure Solutions segment is a provider of specialized products and services designed to support industrial, electrical and other industrial applications. Within this segment, the contract is governed by a customer purchase order and an executed product or services agreement. The contract generally specifies the delivery of what constitutes a single performance obligation consisting of either custom built products, custom services, or off-the-shelf products. For arrangements with multiple performance obligations, the transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation based on the relative standalone selling prices of the goods or services being provided and revenue is recognized upon the satisfaction of each performance obligation. We combine contracts for revenue recognition purposes that are executed with the same customer within a short timeframe from each other and that purport to be for a single commercial objective.
For custom built products, we recognize sales over time provided that the goods do not have an alternative use to the Company and we have an unconditional right to payment for work completed to date plus a reasonable margin. For custom services, which consist of specialized welding and other professional services, we recognize sales over time as the services are rendered due to the fact that the services enhance a customer owned asset. For off-the-shelf products, which consist of tubing and lighting products, we recognize sales upon the transfer of the goods to the customer.
For sales recognized over time, we generally use the cost-to-cost method of revenue recognition. Under this approach, the extent of progress towards completion is measured based on the ratio of costs incurred to date compared with the total estimated costs upon completion of the project. This method requires the estimation of total contract sales, project costs and margin, which involves significant management judgment. As a significant change in one or more of these estimates could affect the profitability of our contracts, management reviews and updates its contract related estimates regularly. We recognize adjustments in estimated margin on contracts on a cumulative catch-up basis and subsequent sales are recognized using the adjusted estimate. If the estimate of contract margin indicates an anticipated loss on the contract, we recognize the total estimated loss in the period identified.
Due to the custom nature of the goods and services provided, contracts within the Infrastructure Solutions segment are often modified to account for changes in contract specifications and requirements. A contract modification exists when the modification either creates new, or changes the existing, enforceable rights and obligations in the contract. For us, most contract modifications are related to goods or services that are not distinct from those in the original contract due to the significant interrelationship or interdependencies between the deliverables. Such modifications are accounted for as if they were part of the original contract. As a result, the transaction price and the measure of progress for the performance obligation to which it relates, is recognized as an adjustment to sales on a cumulative catch-up basis.
In addition to fixed consideration, the contracts within our Infrastructure Solutions segment can include variable consideration, including claims, incentive fees, liquidated damages or other penalties. We recognizes revenue for variable consideration when it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. We estimate the amount of revenue to be recognized on variable consideration using the expected value or the most likely amount method, whichever is expected to better predict the amount.
Contract Assets and Liabilities
The timing of revenue recognition, billings and cash collections results in accounts receivable, contract assets (unbilled receivables), and contract liabilities (customer advances and deposits) on the consolidated balance sheets, primarily related to our Infrastructure Solutions segment. Amounts are billed as work progresses in accordance with agreed upon contractual terms, either at periodic intervals (e.g., weekly or monthly) or upon the achievement of contractual milestones. Billing can occur subsequent to revenue recognition, resulting in contract assets. In addition, we sometimes receive advances or deposits from our customers, before revenue is recognized, resulting in contract liabilities. These assets and liabilities are reported on the consolidated balance sheets on a contract-by-contract basis at the end of each reporting period.
Other
No general rights of return exist for customers and, where necessary, we establish provisions for estimated warranties. We generally do not sell extended warranties. Revenue (sales) is recognized net of applicable sales and other taxes. We do not adjust the contract price for the effects of a significant financing component if we expect, at contract inception, that the period between when we transfer a good or service to a customer and when the customer pays for that good or service will be one year or less, which is generally the case. Sales commissions are deferred and recognized over the same period as the related sales. Shipping and handling is treated as a fulfillment obligation instead of a separate performance obligation and such costs are expensed as incurred.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets, Identifiable Intangible Assets and Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired in each business combination and is not amortized. We test goodwill and intangible assets with an indefinite life for potential impairment annually during the fourth quarter and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the reporting unit below its carrying amount, which would result in impairment. For our goodwill assessment, we have three reporting units: i) Metal Coatings segment, ii) the electrical portion of the Infrastructure Solutions segment and iii) the industrial portion of our Infrastructure Solutions segment.
We use the income approach to complete our annual goodwill assessment. The income approach uses future cash flows and estimated terminal values for our reporting units that are discounted using a market participant perspective to determine the fair value of the reporting unit, which is then compared to the carrying value of that reporting unit to determine if there is impairment. The income approach includes assumptions about revenue growth rates, operating margins and terminal growth rates, discounted by an estimated weighted-average cost of capital derived from other publicly-traded companies that are similar but not identical from an operational and economic standpoint. A significant change in events, circumstances or any of these assumptions could result in an impairment of long-lived assets, including identifiable intangible assets. Variables impacting future cash flows include, but are not limited to, the level of customer demand for and response to products and services we offer to the power generation market, the electrical transmission and distribution markets, the general industrial market and the hot dip galvanizing market, changes in economic conditions of these various markets, changes in costs of raw material and natural gas, and the availability of experienced labor and management to implement our growth strategies. During fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, our testing concluded that none of our goodwill was impaired. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for information about the goodwill write-off related to divestitures in fiscal 2021 and 2020, and Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements regarding our restructuring and impairment charges.
Accounting for Income Taxes
Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits reflect management’s best assessment of estimated current and future taxes to be paid. We are subject to income taxes in both the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining the consolidated income tax expense. Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the financial statements, which will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future.
In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets within the jurisdiction from which they arise, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. In projecting future taxable income, we begin with historical results adjusted for the results of discontinued operations and incorporate assumptions about the amount of future state, federal, and foreign pretax operating income adjusted for items that do not have tax consequences. The assumptions about future taxable income require significant judgment and are consistent with the plans and estimates we are using to manage the underlying businesses. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax asset will not be realized.
The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations in a multitude of jurisdictions across our global operations. Generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America ("GAAP") states that a tax benefit from an uncertain tax position may be recognized when it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including resolutions of any related appeals or litigation processes, on the basis of the technical merits. We may (1) record unrecognized tax benefits as liabilities in accordance with GAAP and (2) adjust these liabilities when our judgment changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available. Because of the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from our current estimate of the unrecognized tax benefit liabilities. These differences will be reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense in the period in which new information is available.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Part II, Item 8. Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 1, Summary of Significant Account Policies, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the actual and expected dates of adoption and estimated effects on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Non-GAAP Disclosure
In addition to reporting financial results in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles in the United States (“GAAP”), the Company has provided adjusted operating income, adjusted earnings and adjusted earnings per share (collectively, the “Adjusted Earnings Measures”), which are non-GAAP measures. Management believes that the presentation of these measures provides investors with a greater transparency comparison of operating results across a broad spectrum of companies, which provides a more complete understanding of the Company’s financial performance, competitive position and prospects for the future. Management also believes that investors regularly rely on non-GAAP financial measures, such as adjusted operating income, adjusted earnings and adjusted earnings per share, to assess operating performance and that such measures may highlight trends in the Company’s business that may not otherwise be apparent when relying on financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP.
The following tables provides a reconciliation for the years ended February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020 between the various measures calculated in accordance with GAAP to the Adjusted Earnings Measures (dollars in thousands, except per share data):
______________________________
(1) Operating income for fiscal 2020 includes impairment charges of $9.2 million, of which $7.2 million are included in Selling,
general and administrative expense, and $2.0 million are included in Cost of sales.
______________________________
(1) Earnings per share amounts included in the table above may not sum due to rounding differences.
(2) Restructuring and impairment charges for fiscal 2020 includes a loss on divestiture of our nuclear logistics business of $18.6 million,
which is included in restructuring and impairment charges on the consolidated statements of income, and other impairment charges of $9.2
million, of which $7.2 million are included in Selling, general and administrative expense, and $2.0 million are included in Cost of sales.
(3) The non-GAAP effective tax rates for fiscal 2021 and 2020 were 22.9% and 17.2%, respectively. For fiscal 2020, tax
benefit includes the tax benefit related to the loss on the disposal and a tax adjustment related to our nuclear logistics business.