Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions that could cause actual results to differ materially from our expectations. Factors that could cause such differences include those described in the section titled “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report. We undertake no obligation to update any of the forward-looking statements.
OVERVIEW
Global industrial and aerospace end markets came under significant pressure beginning in the first quarter of 2020 as a result of COVID-19. Company management reacted quickly, shifting focus to cost management and productivity initiatives as key strategic objectives for 2020. Both the Industrial and Aerospace segments experienced significant declines within several end-markets, requiring that the Company be proactive in managing costs throughout 2020. Productivity and restructuring actions partially offset the impact of lower operating profit contributions across the businesses. Management continued its focus on cash flow and working capital management in 2020 and generated $215.5 million in cash flow from operations.
The Company reported sales of $1,124.4 million in 2020, a decrease of $366.7 million, or 24.6%, from 2019. Organic sales (net sales excluding both foreign currency, acquisition, and divestiture impacts) decreased by $325.6 million, or 21.8%, including decreases of $127.3 million, or 13.6%, at Industrial and $198.3 million, or 35.9%, at Aerospace, largely due to a volume decrease resulting from the significant impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. See "Impact of Coronavirus" below. The Company completed the sale of its Seeger business on February 1, 2020, reducing sales by $51.2 million in the 2020 period relative to the prior year period. The weakening of the U.S. dollar against foreign currencies increased net sales within the Industrial segment by approximately $10.2 million.
Operating income decreased 47.8% from $236.4 million in 2019 to $123.4 million in 2020 and operating margin decreased from 15.9% in 2019 to 11.0% in 2020, largely a result of the profit impact of lower sales volumes, $18.2 million of restructuring charges, primarily employee severance and other termination benefits, and $2.5 million of divestiture charges related to the completion of the sale of the Seeger business, partially offset by significant productivity and cost initiatives including workforce reductions, as well as employee furloughs, temporary salaried employee pay reductions, reductions in overtime, discretionary spending initiatives and reductions in certain other employee related costs, including incentive compensation. The 2019 period also included $2.1 million of short-term purchase accounting adjustments related to the acquisition of Gimatic and a $5.6 million non-cash impairment charge related to the sale of the Seeger business (see below).
On December 20, 2019, the Company entered into a Share Purchase and Transfer Agreement with the Kajo Neukirchen Group to sell the Seeger business, consisting of partnership interests and shares, respectively, of Seeger-Orbis GmbH & Co. OHG and Seeger-Orbis Mechanical Components (Tianjin) Co., Ltd. (“Seeger”). The Company subsequently completed the sale of Seeger, effective February 1, 2020. See Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Impact of Coronavirus
The COVID-19 outbreak and a continued spread of the global pandemic resulted in a substantial curtailment of business activities worldwide and caused weakened economic conditions, both in the United States and abroad. As part of growing efforts to contain the spread of COVID-19 earlier in the year, a number of state, local and foreign governments imposed various restrictions on the conduct of business and travel. Certain of these restrictions remained in place through year end. The Company's global manufacturing operations continued throughout the year, however throughout the year COVID-19 had a significant impact on order rates and recovery expectations within Industrial and, on a more targeted basis, Aerospace end-markets. See further discussion within “Item 7 - Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Outlooks” as both Industrial and Aerospace end markets and order activity sequentially improved throughout the second half of 2020. As a result of COVID-19 and in support of continuing its manufacturing efforts, the Company has undertaken a number of steps to protect its employees, suppliers and customers, as their safety and well-being is priority. The Company has instituted additional precautions to comply with health and safety guidelines and to protect its employees, including enhanced deep cleaning, staggered shifts, temperature checking, use of face masks, practicing social distancing and limiting non-employees at our locations, amongst other safety related policies and procedures. Many of the Company's office workers in our manufacturing facilities, as well as the Corporate and segment headquarters, continue to work remotely, where possible. The senior management team meets regularly to review and assess the status of the Company's operations and the health and safety of its employees. The Company’s global supply chain management team continues to monitor and manage its ability to operate effectively and, to date, the Company has not experienced any significant disruptions within its supply chain.
Table of Content
Ongoing communications with the Company's suppliers to identify and mitigate risk and to manage inventory levels will continue. Notwithstanding the Company's continued operations, COVID-19 has clearly had and may have further negative impacts on its operations, customers and supply chain despite the preventative and precautionary measures being taken.
The Company currently maintains sufficient liquidity and continues to evaluate ways to enhance its liquidity position as it navigates through the disrupted business environment that has resulted from COVID-19. At December 31, 2020, the Company held $79.1 million in cash and cash equivalents and had $406.4 million of undrawn borrowing capacity under its $1,000.0 million Amended Credit Facility, subject to covenants in the Company's revolving debt agreements (limited by the covenants to $161.5 million as of December 31, 2020). The Company executed certain amendments to its revolving Credit Agreement and its Note Purchase Agreement (defined below) in October 2020 related to covenants. On February 10, 2021, the Company and certain of its subsidiaries entered into the a sixth amended and restated revolving credit agreement, retaining Bank of America, N.A. as the Administrative Agent. The Amended Credit Agreement (defined below) maintained the $1,000.0 million of availability within the facility, while extending the maturity date through February 2026. Pursuant to its Agreements, the Company remained in compliance with all covenants as of December 31, 2020 and anticipates continued compliance in each of the next four quarters. See additional discussion regarding the Company's debt agreements and liquidity within “Liquidity and Capital Resources." At this time, the Company has not drawn on its debt agreements as it believes the availability of those funds are not at risk given the strength of the underlying bank syndicate. The Company does not currently anticipate requiring any additional debt facilities. Given the current environment, the Company is closely monitoring its cash generation, usage and preservation including the management of working capital to generate cash. To better align costs with the current business environment, the Company has taken several actions, which include restructuring and workforce reductions (the "Actions"). Resulting pre-tax charges of $19.1 million were recorded in 2020, including $18.2 million and $0.9 million of charges that impacted operating income and Other Expense (Income), respectively. See additional discussion regarding the Actions within "Results of Operations” below. Additional cost savings initiatives included temporary reductions in compensation for salaried employees including Company officers and members of the Board of Directors, employee furloughs and reductions in discretionary expenses. The Actions and cost savings initiatives allowed the Company to partially offset the operating profit impacts of lower sales volumes during the current period. The Actions were designed to benefit current and prospective periods. In addition, management has suspended share repurchase activity.
Entering 2020, automotive, tool and die, and personal care and packaging end markets were experiencing lingering softness. Given the onset of COVID-19, sales pressure increased significantly within these markets during the latter part of the first quarter, extending into the second quarter of 2020. Certain end-markets within Industrial began to show gradual signs of recovery in the third quarter of 2020, with continuing improvement in the fourth quarter as Industrial orders continued to rise. Medical end markets in which the Company participates, in particular, remained favorable, with improvements also becoming evident within packaging markets. Auto production rates also notably improved throughout the second half of 2020, however have recently come under pressure due to semiconductor shortages that are expected to impact near-term automotive production. Aerospace end markets were strong entering 2020, however sales for the segment declined nearly 50% in each of the second and third quarters as compared with prior year periods, followed by sequential improvement in excess of 10% in the fourth quarter of 2020 as sales and orders improved within both the OEM and the Aftermarket businesses. The Company anticipates continued sales pressure within OEM as certain aircraft programs have been delayed as a result of COVID-19. Within the Aftermarket business, aircraft have been removed from service and utilization is reduced, impacting the more profitable repair and overhaul and spare parts businesses. See additional discussion regarding the anticipated financial impact of COVID-19 within “Outlooks."
Business Transformation
Acquisitions and strategic relationships with our customers have been a key growth driver for the Company, and we continue to seek alliances which foster long-term business relationships. These acquisitions have allowed us to extend into new or adjacent markets, expand our geographic reach, and commercialize new products, processes and services. The Company continually evaluates its business portfolio to optimize product offerings and maximize value. We have significantly transformed our business with our entrance into new markets, including most recently automation, and we continue to pursue strategic additions that align with our portfolio of differentiated products.
In 2018, the Company completed its acquisition of Gimatic S.r.l. (“Gimatic”). Gimatic designs and develops robotic grippers, advanced end-of-arm tooling systems, sensors and other automation components for intelligent robotic handling solutions and industrial automation applications. Headquartered in Italy, Gimatic has a sales network extending across Europe, North America and Asia. Its diversified automation end market includes customers within the automotive, packaging, health care, and food and beverage industries, among others. The Company acquired Gimatic for an aggregate purchase price of 363.4 million Euros ($411.0 million) which includes adjustments under the terms of the Sale and Purchase Agreement, including 7.8
Table of Content
million Euros ($8.8 million) related to cash acquired. The acquisition of Gimatic was financed using cash on hand and borrowings under the Company's Amended Credit Agreement. See Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. The acquisition of Gimatic resulted in the Company's establishment of the Automation business unit, which operates within the Industrial segment.
Also in 2018, the Company completed its acquisition of Industrial Gas Springs ("IGS"), a recognized designer, manufacturer and supplier of customized gas springs. IGS's diversified end markets include general industrial, transportation, aerospace, and medical, among others. IGS was integrated with the Nitrogen Gas Products business ("NGP"), where its complementary and diversified end markets and strong customized product application engineering allow the Company to scale and broaden NGP’s technology portfolio and customer base. In a related move, the Company transferred its Associated Spring Raymond ("ASR") operations from Engineered Components to NGP. With these changes, and given the broader solutions focus of the combined business, the Company has renamed NGP the Force & Motion Control business (“FMC”), which operates in the Industrial segment. FMC is a leader in the development of nitrogen gas springs, gas-hydraulic suspensions, customized gas springs, spring elements and precision custom struts, providing innovative force and motion control solutions to customers in a wide range of metal forming and other industrial markets.
Management Objectives
Management is focused on continuing the Company's transformation by executing on its profitable growth strategy comprised of the following elements:
•Build a world-class Company focused on high margin, high growth businesses
•Leverage the Barnes Enterprise System ("BES") as a significant competitive advantage
•Expand and protect our core intellectual property to deliver differentiated solutions
•Effectively allocate capital to drive top quartile total shareholder return.
The successful execution of this strategy requires making value-enhancing investments in organic growth (new products, processes, systems, services, markets and customers) and strategic acquisitions while divesting of businesses or existing product lines to effectively redeploy capital. Management remains focused on a deeper deployment of BES across the Company to advance Commercial Excellence, Operational Excellence and Financial Excellence. In addition, we remain focused on optimizing two key strategic enablers that will strengthen our competitive position:
•Cultivate a culture of innovation and build upon intellectual property to drive growth
•Enhance our Talent Management System to recruit, develop and retain an engaged and empowered workforce.
The combined benefits from growth investment and execution of the strategic enablers are expected to generate long-term value for the Company's shareholders, customers and employees.
Our Business
The Company consists of two operating segments: Industrial and Aerospace.
Key Performance Indicators
Management evaluates the performance of its reportable segments based on the sales, operating profit, operating margins and cash generation of the respective businesses, which includes net sales, cost of sales, selling and administrative expenses and certain components of other income and other expenses, as well as the allocation of corporate expenses. Each segment has standard key performance indicators (“KPIs”), a number of which are focused on employee safety-related metrics (total recordable incident rate and lost time incident rate), customer metrics (on-time-delivery and quality), internal effectiveness and productivity/efficiency metrics (sales effectiveness, global sourcing, operational excellence, functional excellence, cost of quality, days working capital and return on invested capital) and specific KPIs on profitable growth.
Key Industry Data
In both segments, management tracks a variety of economic and industry data as indicators of the health and outlook of a particular sector.
Table of Content
At Industrial, key data for the manufacturing operations include the Institute for Supply Management’s manufacturing PMI Composite Index (and similar indices for European and Asian-based businesses); the Bureau of Economics Industrial Production Index ("the IPI"); IHS-Markit worldwide forecasts for light vehicle production, as well as new model introductions and existing model refreshes; North American heavy duty vehicle production; Interconnection Consulting Hot Runner Systems Worldwide Report for Auto, Medical, Personal Care and Packaging industries; and global GDP growth forecasts.
At Aerospace, management of the Aftermarket business monitors the number of aircraft in the active fleet, the number of aircraft temporarily or permanently taken out of service, aircraft utilization rates for the major airlines, engine shop visits, airline profitability, aircraft fuel costs and passenger traffic. The Aerospace OEM business regularly tracks orders, backlog and deliveries for each of the major aircraft manufacturers, as well as engine purchases made for new aircraft. Management also monitors annual appropriations for the U.S. defense market related to purchases of new or used aircraft and engine components.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Sales
2020 vs. 2019:
COVID-19 began to impact sales during the first quarter of 2020. Beginning late in the first quarter, Industrial and Aerospace business units began to experience the negative impact on demand for certain products and services due to COVID-19's disruption of global manufacturing and consumer spending. The Company's global manufacturing, in certain regions, operated at reduced levels during the first quarter. As described further below, the impacts of COVID-19 significantly increased during the second quarter of 2020, however both segments reflected sequential sales improvements in the third and fourth quarters of 2020. Customer orders and corresponding demand for certain product, although sequentially improving during the second half of 2020, remained soft relative to the prior year period, impacting sales volumes accordingly.
The Company reported net sales of $1,124.4 million in 2020, a decrease of $366.7 million, or 24.6%, from 2019. Organic sales decreased by $325.6 million, including decreases of $127.3 million and $198.3 million at Industrial and Aerospace, respectively. Sales at Industrial and Aerospace reflected sequential improvements of 19.3% and 2.3%, respectively, in the third quarter of 2020, as compared with the second quarter of 2020, followed by sequential improvements of 6.2% and 10.9%, respectively, in the fourth quarter of 2020, as compared with the third quarter of 2020. The year-over-year decrease at Industrial was driven by organic sales declines across the Industrial business units, driven primarily by the impact of COVID-19. The Automation business was organically flat relative to the 2019 period. Automotive end markets remained soft relative to the prior year period, reflecting the impacts of both COVID-19 and broader global economic uncertainty, although these end markets saw the most sequential improvement during the second half of 2020 as automotive production improved throughout the year. Potential changes in regulatory requirements related to personal care and packaging markets continued to impact Industrial sales, although orders within both markets improved in the second half of 2020 versus a year ago, reflecting a release of previously deferred projects by customers. An increase in volumes within medical end-markets also benefited sales. The Company completed the sale of its Seeger business on February 1, 2020, reducing sales by $51.2 million during the 2020 period. The sales decrease at Aerospace relative to the 2019 period was driven by declines in sales within both the OEM and Aftermarket businesses, resulting primarily from a global slowdown in aerospace markets driven by COVID-19, and more specifically a resultant decline in aircraft utilization and the removal of aircraft from service by certain airlines. See additional discussion related to the anticipated financial impacts of COVID-19 within the segment outlooks below. See discussion related to COVID-19's risk on the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements within "Part I - Item 1A - Risk Factors." The weakening of the U.S. dollar against foreign currencies increased net sales within the Industrial segment by approximately $10.2 million. The Company's international sales decreased by 25.2% year-over-year while domestic sales decreased by 23.6%. Excluding the impact of foreign currency translation on sales, however, the Company's international sales in 2020 decreased by 26.4% from 2019.
2019 vs. 2018:
The Company reported net sales of $1,491.1 million in 2019, a decrease of $4.8 million, or 0.3%, from 2018. Organic sales decreased by $28.9 million, including a decrease of $80.3 million at Industrial, partially offset by a $51.4 million increase
Table of Content
at Aerospace. The decrease at Industrial was driven by organic sales declines within each of the Industrial business units, largely due to lower global auto production rates and delays in automotive model change releases, reflecting global trade uncertainty throughout the year and potential changes in regulatory requirements. Acquired businesses contributed incremental sales of $54.5 million during the 2019 period. The impact of foreign currency translation decreased sales within Industrial by approximately $30.4 million as the U.S. dollar strengthened against foreign currencies. The increase at Aerospace was driven primarily by sales growth within the Aftermarket businesses, whereas continued growth on newer, more technologically advanced engine platforms contributed to increased sales within the OEM business. Sales within Aerospace were not significantly impacted by changes in foreign currency as these are largely denominated in U.S. dollars. The Company’s international and domestic sales remained flat year-over-year. Excluding the impact of foreign currency translation on sales, however, the Company's international sales in 2019 increased 2.7%, inclusive of sales through acquisition, from 2018.
Expenses and Operating Income
(1)Sales less cost of sales
2020 vs. 2019:
Cost of sales in 2020 decreased 23.6% from 2019, while gross profit margin decreased from 36.7% in 2019 to 35.9% in 2020. Gross margins improved slightly at Industrial and declined at Aerospace. At Industrial, the gross margin increase during 2020 was primarily driven by the cost savings initiatives discussed above, including workforce reductions and employee furloughs, combined with the absence of $2.1 million of short-term purchase accounting adjustments related to the acquisition of Gimatic. Within Aerospace, a reduction in gross profit in 2020 was driven by significantly lower volumes across the OEM and Aftermarket businesses. Selling and administrative expenses in 2020 decreased 9.9% from the 2019 period. This reduction was driven partially by lower sales volumes, primarily due to productivity and cost initiatives that included workforce reductions, as well as employee furloughs, temporary salaried employee pay reductions and discretionary spending initiatives. Also benefiting the current period were lower amortization of certain intangibles related to earlier acquisitions and a reduction in employee related costs (including lower incentive compensation). The primary drivers of lower selling and administrative expenses during 2020 were partially offset by $18.2 million of pre-tax charges related to restructuring and workforce actions and $2.5 million of divestiture charges related to the completion of the Seeger sale. As a percentage of sales, selling and administrative costs increased from 20.8% in 2019 to 24.9% in the 2020 period. Operating income in 2020 decreased 47.8% to $123.4 million from the 2019 period and operating income margin decreased from 15.9% in the 2019 period to 11.0% in the 2020 period, primarily driven also by the items noted above.
2019 vs. 2018:
Cost of sales in 2019 decreased 2.0% from 2018, while gross profit margin increased from 35.6% in 2018 to 36.7% in 2019. Gross profit declined at Industrial and improved at Aerospace. At Industrial, gross profit declined as a result of a lower profit contribution from reduced organic sales, partially offset by a reduction in short-term purchase accounting adjustments and favorable cost productivity actions taken during the 2019 period. The current period includes $2.1 million of short-term purchase accounting adjustments related to the acquisition of Gimatic, whereas 2018 included $5.6 million of short-term purchase accounting adjustments related to the acquisitions of Gimatic and IGS. Gross profit margins improved at Industrial, largely as a result of productivity actions taken within the segment. Selling and administrative expenses in 2019 increased 3.3% from the 2018 period, due to a $5.6 million impairment charge related to the sale of the Seeger business (see Note 3) and increased costs related to the acquisition of Gimatic (owned throughout 2019), primarily the amortization of acquired intangible assets. These increases were partially offset by the absence of transaction costs of $2.4 million related to Gimatic and IGS and due diligence costs in the prior year period, combined with the favorable cost impact of productivity actions taken by management during 2019. As a percentage of sales, selling and administrative costs increased from 20.1% in the 2018 period to
Table of Content
20.8% in the 2019 period. Operating income in 2019 increased 2.0% to $236.4 million from 2018 and operating income margin increased from 15.5% to 15.9%, driven primarily by the items noted above.
Interest expense
2020 vs. 2019:
Interest expense in 2020 decreased $4.7 million to $15.9 million from 2019, primarily as a result of decreased borrowings during the period and the impact of lower average interest rates.
2019 vs. 2018:
Interest expense in 2019 increased $3.8 million to $20.6 million from 2018, primarily as a result of increased borrowings during the period, partially offset by the impact of lower average interest rates.
Other expense (income), net
2020 vs. 2019:
Other expense (income), net in 2020 was $5.9 million compared to $9.0 million in 2019. Other expense (income) includes foreign currency losses of $1.5 million in the 2020 period compared with losses of $6.5 million in the 2019 period. Other expense (income) during the 2020 and 2019 periods also includes other components of pension expense (income) of $1.5 million and $(0.2) million, respectively.
2019 vs. 2018:
Other expense (income), net in 2019 was $9.0 million compared to $7.4 million in 2018. Other expense (income) includes foreign currency losses of $6.5 million in the 2019 period compared with losses of $3.9 million in the 2018 period. Other expense (income) during the 2019 and 2018 periods also includes other components of pension expense (income) of $(0.2) million and $1.6 million, respectively.
Income Taxes
U.S. Tax Reform
On December 22, 2017 the U.S. government enacted comprehensive tax legislation commonly referred to as the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Act”). The Act made broad and complex changes to the U.S. Tax Code that affected 2017 and future years and included, but was not limited to, requiring a one-time Transition Tax on certain unrepatriated earnings of foreign subsidiaries of the Company, which is payable over eight years, exempted foreign dividends paid to the U.S. during the year from taxation if such earnings were included within the Transition Tax, introduced several new international tax regimes for multi-national entities including the global intangible low-taxed income (“GILTI”) and reduced the U.S. Corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21%.
The SEC issued Staff Accounting Bulletin 118 ("SAB 118") in December 2017, which provided guidance on accounting for the tax effects of the Act including providing a measurement period in which to finalize the accounting under Accounting Standards Codification 740, Income Taxes ("ASC 740"). This measurement period was not permitted to extend beyond one year from the Act enactment date and required all adjustments to be final as of December 22, 2018, one year following the Act's enactment. The U.S Department of Treasury ("U.S. Treasury") issued certain Notices and proposed regulations ("interpretative guidance") in 2018 addressing the Transition Tax component of the Act. During the period 2017 through the current year, various states have also issued guidance related to calculating state tax as a result of the Act as well as clarification and guidance as to state tax treatment of the Transition Tax. The Company applied the impact of the interpretative guidance in computing its income tax expense for 2018 through 2020.
As part of our analysis of the impact of the Act, we recorded a one-time discrete tax expense of $99.2 million as of December 31, 2017. This amount primarily consisted of net expense related to the deemed repatriation Transition Tax of $86.7 million (payable over an eight-year period as of the date of the Act), combined with the impacts of reduced corporate income tax rates on our deferred tax assets of $4.2 million, state taxation on the earnings reported under the Transition Tax of $1.4 million and foreign income and withholding taxes of $6.9 million related to the repatriation of certain foreign earnings. Various
Table of Content
adjustments were made throughout 2018 as the Company applied interpretive guidance issued by the U.S. Treasury as discussed above. A reduction in tax expense of $2.6 million was recorded during 2018, for a final tax expense resulting from the Act of $96.6 million. As required pursuant to SAB 118, the tax effect of the Act was final as of December 22, 2018 (one year after Enactment), and was recorded as such as of December 31, 2018.
2020 vs.2019:
The Company's effective tax rate was 37.6% in 2020, compared with 23.4% in 2019. The increase in the effective tax rate in 2020 was primarily due to a decrease in projected earnings in jurisdictions with lower rates, the recognition of tax expense related to the completed sale of the Seeger business during the first quarter of 2020, the impact of GILTI and excess tax charges related to stock awards. During 2020, the Company repatriated $85.0 million, compared to $153.0 million in 2019. Pursuant to the Act, neither dividend was taxable in the U.S.
The Aerospace and Industrial Segments have a number of multi-year tax holidays in Singapore and China. The tax holiday in China expired at the end of 2020. The Company plans to apply for approval of a potential three-year holiday in China which could reduce the tax rate from 25% to 15%. The Company anticipates notification of a decision on its application for the holiday in the later half of 2021. These holidays are subject to the Company meeting certain commitments in the respective jurisdictions. Aerospace was granted an income tax holiday for operations recently established in Malaysia. The Company is in discussion with the Malaysian government as to the start date of the holiday and currently anticipates the holiday beginning in 2022 at a point to be determined. The holiday would then remain effective for ten years. See Note 15 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
In 2021, the Company expects the effective tax rate to approximate 30%, a decrease from the rate of 37.6% in 2020. The decrease in the effective tax rate is driven primarily by the absence of the tax charges related to the completed sale of the Seeger business incurred in 2020, a more favorable projected earnings mix and lower GILTI tax expense.
2019 vs. 2018:
The Company's effective tax rate was 23.4% in 2019, compared with 19.9% in 2018. The increase in the 2019 effective tax rate from the full year 2018 rate was primarily due to the absence of adjustments to certain international valuation reserves and final adjustments resulting from the impact of U.S. Tax Reform (see discussion above). During 2019, the Company repatriated $153.0 million to the U.S., compared to $228.8 million in 2018. Pursuant to the Act, neither dividend was taxable in the U.S. for federal purposes.
See Note 15 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for a reconciliation of the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate to the consolidated effective income tax rate.
Income and Income Per Share
Basic and diluted net income per common share decreased for 2020 as compared to 2019 due to a decrease in net income year over year. Basic and diluted weighted average common shares outstanding decreased due to the repurchase of 900,000 and 396,000 shares during 2019 and 2020, respectively, as part of the Company's publicly announced Repurchase Program. The impact of the repurchased shares was partially offset by the issuance of additional shares for employee stock plans.
Table of Content
Financial Performance by Business Segment
Industrial
2020 vs. 2019:
Sales at Industrial were $770.1 million in 2020, a decrease of $168.4 million, or 17.9%, from 2019. Organic sales decreased by $127.3 million, or 13.6%, during 2020, driven by lower sales across the businesses, primarily driven by the impact of COVID-19. Automation remained essentially flat organically as compared with the 2019 period. Sales declined in several end markets, although Industrial recognized an increase in volumes within medical, which remained strong throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. COVID-19 began to impact sales during the first quarter of 2020 when the Company began to experience lower demand for certain products and services due to the pandemic's disruption of global manufacturing and consumer spending. The impacts of COVID-19 significantly increased through the second quarter of 2020, however Industrial experienced sequential quarterly sales improvements during the second half of 2020. Specifically, sales saw sequential improvements of 19.3% and 6.2% between the second and third quarters of 2020 and the third and fourth quarters of 2020, respectively, providing indications of a recovery as the year progressed. Global automotive production rates began to improve during the third quarter of 2020, benefiting sales during the second half of the year. Earlier in the year, orders related to automotive model changes had been deferred due to the impacts of both COVID-19 and broader economic uncertainty, as customers continued to defer certain capital expenditures. The release of certain of these orders during the fourth quarter of 2020 provided benefit to Industrial. Within the personal care and packaging markets, proposed environmental regulations affecting product composition and disposability continued to impact sales and orders. However, orders within the packaging market improved on a year-over-year basis, also reflecting the release of some previously deferred projects. Sequential sales within the packaging market improved in the second half of 2020. The Company completed the sale of its Seeger business on February 1, 2020, reducing sales by $51.2 million during the 2020 period. See additional discussion below and within "Part II - Item 1A - Risk Factors". The impact of foreign currency translation increased sales by approximately $10.2 million as the U.S. dollar weakened against foreign currencies.
Operating profit in 2020 at Industrial was $66.6 million, a decrease of $47.4 million, or 41.6% from 2019. Operating profit was negatively impacted by the lower profit contribution of declining organic sales volumes resulting from COVID-19, $15.9 million of restructuring charges, primarily employee severance and other termination benefits, and $2.5 million of divestiture charges related to the completion of the Seeger sale, partially offset by the benefits of the significant cost initiatives that were taken throughout 2020, including workforce reductions, as well as employee furloughs, temporary salaried employee pay reductions and discretionary spending initiatives. Government incentives in certain regions also served as a benefit to operating profit. Lower intangible amortization and a reduction in employee related costs (including lower incentive compensation) also partially offset the profit impact of lower volumes and restructuring charges during the 2020 year period. The 2019 period included a $5.6 million non-cash impairment charge related to the sale of the Seeger business and $2.1 million of short-term purchase accounting adjustments related to the acquisition of Gimatic. Operating margin decreased from 12.1% in the 2019 period to 8.6% in the 2020 period, primarily as a result of these items.
Outlook:
At Industrial, management is focused on generating organic sales growth through the introduction of new products and services and by leveraging the benefits of its diversified products and global industrial end-markets, however the onset of COVID-19 presented new challenges for the Company during 2020. Our ability to generate sales growth is impacted by recent disruptions within the global markets served by all of our businesses. Given the onset of COVID-19, sales pressure increased further within these markets, as described above. Markets within our key regions of China, Europe and North America have recently begun to indicate signs of recovery, however certain end-markets remain challenged given higher levels of economic uncertainty. Several automotive plants, including plants operated by certain of our more significant customers, experienced closures earlier in the year. Although these facilities have since returned to production, demand and manufacturing capacity has been impacted by the conditions across the globe. General industrial end markets remained relatively soft during the first half of 2020, however we have seen a gradual recovery in sales during the second half of the year as the global economic environment improves. It is expected that conditions within the general industrial market will continue to improve as the broader economy
Table of Content
recovers. For overall industrial end-markets, the manufacturing Purchasing Managers' Index ("PMI") reflect the impacts of COVID-19. PMI within the United States, Europe and China initially deteriorated to below 50 (indicating contraction) between December 31, 2019 and March 31, 2020, as the impacts of the global pandemic began to weigh. PMIs subsequently improved through December 31, 2020, with all regions rising to above 50, with particular strength in the U.S. and certain regions within Europe. Global forecasted production for light vehicles has improved within the Europe, China and North America markets during the second half 2020, a positive sign for our businesses given strengthened forecasts for 2021. Production, however, has recently come under pressure due to semiconductor shortages that are expected to impact near-term automotive builds. Within our Molding Solutions business, global medical markets remain healthy and are expected to remain favorable given an aging population and expanded medical applications. The automotive hot runner market continues to improve following the release of projects with automotive original equipment manufacturers related to model launches. Orders within the packaging market have improved sequentially since the second quarter of 2020, however proposed environmental regulations affecting product and packaging composition and disposability may impact future sales within these end markets. Automation end-markets continue to trend positively with increased order activity as we enter 2021 and we look to expand further into adjacent end-markets. Overall industrial end-markets may be impacted by uncertainty related to current and proposed tariffs announced by the United States and the China governments, although developments in this area have been muted given the global shift in focus to combating COVID-19. As noted above, our sales were positively impacted by $10.2 million from fluctuations in foreign currencies. To the extent that the U.S. dollar fluctuates relative to other foreign currencies, our sales may be impacted relative to the prior year periods. The relative impact on operating profit is not expected to be as significant as the impact on sales as most of our businesses have expenses primarily denominated in local currencies, where their revenues reside, however operating margins may be impacted. Management is focused on sales growth through innovation, acquisition and expanding geographic reach. Strategic investments in new technologies, manufacturing processes and product development are expected to provide benefits over the long term and management continues to evaluate such opportunities.
Given the recent pressures on sales resulting from COVID-19, the Company is focused on the proactive management of costs to mitigate the impacts on operating profit. Management also remains focused on strategic investments and new product and process introductions, as well as driving productivity by leveraging BES. Recent cost saving initiatives taken in 2020 include the workforce reductions described above, in addition to employee furloughs, temporary salaried employee pay reductions and discretionary spending initiatives. The Company continued to manage its cost structure to align with the intake of orders and sales given continued uncertainty within certain end-markets as we closed out the year. Management will continue to explore opportunities for additional cost savings as we enter 2021, while working closely with vendors and customers as it relates to the timing of deliveries and pricing initiatives. It is anticipated that operating profit will continue to be impacted by changes in sales volume noted above, mix and pricing, and the levels of short-term investments made within each of the Industrial businesses. Operating profit may also be impacted by enactment of or changes in tariffs, trade agreements and trade policies that may affect the cost and/or availability of goods, including aluminum and steel. Costs associated with new product and process introductions, restructuring and other cost initiatives, strategic investments and the integration of acquisitions may negatively impact operating profit.
2019 vs. 2018:
Sales at Industrial were $938.5 million in 2019, a decrease of $56.2 million, or 5.7%, from 2018. Acquired businesses contributed incremental sales of $54.5 million during the 2019 period. Organic sales decreased by $80.3 million, or 8.1%, during 2019 reflecting declines in sales within each of the businesses. Softness in automotive end markets continued to negatively impact sales volumes, largely due to lower global auto production rates and delays in automotive model change releases, reflecting global trade uncertainty throughout the year and potential changes in regulatory requirements. Increased volumes within the medical end market, however, partially offset the automotive, personal care and packaging related declines within the Molding Solutions business. Proposed environmental regulations affecting product and packaging composition and disposability have impacted sales within these end markets. The impact of foreign currency translation decreased sales by approximately $30.4 million as the U.S. dollar strengthened against foreign currencies.
Operating profit in 2019 at Industrial was $114.0 million, a decrease of $16.4 million, or 12.6% from 2018, driven by the reduced profit contribution of lower organic sales, a $5.6 million non-cash impairment charge related to the sale of the Seeger business (see Note 3) and an increase in intangible amortization as a result of the Gimatic acquisition, partially offset by favorable productivity, the profit contribution of acquisition volumes and a reduction in short-term purchase accounting adjustments. Operating profit in 2019 includes $2.1 million of short-term purchase accounting adjustments related to the acquisition of Gimatic, whereas 2018 included $5.6 million of short-term purchase accounting adjustments and $2.4 million of acquisition transaction costs, both related to the acquisitions of Gimatic and IGS, in addition to due diligence costs related to the acquisition of Gimatic. Operating margin decreased from 13.1% in the 2018 period to 12.1% in the 2019 period, primarily as a result of these items.
Table of Content
Aerospace
2020 vs. 2019:
Aerospace recorded sales of $354.3 million in 2020, a 35.9% decrease from 2019. Sales declined within both the OEM and the Aftermarket businesses relative to the 2019 period. The decline in OEM sales was largely attributed to COVID-19 which severely impacted the aerospace industry and, to a lesser extent, 737 Max aircraft delays, following an earlier suspension of production by Boeing. OEM sales, more specifically, were impacted by a reduction in engine and airframe build schedules, in addition to high levels of inventory within the supply chain. Sales within the Aftermarket maintenance repair and overhaul ("MRO") and spare parts businesses also deteriorated during 2020 as airline traffic and aircraft utilization severely declined as a result of COVID-19. In addition, the removal of aircraft from service by certain airlines resulted in an unprecedented reduction in demand. Sales within Aerospace grew sequentially by 10.9% between the third and fourth quarters of 2020, with gradual signs of a recovery, however a recovery to pre-COVID-19 levels is expected to take several years. See Outlook section below. Sales within the segment are largely denominated in U.S. dollars and therefore were not significantly impacted by changes in foreign currency.
Operating profit at Aerospace decreased 53.6% from 2019 to $56.8 million. The operating profit decrease resulted from the profit impact of decreased volumes at both the OEM and Aftermarket businesses, as discussed above, and $2.3 million of restructuring charges, primarily employee severance and other termination benefits, partially offset by significant productivity and cost savings initiatives including reductions in workforce, as well as employee furloughs, reduced overtime, temporary pay reductions within leadership and discretionary spending initiatives. Government incentives in certain regions also served as a benefit to operating margins. Reductions in employee related costs (including lower incentive compensation) also served as a partial offset to the profit impact of lower volumes. Operating margin decreased from 22.2% in the 2019 period to 16.0% in the 2020 period, primarily a result of volume decreases across all businesses, combined with the impacts of the items discussed above.
Outlook:
Sales in the Aerospace OEM business are based on the general state of the aerospace market driven by the worldwide economy and are supported by its order backlog through participation in certain strategic commercial and defense-related engine and airframe programs. With the onset of COVID-19, previously strong aerospace end markets have come under severe pressure, driving an OEM sales decline of roughly 35% in 2020 as compared with the respective 2019 period. OEM sales and orders improved sequentially during the third and fourth quarters in 2020 after experiencing a decline during the second quarter. The Company expects, however, that the OEM business will continue to see lingering softness in demand for its manufactured components as aircraft production rates at Boeing and Airbus have been reduced. The duration and depth of the aerospace market disruptions remain uncertain at this time, however a recovery to pre-pandemic levels is expected to take several years. Aerospace management continues to work with customers to evaluate engine and airframe build schedules, giving management the ability to react timely to such changes. Management is also working closely with suppliers to align raw material schedules with production requirements. Management was successful in executing long-term agreements in 2020 with this focus remaining in 2021, while expanding our share of production on key programs. Backlog at OEM was $572.0 million at December 31, 2020, a decrease of 28.6% since December 31, 2019, at which time backlog was $800.7 million (sequential increase of 7.1% from backlog of $534.2 million as of September 30, 2020), with a significant portion of this decline resulting from changes in our customers' production schedules for aircraft engines. The recent trend of improved OEM orders would support a continued increase in OEM backlog as we enter 2021, however backlog may also decline as Aerospace customers adjust orders based on their changing aircraft production schedules. Approximately 45% of OEM backlog is currently scheduled to ship in the next 12 months. If COVID-19 continues to have a material impact on the aviation industry, including our more significant OEM customers, it will continue to materially affect our Aerospace business and results of operations. The Aerospace OEM business may also be impacted by changes in the content levels on certain platforms, changes in customer sourcing decisions, adjustments to customer inventory levels, commodity availability and pricing, vendor sourcing capacity and the use of alternate materials. Additional impacts may include the redesign of parts, quantity of parts per engine, cost schedules agreed to under contract with the engine and airframe manufacturers, as well as the pursuit and duration of new programs.
Table of Content
In the Aerospace Aftermarket business, COVID-19 is impacting previously strong aerospace end markets. Significantly reduced aircraft utilization, increased levels of aircraft removed from service, and reduced airline profitability are expected to continue to negatively impact our business in the mid-term. Sales in the Aerospace Aftermarket business may continue to be impacted by inventory management and changes in customer sourcing, deferred or limited maintenance activity during engine shop visits and the use of surplus (used) material during the engine repair and overhaul process. Management believes that its Aerospace Aftermarket business continues to be competitively positioned based on well-established long-term customer relationships, including maintenance and repair contracts in the MRO business and long-term Revenue Sharing Programs ("RSPs") and Component Repair Programs ("CRPs"). The MRO business may also be impacted by airlines that closely manage their aftermarket costs as engine performance and quality improves. Fluctuations in fuel costs and their impact on airline profitability and behaviors within the aerospace industry could also impact levels and frequency of aircraft maintenance and overhaul activities, and airlines' decisions on maintaining, deferring or canceling new aircraft purchases, in part based on the economics associated with new fuel efficient technologies.
Given the recent pressures on sales growth resulting from COVID-19, the Company is focused on the proactive management of costs as it takes action to mitigate continued pressure on operating profit. Recent cost saving initiatives that were taken throughout 2020 include workforce reductions, employee furloughs, reduced overtime, temporary pay reductions within leadership and discretionary spending initiatives. Although these charges were primarily recorded earlier in 2020, these actions were critical in partially offsetting the lower profit contribution of lower sales throughout the full year. Aerospace will continue to explore opportunities for margin improvement in 2021, including working closely with vendors and customers as it relates to the timing of deliveries and pricing initiatives. Management also remains focused on strategic investments and new product and process introductions. Driving productivity through the application of BES continues as a key initiative. Operating profit is expected to be affected by the impact of the changes in sales volume noted above, mix and pricing, particularly as they relate to the higher profit Aftermarket RSP spare parts business, and investments made in each of its businesses. Operating profits may also be impacted by potential changes in tariffs, trade agreements and trade policies that may affect the cost and/or availability of goods. Costs associated with new product and process introductions, the physical transfer of work to other global regions, additional productivity initiatives and restructuring activities may also negatively impact operating profit.
2019 vs. 2018:
Aerospace recorded sales of $552.6 million in 2019, a 10.3% increase from 2018. Sales increased within all of the Aerospace businesses. The original equipment manufacturing ("OEM") business continued to benefit from the ramp of newer, more technologically advanced engine programs. The sales increase reflects increased volume generated by these platforms. Sales within the aftermarket maintenance repair and overhaul ("MRO") and spare parts businesses increased during 2019 as airline traffic and aircraft utilization remained strong, with additional volumes being obtained largely from existing customers. Sales within the segment are largely denominated in U.S. dollars and therefore were not significantly impacted by changes in foreign currency.
Operating profit at Aerospace increased 20.8% from 2018 to $122.5 million. The operating profit increase resulted from the profit impact of increased volumes at both the OEM and aftermarket businesses, as discussed above. Operating margin increased from 20.2% in the 2018 period to 22.2% in the 2019 period, primarily a result of volume increases across all businesses, combined with favorable mix from the MRO and spare parts businesses.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Management assesses the Company's liquidity in terms of its overall ability to generate cash to fund its operating and investing activities. Of particular importance in the management of liquidity are cash flows generated from operating activities, capital expenditure levels, dividends, capital stock transactions, effective utilization of surplus cash positions overseas and adequate lines of credit. The Company currently maintains sufficient liquidity and will continue to evaluate ways to enhance its liquidity position as it navigates through the disrupted business environment that has resulted from COVID-19.
The Company believes that its ability to generate cash from operations in excess of its internal operating needs is one of its financial strengths. Management continues to focus on cash flow and working capital management, and anticipates that operating activities in 2021 will generate sufficient cash to fund operations. Given the recent global market disruptions caused by COVID-19, the Company is closely monitoring its cash generation, usage and preservation including the management of working capital to generate cash. The Company does not currently anticipate requiring any additional debt facilities. See additional discussion regarding currently available debt facilities further below.
Table of Content
To better align costs with the current business environment, the Company has taken several actions. In June 2020, the Company announced restructuring and workforce reduction actions ("Actions") to be implemented across its businesses and functions in response to the macroeconomic disruption in global industrial and aerospace end markets arising from COVID-19. A resulting pre-tax charge of $18.2 million was recorded through operating profit in 2020, primarily related to employee severance and other termination benefits, with the amounts expected to be paid by the end of 2021, primarily using cash on hand. The Actions were substantially complete in 2020 and reduced the Company’s global workforce by approximately 8%. A liability of $13.2 million was included within accrued liabilities as of December 31, 2020. The Company expects to incur additional costs of approximately $1.0 million through the first half of 2021 related to the Actions. Additional cost saving initiatives included temporary reductions in compensation for salaried employees, including Company officers and Board directors, employee furloughs and reductions in discretionary expenses. The Company continues to invest within its businesses, with its estimate of 2021 capital spending to be approximately $55 million.
In February 2017, the Company and certain of its subsidiaries entered into a fourth amendment to its fifth amended and restated revolving credit agreement (the “Fourth Amendment”) and retained Bank of America, N.A. ("Bank of America") as the Administrative Agent for the lenders. The $850.0 million facility was scheduled to mature in February 2022. The Fourth Amendment also increased the previous accordion feature from $250.0 million, allowing the Company to request additional borrowings of up to $350.0 million. The Company may exercise the accordion feature upon request to the Administrative Agent as long as an event of default has not occurred or is not continuing. The borrowing availability of $850.0 million, pursuant to the terms of the Fourth Amendment, allows for multi-currency borrowing which includes Euro, British pound sterling or Swiss franc borrowing, up to $600.0 million. In September 2018, the Company and one of its wholly owned subsidiaries entered into a Sale and Purchase Agreement to acquire Gimatic S.r.l (the "Acquisition"). See Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. In conjunction with the Acquisition, the Company requested additional borrowings of $150.0 million that was provided for under the existing accordion feature. The Administrative Agent for the lenders approved the Company's access to the accordion feature and on October 19, 2018 the lenders formally committed the capital to fund such feature, resulting in the execution of the fifth amendment to the Amended Credit Agreement (the "Fifth Amendment"). The Fifth Amendment, effective October 19, 2018, thereby increased the borrowing availability of the existing facility to $1,000.0 million. The Company may also request access to the residual $200.0 million of the accordion feature. Depending on the Company’s consolidated leverage ratio, and at the election of the Company, borrowings under the Amended Credit Agreement will bear interest at either LIBOR plus a margin of between 1.10% and 1.70% or the base rate, as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement, plus a margin of 0.10% to 0.70%. Multi-currency borrowings, pursuant to the Amended Credit Agreement, bear interest at their respective interbank offered rate (i.e. Euribor) or 0.00% (higher of the two rates) plus a margin of between 1.10% and 1.70%.
In October 2014, the Company entered into a Note Purchase Agreement (“Note Purchase Agreement”), among the Company and New York Life Insurance Company, New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation and New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation Institutionally Owned Life Insurance Separate Account, as purchasers, for the issuance of $100.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.97% senior notes due October 17, 2024 (the “3.97% Senior Notes”). The 3.97% Senior Notes are senior unsecured obligations of the Company and pay interest semi-annually on April 17 and October 17 of each year at an annual rate of 3.97%. The 3.97% Senior Notes will mature on October 17, 2024 unless earlier prepaid in accordance with their terms. Subject to certain conditions, the Company may, at its option, prepay all or any part of the 3.97% Senior Notes in an amount equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 3.97% Senior Notes so prepaid, plus any accrued and unpaid interest to the date of prepayment, plus the Make-Whole Amount, as defined in the Note Purchase Agreement, with respect to such principal amount being prepaid. The Note Purchase Agreement contains customary affirmative and negative covenants that are similar to the covenants required under the Amended Credit Agreement, as discussed below.
The Company's borrowing capacity remains limited by various debt covenants in the Fourth Amendment of the Amended Credit Agreement and the Note Purchase Agreement (the "Agreements"). The Agreements required the Company to maintain a ratio of Consolidated Senior Debt, as defined, to Consolidated EBITDA, as defined, of not more than 3.25 times ("Senior Debt Ratio"), a ratio of Consolidated Total Debt, as defined, to Consolidated EBITDA of not more than 3.75 times ("Total Debt Ratio") and a ratio of Consolidated EBITDA to Consolidated Cash Interest Expense, as defined, of not less than 4.25, in each case at the end of each fiscal quarter; provided that the debt to EBITDA ratios are permitted to increase for a period of four fiscal quarters after the closing of certain permitted acquisitions. A permitted acquisition is defined as an acquisition exceeding $150.0 million, for which the acquisition of Gimatic on October 31, 2018 qualified. With the completion of a permitted acquisition, the Senior Debt Ratio cannot exceed 3.50 times and the Total Debt Ratio cannot exceed 4.25 times. The increased ratios were allowed for a period of four fiscal quarters subsequent to the close of the permitted acquisition and therefore expired in the fourth quarter of 2019.
On October 8, 2020, the Company entered into the sixth amendment to the Amended Credit Agreement with Bank of America (the “Sixth Amendment”) and the first amendment to the Note Purchase Agreement with New York Life (the “First
Table of Content
NPA Amendment”). The Sixth Amendment and the First NPA Amendment provided for an increase in the Company’s maximum ratio of Consolidated Senior Debt, as defined, to Consolidated EBITDA, as defined, from 3.25 times (or, if a certain permitted acquisition above $150.0 million is consummated, 3.50 times) to 3.75 times in each case at the end of the four fiscal quarters, beginning with December 31, 2020, and regardless of whether a permitted acquisition, as defined, is consummated, providing additional financing flexibility and access to liquidity. Additionally, the Sixth Amendment requires the Company to maintain a maximum ratio of Consolidated Total Debt, as defined, to Consolidated EBITDA, of not more than 3.75 times in each case at the end of the four fiscal quarters, beginning with December 31, 2020, and regardless of whether a permitted acquisition, as defined, is consummated. Furthermore, the First NPA Amendment provides for (i) adjustments to the ratio of Consolidated Total Debt, as defined, to Consolidated EBITDA, as defined, to conform to a more restrictive total leverage ratio that may be required under the Amended Credit Agreement, (ii) an increase in the amount of allowable add-back for restructuring charges when calculating Consolidated EBITDA from $15.0 million to $25.0 million and (iii) a required fee payment equal to 0.50% per annum times the daily outstanding principal amount of the note during each of the four fiscal quarters, following the quarter ended December 31, 2020, if the Company’s Senior Leverage Ratio, as defined, exceeds 3.25 times.
On February 10, 2021, the Company and certain of its subsidiaries entered into the sixth amended and restated senior unsecured revolving credit agreement (the "Amended Credit Agreement") and retained Bank of America, N.A. as the Administrative Agent for the lenders. The Amended Credit Agreement maintains the $1,000.0 million of availability within the facility, while increasing the available borrowings under the accordion feature from $200.0 million to $250.0 million (aggregate availability of $1,250.0 million) and extends the maturity date through February 2026. The Amended Credit Agreement also adjusts the interest rate to either the Eurocurrency rate, as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement, plus a margin of 1.175% to 1.775% or the base rate, as defined in the Amended Agreement, plus a margin of 0.175% and 0.775%, depending on the Company's leverage ratio at the time of the borrowing. Multi-currency borrowings, pursuant to the Amended Credit Agreement, bear interest at their respective interbank offered rate (i.e. Euribor) or 0.00% (higher of the two rates) plus a margin of between 1.175% to 1.775%. As with the earlier facility, the Company's borrowing capacity is limited by various debt covenants in the Amended Credit Agreement, as described further below. The Amended Credit Agreement requires the Company to maintain a Senior Debt Ratio of not more than 3.75 times at the end of each fiscal quarter ending on or before September 30, 2021, after which the ratio will revert to 3.25 times (or, if a permitted acquisition above $150.0 million is consummated, 3.50 times at the end of each of the first four fiscal quarters ending after the consummation of any such acquisition). In addition, the Amended Credit Agreement requires the Company to maintain a Total Debt Ratio of not more than 3.75 for each fiscal quarter (or, if a permitted acquisition above $150.0 million is consummated, 4.25 times at the end of each of the first four fiscal quarters ending after the consummation of any such acquisition, however, such increase in the ratio will not be effective during any period prior to October 1, 2021. A ratio of Consolidated EBITDA to Consolidated Cash Interest Expense, as defined, of not less than 4.25, is required at the end of each fiscal quarter. The Amended Credit Agreement also contemplates the potential replacement of LIBOR (as defined below) with a successor financing rate, pursuant to the intent of the United Kingdom's Financial Conduct Authority to phase out use of LIBOR. See additional discussion immediately below regarding the Company's ongoing evaluation related to this potential change in financing rates. The Company paid fees and expenses of $4.3 million in conjunction with executing the Amended Credit Agreement; such fees will be deferred within Other assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets and will be amortized into interest expense on the Consolidated Statements of Income through its maturity.
The United Kingdom's Financial Conduct Authority, which regulates the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”), announced its intent to phase out the use of LIBOR by the end of 2021. The U.S. Federal Reserve, in conjunction with the Alternative Reference Rates Committee, a steering committee comprised of large U.S. financial institutions, identified the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”) as its preferred benchmark alternative to U.S. dollar LIBOR. Published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, SOFR represents a measure of the cost of borrowing cash overnight, collateralized by U.S. Treasury securities, and is calculated based on directly observable U.S. Treasury-backed repurchase transactions. The Company’s Amended Credit Agreement and corresponding interest rate Swap are tied to LIBOR, with each maturing in February 2026 and January 2022, respectively, as noted above. The Company is evaluating the potential impact of the replacement of LIBOR, but does not anticipate a material impact on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
At December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with all applicable covenants. The Company anticipates continued compliance in each of the next four quarters. The Company's most restrictive financial covenant is the Senior Debt Ratio, which required the Company to maintain a ratio of Consolidated Senior Debt to Consolidated EBITDA of not more than 3.75 times at December 31, 2020. The actual ratio at December 31, 2020 was 3.05 times, as defined.
In 2020, 2019 and 2018, the Company acquired 0.4 million shares, 0.9 million shares and 2.3 million shares of the Company's common stock, respectively, at a cost of $15.6 million, $50.3 million and $138.3 million, respectively.
Table of Content
Operating cash flow may be supplemented with external borrowings to meet near-term business expansion needs and the Company's current financial commitments. The Company has assessed its credit facilities and currently expects that its bank syndicate, comprised of 12 banks, will continue to support its recently executed Amended Credit Agreement, which matures in February 2026. At December 31, 2020, the Company had $406.4 million unused and available for borrowings under its $1,000.0 million Amended Credit Facility, subject to covenants in the Company's revolving debt agreements. At December 31, 2020, additional borrowings of $161.5 million of Total Debt including $161.5 million of Senior Debt would have been allowed under the financial covenants. The Company intends to use borrowings under its Amended Credit Facility to support the Company's ongoing growth initiatives, however the probability of a significant acquisition or divestiture in the near-term is not likely given the current business environment. Nonetheless, the Company continues to analyze potential acquisition targets and end markets that meet our strategic criteria with an emphasis on proprietary, highly-engineered industrial technologies. The Company believes its credit facilities and access to capital markets, coupled with cash generated from operations, are adequate for its anticipated future requirements. The Company has not drawn on its debt agreements as a result of COVID-19, as it believes the availability of those funds are not at risk given the strength of the underlying bank syndicate. The Company maintains communication with its bank syndicate as it continues to monitor its cash requirements.
The Company had $2.1 million in borrowings under short-term bank credit lines at December 31, 2020.
The Company entered into an interest rate swap agreement (the "Swap") on April 28, 2017, with one bank, which converts the interest on the first $100.0 million of the Company's one-month LIBOR-based borrowings from a variable rate plus the borrowing spread to a fixed rate of 1.92% plus the borrowing spread. The swap expires on January 31, 2022. At December 31, 2020, the Company's total borrowings were comprised of approximately 30% fixed rate debt and 70% variable rate debt. At December 31, 2019, the Company's total borrowings were comprised of approximately 25% fixed rate debt and 75% variable rate debt.
The funded status of the Company's pension plans is dependent upon many factors, including actual rates of return that impact the fair value of pension assets and changes in discount rates that impact projected benefit obligations. The unfunded status of the pension plans decreased slightly from $55.1 million at December 31, 2019 to $55.0 million at December 31, 2020 as the increase in the fair value of the pension plan assets was comparable to the increase in the projected benefit obligations ("PBOs"), following an update of certain actuarial assumptions. The Company recorded $1.9 million of non-cash after-tax increases in stockholders equity (through other non-owner changes to equity) when recording the current year adjustments for changes in the funded status of its pension and postretirement benefit plans as required under accounting for defined benefit and other postretirement plans. This increase in stockholders equity resulted primarily from favorable variances between expected and actual returns on pension plan assets, the amortization of actuarial losses and prior service costs recorded earlier (including curtailment and settlement charges resulting from actions taken place during 2020), partially offset by changes in actuarial assumptions, primarily a decrease in discount rates. In 2020, the Company made no discretionary contributions to its U.S Qualified pension plans. The Company expects to contribute approximately $4.7 million to its various defined benefit pension plans in 2021. No discretionary contributions to the U.S. Qualified pension plans are currently planned in 2021. See Note 13 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
As noted above, the U.S. government enacted the Act on December 22, 2017. The Company completed its computation of the Transition Tax as required pursuant to SAB 118 in 2018, resulting in a final net Transition Tax expense of $86.7 million. The Company elected to pay the Transition Tax over the allowed eight year period. The installment payments for the Transition Tax are not expected to have a material impact on the liquidity or capital resources of the Company. The Company expects to make the payments through the use of available cash or borrowings under the Amended Credit Facility.
The Company completed the sale of the Seeger business to KNG effective February 1, 2020. Gross proceeds received were 39.0 million Euros ($42.9 million). The Company yielded net cash proceeds of $36.1 million after consideration of cash sold and transaction costs. Resulting tax charges of $4.2 million were recognized in the first quarter of 2020 following the completion of the sale. The Company utilized the proceeds from the sale to reduce debt under the Amended Credit Facility.
At December 31, 2020, the Company held $79.1 million in cash and cash equivalents, the majority of which was held by foreign subsidiaries. These amounts have no material regulatory or contractual restrictions and are expected to primarily fund international investments. The Act changed the impact of U.S taxation on foreign distributions. The Company is continuously evaluating its position regarding the potential repatriation of overseas cash. The evaluation of potential repatriation is dependent upon several variables, including foreign taxation of dividends and the impact of withholding tax. The Company repatriated $85.0 million to the U.S. during 2020.
Table of Content
Any future acquisitions are expected to be financed through internal cash, borrowings and equity, or a combination thereof. We may from time to time seek to retire or repurchase our outstanding debt through cash purchases and/or exchanges for equity securities, in open market purchases, under a Rule 10b5-1 trading plan, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Such repurchases or exchanges, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors.
Cash Flow
________________________
NM - Not meaningful
Operating activities provided $215.5 million in 2020 compared to $248.3 million in 2019. Operating cash flows in the 2020 period included cash generated by working capital of $99.6 million, which was driven by a reduction in accounts receivable, compared to cash generated by working capital of $18.1 million in the 2019 period. Operating cash flows in the 2019 period were negatively impacted by a $15.0 million discretionary contribution made to the U.S. qualified pension plans.
Investing activities used $4.2 million in 2020 and $62.2 million in 2019. Net cash proceeds of $36.1 million from the sale of the Seeger business are included in investing activities for the 2020 period. See Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. In 2020, investing activities included capital expenditures of $40.7 million compared to $53.3 million in 2019. The Company expects capital spending in 2021 to approximate $55 million. Capital expenditures relate to both maintenance needs and support of growth initiatives, which include the purchase of equipment to support new products and services, and are expected to be funded primarily through cash flows from operations. Investing activities in 2019 also included $6.1 million of payments related to the Gimatic acquisition under the terms of the Sale and Purchase Agreement and $3.5 million of payments related to Aerospace agreements, which are reflected in Other Investing activities.
Cash used by financing activities in 2020 included a net decrease in borrowings of $174.2 million compared to a net decrease of $99.4 million in 2019. In 2019 and 2018, the Company borrowed 44.1 million Euro ($49.5 million) and 179.0 million Euro ($208.6 million), respectively, under the Amended Credit Facility through an international subsidiary. The proceeds were distributed to the Parent Company and subsequently used to pay down U.S. borrowings under the Amended Credit Agreement. Proceeds from the issuance of common stock were $2.0 million and $5.5 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. In 2020, the Company repurchased 0.4 million shares of the Company's stock at a cost of $15.6 million, compared with the purchase of 0.9 million shares at a cost of $50.3 million in 2019. Total cash used to pay dividends was $32.4 million in 2020 compared to $32.5 million in 2019. Withholding taxes paid on stock issuances were $3.4 million in the 2020 period and $6.1 million in the 2019 period. Other financing cash flows during 2020 and 2019 included $5.6 million of net cash proceeds and $7.5 million of net cash payments, respectively, related to the settlement of foreign currency hedges related to intercompany financings. Other financing cash flows in the 2020 period also included $1.4 million of fees paid in conjunction with executing amendments to the Amended Credit Agreement and the Note Purchase Agreement.
Debt Covenants
As noted above, borrowing capacity is limited by various debt covenants in the Company's debt agreements. Following is a reconciliation of Consolidated EBITDA, a key metric in the debt covenants, to the Company's net income (in millions):
Table of Content
The Amended Credit Agreement allows for certain adjustments within the calculation of the financial covenants. Other adjustments consist primarily of changes in accounting as permitted under the Amended Credit Agreement. The Company's financial covenants are measured as of the end of each fiscal quarter. At December 31, 2020, additional borrowings of $161.5 million of Senior Debt would have been allowed under the covenants. Additional borrowings for Total Debt would also have been limited to $161.5 million under the covenants at December 31, 2020. Senior Debt includes primarily the borrowings under the Amended Credit Facility, the 3.97% Senior Notes and the borrowings under the lines of credit. The Company's unused committed credit facilities at December 31, 2020 were $406.4 million; however, the borrowing capacity was limited by the debt covenants to $161.5 million at December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
At December 31, 2020, the Company had the following contractual obligations and commitments:
(1)Long-term debt obligations represent the required principal payments under such agreements. As noted above, the Company entered into an Amended Credit Agreement on February 10, 2021, extending the maturity of the $1,000.0 million facility from February 2022 to February 2026.
(2)Interest payments under long-term debt obligations have been estimated based on the borrowings outstanding and market interest rates as of December 31, 2020. The Amended Credit Agreement extends the maturity of the facility and the timing of corresponding interest payments through February 2026.
Table of Content
(3)The Company’s operating lease payments included herein reflect the future minimum undiscounted fixed lease payments, which represent the basis for calculating the Company’s operating lease liabilities as of December 31, 2020. Refer to Note 20 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(4)The amounts do not include purchase obligations reflected as current liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet. The purchase obligation amount includes all outstanding purchase orders as of the balance sheet date as well as the minimum contractual obligation or termination penalty under other contracts.
(5)The amount included in “Less Than 1 Year” reflects anticipated contributions to the Company’s various pension plans. Anticipated contributions beyond one year are not determinable.
(6)Amounts reflect anticipated benefit payments under the Company’s other postretirement benefit plans based on current actuarial assumptions. Expected benefit payments, as presented above, do not extend beyond 2030. See Note 13 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(7)Amounts reflect anticipated long-term payments related to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act that was enacted on December 22, 2017. Payments are allowed over an eight-year period. See Note 15 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. The amount payable in 2021 is included within accrued liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
The above table does not reflect unrecognized tax benefits as the timing of the potential payments of these amounts cannot be determined. See Note 15 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
OTHER MATTERS
Inflation
Inflation generally affects the Company through its costs of labor, equipment and raw materials. Increases in the costs of these items have historically been offset by price increases, commodity price escalator provisions, operating improvements, and other cost-saving initiatives.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Significant accounting policies are disclosed in Note 1 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. The most significant areas involving management judgments and estimates are described below. Actual results could differ from such estimates.
Inventory Valuation: Inventories are valued at the lower of cost, determined on a first-in, first-out basis, or net realizable value. The primary components of cost included in inventories are raw material, labor and overhead. Provisions are made to reduce excess or obsolete inventories to their estimated net realizable value. The process for evaluating the value of excess and obsolete inventory often requires the Company to make subjective judgments and estimates concerning future sales levels, quantities and prices at which such inventory will be sold in the normal course of business and estimated costs. Accelerating the disposal process or changes in estimates based on future sales potential or estimated costs may necessitate future adjustments to these provisions.
Revenue recognition: Revenue is recognized by the Company when control of the product or solution is transferred to the customer. Control is generally transferred when products are shipped or delivered to customers, title is transferred, the significant risks and rewards of ownership have transferred, the Company has rights to payment and rewards of ownership pass to the customer. Customer acceptance may also be a factor in determining whether control of the product has transferred. Although revenue is generally transferred at a point in time, a certain portion of businesses with customized products or contracts in which the Company performs work on customer-owned assets requires the use of an over time recognition model as certain contracts meet one or more of the established criteria pursuant to the accounting standards governing revenue recognition. Also, service revenue is recognized as control transfers, which is concurrent with the services being performed. See Note 4 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Business Acquisitions, Intangible Assets and Goodwill: Assets and liabilities acquired in a business combination are recorded under the acquisition method of accounting at their estimated fair values at the dates of acquisition. At December 31, 2020, the Company had $1,011.6 million and $320.7 million of goodwill and identifiable intangible assets related to acquisitions, respectively. Goodwill represents the cost of acquisitions in excess of fair values assigned to the underlying identifiable net assets of acquired businesses. Identifiable intangible assets acquired in business acquisitions include customer relationships, patents and technology and trademarks/trade names. The fair value of acquired customer relationship intangibles was determined as of the acquisition dates based on estimates and judgments regarding expectations for the future after-tax cash flows arising from customer relationships that existed on the acquisition date over their estimated lives, less a contributory assets charge, all of which is discounted to present value using an appropriate discount rate. The fair value of the patents and technology and trademark/trade name intangible assets were determined utilizing the relief from royalty method which is a form of the income approach. Under this method, an after-tax royalty rate based on market royalty rates is applied to projected
Table of Content
revenue associated with the patents/technology and trademark/trade name and discounted to present value using an appropriate discount rate. See Note 7 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are subject to impairment testing annually or more frequently if an event or change in circumstances indicates that the fair value of a reporting unit has been reduced below its carrying value. Management completes their annual impairment assessments during the second quarter of each year as of April 1. The Company utilizes the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is necessary to perform the Step 1 quantitative goodwill impairment test in accordance with the applicable accounting standards. Under the qualitative assessment, management considers relevant events and circumstances including but not limited to macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, overall unit performance and events directly affecting a unit. If the Company determines that the Step 1 quantitative impairment test is required, management estimates the fair value of the reporting unit primarily using the income approach, which reflects management’s cash flow projections, and also evaluates the fair value using the market approach. Inherent in management’s development of cash flow projections are assumptions and estimates, including those related to future earnings and growth rates and the weighted average cost of capital. The Company compares the fair value of the reporting unit with the carrying value of the reporting unit. If the fair values were to fall below the carrying values, the Company would recognize a non-cash impairment charge to income from operations for the amount by which the carrying amount of any reporting unit exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, assuming the loss recognized does not exceed the total amount of goodwill for the reporting unit. Based on our second quarter assessment, the estimated fair value of the Automation reporting unit, which represents the October 2018 acquisition of Gimatic, exceeded its carrying value while the estimated fair value of each of the remaining reporting units significantly exceeded their carrying values. There was no goodwill impairment at any reporting units in 2020. Many of the factors used in assessing fair value are outside the control of management, and these assumptions and estimates can change in future periods as a result of both Company-specific and overall economic conditions, including the impacts of COVID-19. Management’s quantitative assessment includes a review of the potential impacts of current and projected market conditions from a market participant’s perspective on reporting units’ projected cash flows, growth rates and cost of capital to assess the likelihood of whether the fair value would be less than the carrying value. The Company also completed its annual impairment testing of its trade names, indefinite-lived intangible assets, in the second quarter of 2020 and determined that there were no impairments.
The Company executed an SPA to sell Seeger in December 2019 and subsequently classified the assets and liabilities of Seeger as "held for sale" on the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2019. Pursuant to the required accounting guidance, the Company allocated $15.0 million of goodwill from the Engineered Components ("EC") reporting unit to Seeger based on the estimated relative fair values of the business to be disposed of and the portion of the reporting unit that will be retained. The Company subsequently recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $5.6 million related to the goodwill that was allocated to Seeger. The impairment charge was recorded within Selling and Administrative expenses on the Consolidated Statement of Income in the period ended December 31, 2019. The Company assessed the goodwill within the remaining EC reporting unit and determined that there was no further impairment. See Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Company assesses the impairment of the identifiable finite-lived intangible assets subject to amortization whenever significant events or significant changes in circumstances indicate their carrying value may not be recoverable. The Company did not identify any impairments related to such intangible assets during 2020.
Aerospace Aftermarket Programs: The Company participates in aftermarket RSPs under which the Company receives an exclusive right to manufacture and supply designated aftermarket parts over the life of the related aircraft engine program to our customer, General Electric ("GE"). As consideration, the Company has paid participation fees, which are recorded as intangible assets. The carrying value of these intangible assets was $156.3 million at December 31, 2020. The Company records amortization of the related asset as sales dollars are being earned based on a proportional sales dollar method. Specifically, this method amortizes each asset as a reduction to revenue based on the proportion of sales under a program in a given period to the estimated aggregate sales dollars over the life of that program which reflects the pattern in which economic benefits are realized.
The Company also participates in Component Repair Programs ("CRPs") with GE which provide for, among other items, the right to sell certain aftermarket component repair services for CFM56, CF6, CF34 and LM engines directly to other customers over the life of the engine program as one of a few GE licensed suppliers. In addition, the CRPs extended certain existing contracts under which the Company provides these services directly to GE. Our total investments in CRPs as of December 31, 2020 equaled $111.8 million, all of which have been paid. At December 31, 2020, the carrying value of the CRPs was $81.0 million. The Company recorded the CRP payments as an intangible asset which is recognized as a reduction of sales over the remaining life of these engine programs based on the estimated sales over the life of such programs. This method reflects the pattern in which the economic benefits of the CRPs are realized.
Table of Content
The recoverability of each asset is subject to significant estimates about future revenues related to the programs' aftermarket parts and services. The Company evaluates these intangible assets for recoverability and updates amortization rates on an agreement by agreement basis for the RSPs and on an individual asset basis for the CRPs. The assets are reviewed for recoverability periodically including whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying amount may not be recoverable. Annually, the Company evaluates the remaining life of these assets to determine whether events and circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining periods of amortization. Management updates revenue projections, which include a comparison of actual experience against projected revenue and industry projections. The potential exists that actual revenues will not meet expectations due to a change in market conditions, including, for example, the replacement of older engines with new, more fuel-efficient engines or the Company's ability to capture additional production share within the aftermarket business. A shortfall in future revenues may indicate a triggering event requiring a write down or further evaluation of the recoverability of the assets or require the Company to accelerate amortization expense prospectively dependent on the level of the shortfall. Management considered the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the broader aerospace end markets during its evaluation of these intangible assets in 2020. The Company has not identified any impairment of these assets, although changes in projected RSP and CRP revenue has impacted amortization rates that will be applied prospectively. See Note 7 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits: Accounting policies and significant assumptions related to pension and other postretirement benefits are disclosed in Note 13 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. As discussed further below, the significant assumptions that impact pension and other postretirement benefits include discount rates, mortality rates and expected long-term rates of return on invested pension assets.
The Company selected the expected long-term rate of return of its U.S. defined benefit plans based on consideration of historical and projected rates of return on the weighted target asset mix of our pension investments. The target mix reflects a 65% equity investment target and a 35% target for fixed income and cash investments (in aggregate). The equity investment of 65% is more heavily weighted on global equity investment targets, rather than U.S. targets. The historical rates of return for the Company's defined benefit plans were calculated based upon compounded average rates of return of published indices. Management selected a long-term expected rate of return on its U.S. pension assets of 7.25%. The long-term rates of return for non-U.S. plans were selected based on actual historical rates of return of published indices that reflect the plans’ target asset allocations.
The discount rate used for the Company’s U.S. pension plans reflects the rate at which the pension benefits could be effectively settled. At December 31, 2020, the Company selected a discount rate of 2.65% based on a bond matching model for its U.S. pension plans. Market interest rates have decreased in 2020 as compared with 2019 and, as a result, the discount rate used to measure pension liabilities decreased from 3.40% at December 31, 2019. The discount rates for non-U.S. plans were selected based on highly rated long-term bond indices and yield curves that match the duration of the plan’s benefit obligations.
A one-quarter percentage point change in the assumed long-term rate of return on the Company’s U.S. pension plans as of December 31, 2020 would impact the Company’s 2021 pre-tax income by approximately $1.0 million. A one-quarter percentage point decrease in the discount rate on the Company's U.S. pension plans as of December 31, 2020 would also decrease the Company’s 2021 pre-tax income by approximately $1.0 million. The Company reviews these and other assumptions at least annually.
The Company recorded $1.9 million of non-cash after-tax increases in stockholders equity (through other non-owner changes to equity) when recording the current year adjustments for changes in the funded status of its pension and postretirement benefit plans as required under accounting for defined benefit and other postretirement plans. This increase in stockholders equity resulted primarily from favorable variances between expected and actual returns on pension plan assets, the amortization of actuarial losses and prior service costs recorded earlier (including curtailment and settlement charges resulting from actions taken place during 2020), partially offset by changes in actuarial assumptions, primarily a decrease in discount rates. During 2020, the fair value of the Company’s pension plan assets increased by $40.3 million and the projected benefit obligation increased by $40.1 million. The increase in the projected benefit obligation included a $40.5 million (pre-tax) increase due to actuarial losses resulting primarily from a change in the discount rates used to measure pension liabilities, and annual service and interest costs of $6.3 million and $15.1 million, respectively. Changes to other actuarial assumptions in 2020 did not have a material impact on our stockholders equity or projected benefit obligation. Actual pre-tax gains on total pension plan assets were $59.7 million compared with an expected pre-tax return on pension assets of $29.7 million. Pension expense for 2021 is expected to increase from $6.7 million in 2020 to $7.9 million.
Table of Content
Income Taxes: As of December 31, 2020, the Company had recognized $22.1 million of deferred tax assets, net of valuation reserves. The realization of these benefits is dependent, in part, on the amount and timing of future taxable income in jurisdictions where the deferred tax assets reside. For those jurisdictions where the expirations dates of tax loss carryforwards or the proposed operating results indicate that realization is unlikely, a valuation allowance is provided. Management currently believes that sufficient taxable income should be earned in the future to realize the deferred tax assets, net of valuation allowances recorded.
The valuation of deferred tax assets requires significant judgment. Management’s assessment that the deferred tax assets will be realized represents its estimate of future results; however, there can be no assurance that such expectations will be met. Changes in management’s assessment of achieving sufficient future taxable income could materially increase the Company’s tax expense and could have a material adverse impact on the Company’s financial condition and the results of operations.
Additionally, the Company is exposed to certain tax contingencies in the ordinary course of business and records those tax liabilities in accordance with the guidance for accounting for uncertain tax positions. For tax positions where the Company believes it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will be sustained, the Company has recorded the largest amount of tax benefit with a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized. For those income tax positions where it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will not be sustained, no tax benefit is recognized in the financial statements. See Note 15 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
A significant portion of revenue is generated by foreign locations. Current guidance requires the recognition of a tax liability under the assumption that foreign earnings will be repatriated in the future, unless the Company can assert that the earnings are indefinitely reinvested. Management’s annual assessment in determining whether the earnings are indefinitely reinvested is based on an analysis of U.S. cash requirements and working capital requirements of the foreign operations, including capital expenditures, combined with any limitations, such as dividend restrictions or local law limits, which would limit possible repatriation. The Company has recognized a deferred tax liability for U.S. taxes of $0.2 million on $3.5 million of undistributed earnings of its international subsidiaries, earned before 2017 and the application of the Transition Tax implemented by the Act. All remaining earnings are considered indefinitely reinvested as defined per the indefinite reversal criterion within the accounting guidance for income taxes.
Stock-Based Compensation: The Company accounts for its stock-based employee compensation plans at fair value on the grant date and recognizes the related cost in its consolidated statement of income in accordance with accounting standards related to share-based payments. The fair values of stock options are estimated using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model based on certain assumptions. The fair values of service and performance based share awards are estimated based on the fair market value of the Company’s stock price on the grant date. The fair values of market based performance share awards are estimated using the Monte Carlo valuation method. See Note 14 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
EBITDA
Earnings before interest expense, income taxes, and depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) for 2020 was $205.1 million compared to $326.5 million in 2019. EBITDA is a measurement not in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). The Company defines EBITDA as net income plus interest expense, income taxes, and depreciation and amortization which the Company incurs in the normal course of business. The Company does not intend EBITDA to represent cash flows from operations as defined by GAAP, and the reader should not consider it as an alternative to net income, net cash provided by operating activities or any other items calculated in accordance with GAAP, or as an indicator of the Company’s operating performance. The Company’s definition of EBITDA may not be comparable with EBITDA as defined by other companies. The Company believes EBITDA is commonly used by financial analysts and others in the industries in which the Company operates and, thus, provides useful information to investors. Accordingly, the calculation has limitations depending on its use.
Table of Content
Following is a reconciliation of EBITDA to the Company’s net income (in millions):
Table of Content