Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis presents factors that the Company believes are relevant to an assessment and understanding of the Company’s financial position and results of operations for the three years ended December 31, 2020. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto and the selected consolidated financial data included herein.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
The Company may make forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 with respect to earnings, credit quality, corporate objectives, interest rates and other financial and business matters. Forward-looking statements include estimates and give management’s current expectations or forecasts of future events. The Company cautions readers that these forward-looking statements are subject to numerous assumptions, risks and uncertainties, including economic conditions; the performance of financial markets and interest rates; legislative and regulatory actions and reforms; competition; as well as other factors, all of which change over time. Examples of forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to: (i) projections of revenues, expenses, income or loss, earnings or loss per share, the payment or nonpayment of dividends, capital structure and other financial items; (ii) statements of plans, objectives and expectations, including those relating to products or services; (iii) statements of future economic performance; and (iv) statements of assumptions underlying such statements. Words such as “believes”, “anticipates”, “expects”, “intends”, “targeted”, “continue”, “remain”, “will”, “should”, “may” and other similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements but are not the exclusive means of identifying such statements.
Forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from those in such statements. Factors that could cause actual results to differ from those discussed in the forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to:
•
The COVID-19 pandemic’s adverse effects on us and our customers, employees and third-party service providers; the adverse impacts of the pandemic on our business, financial position, operations and prospects may be material. It is not possible to accurately predict the extent, severity or duration of the pandemic or when normal economic and operation conditions will return.
•
The effect of governments’ stimulus programs.
•
Local, regional, national and international economic conditions and the impact they may have on the Company and its customers and the Company’s assessment of that impact.
•
Changes in the mix of loan geographies, sectors and types or the level of non-performing assets and charge-offs.
•
Inflation, interest rates, energy prices, securities markets and monetary fluctuations.
•
The effect of changes in laws and regulations (including laws and regulations concerning taxes, banking, securities and insurance) with which the Company must comply.
•
Impairment of the Company’s goodwill or other intangible assets.
•
Changes in consumer spending, borrowing and savings habits.
•
Changes in the financial performance and/or condition of the Company’s borrowers.
•
Technological changes.
•
Acquisitions and integration of acquired businesses.
•
The effect of changes in accounting policies and practices, as may be adopted by the regulatory agencies, as well as the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, the Financial Accounting Standards Board and other accounting standard setters.
•
The Company’s success at managing the risks involved in the foregoing items.
Actual results may differ materially from forward-looking statements.
THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC
Since the latter half of the first quarter of 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken in response to it have negatively impacted the global economy and all financial markets. Since March 31, 2020, these conditions and the related financial impact have continued and, in some cases, worsened. Although the Company is not able to estimate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the resultant economic circumstances on a long-term basis at this time, the COVID-19 pandemic could materially affect the Company’s financial and operational results. See Item 1.A. Risk Factors for further discussion.
The Company is closely monitoring its loan portfolio for effects related to COVID-19. The decline in economic activity as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic caused volatility in crude oil prices since February 2020. This volatility could negatively impact the energy industry and the overall economies of our markets and could lead to increased credit stress in the Company’s energy portfolio, increased losses associated with that portfolio and reduced demand for energy lending.
If the negative impacts due to COVID-19 continue coupled with volatile energy prices, it is possible that the Company’s goodwill could become impaired in future periods.
SUMMARY
The Company’s net income for 2020 was $99.6 million, or $3.00 per diluted share, compared to $134.9 million, or $4.05 per diluted share for 2019 and $125.8 million, or $3.76 per diluted share for 2018. The results for 2020 were negatively impacted by a higher provision for credit losses. Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes the entire year of net income of Pegasus Bank in Dallas, Texas, which was acquired on August 15, 2019, and the income and expenses associated with the purchase of assets and assumption of liabilities on March 5, 2020, from The Citizens State Bank of Okemah (“Citizens'”). The results for 2019 include Pegasus Bank acquisition related expenses of approximately $3.1 million. The results for 2018 include acquisitions related expenses of approximately $2.6 million.
In 2020, net interest income was $306.7 million, compared to $281.9 million in 2019 and $260.5 million in 2018. Net interest income increased in 2020 due to a full year of net interest income from Pegasus Bank, loan growth, PPP fee income of approximately $15.6 million and a decrease in interest rates paid on deposits. The Company’s net interest margin decreased to 3.57% for 2020, compared to 3.85% for 2019 and 3.70% for 2018. The provision for credit losses was $62.6 million in 2020 compared to $8.3 million in 2019 and $3.8 million in 2018. The increase in the provision for credit losses in 2020 related to reserve build up for expected credit losses stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic and low energy prices. The ratio of net charge-offs to average loans for 2020 was 0.35%, compared to 0.10% for 2019 and 0.08% for 2018. Noninterest income totaled $137.2 million in 2020 compared to $137.2 million in 2019 and $125.2 million in 2018. Noninterest expense was $257.7 million in 2020 compared to $241.3 million in 2019 and $222.1 million in 2018. The increase in noninterest expense in 2020 was due to a full year of noninterest expenses of Pegasus Bank, which added approximately $9.0 million. In addition, noninterest expense increased in 2020 due to COVID-19 pandemic related salary expenses, net occupancy and depreciation from the Company’s new corporate headquarters, and acquisition expense related to the purchase of assets from Citizens, partially offset by $2.4 million in gains on sales of property carried in other real estate owned and a decrease in marketing and business promotions.
The Company’s assets at year-end 2020 totaled $9.2 billion, compared to $8.6 billion at December 31, 2019. Debt securities were $555.2 million, an increase of $63.6 million from December 31, 2019. Loans totaled $6.4 billion compared to $5.7 billion for 2019. Total deposits were $8.1 billion for 2020 compared to $7.5 billion for 2019. The increase in assets, loans and deposits were primarily related to the PPP and other government stimulus. At December 31, 2020, the Company had PPP loans held for investment of $652.7 million, net of unamortized processing fees of $14.5 million. The Company’s total stockholders’ equity was $1.1 billion, an increase of $62.9 million over December 31, 2019.
Nonaccrual loans represented 0.58% of total loans at December 31, 2020, up from 0.32% at year-end 2019. Non-performing assets represented 0.90% of total assets at December 31, 2020, up from 0.63% at December 31, 2019 as a result of a migration from loans to other real estate owned during 2020. The allowance for credit losses to total loans was 1.42% at December 31, 2020, up from 0.96% at year-end 2019. The allowance for credit losses to nonaccrual loans was 243.35% compared to 301.91% at year-end 2019.
See Note (2) of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for disclosure regarding the Company’s recent developments, including mergers and acquisitions.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The Company’s significant accounting policies are described in Note (1) to the consolidated financial statements. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States inherently involves the use of estimates and assumptions, which affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and the related disclosures. These estimates relate principally to the allowance for credit losses, income taxes, intangible assets and the fair value of financial instruments. Such estimates and assumptions may change over time and actual amounts realized may differ from those reported. The following is a summary of the accounting policies and estimates that management believes are the most critical.
Allowance for Credit losses
On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 326, which replaces the incurred loss methodology for determining its provision for credit losses and allowance for credit losses with an expected loss methodology that is referred to as the CECL model. The allowance for credit losses is management’s estimate of the expected credit losses on financial assets measured at amortized cost.
The allowance for credit losses is increased by provisions charged to operating expense and is reduced by net loan charge-offs. The amount of the allowance for credit losses is measured using relevant information about past events, including historical credit loss experience on financial assets with similar risk characteristics, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts that affect the collectability of the remaining cash flows over the contractual term of the financial assets. A loan is considered collateral-dependent when the repayment is expected to be provided substantially through the operation or sale of the collateral when the borrower is experiencing financial difficulty based on the entity's assessment as of the reporting date. For collateral dependent loans, the standard allows institutions to use, as a practical expedient, the fair value of the collateral to measure expected credit losses on collateral-dependent financial assets. This amount is included in the allowance for credit losses.
The amount of the allowance for credit losses is first estimated by each business unit’s management based on its evaluation of the unit’s portfolio. This evaluation involves identifying collateral dependent and adversely classified loans. Specific allowances for losses are determined for collateral dependent loans based on either the loans’ estimated discounted cash flows or the fair values of the collateral. An allowance is estimated for loans using a historical loss percentage based on losses arising specifically from each respective loan category, adjusted for various economic and environmental factors that are considered reasonable and supportable related to the underlying loans. Each month the Company’s Senior Loan Committee reviews each business unit’s allowance, and the aggregate allowance for the Company and, on a quarterly basis, adjusts and approves the appropriateness of the allowance. In addition, annually or more frequently as needed, the Senior Loan Committee evaluates and establishes the loss percentages used in the estimates of the allowance based on historical loss data, and giving consideration to their assessment of current economic and environmental conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts. To facilitate the Senior Loan Committee’s evaluation, the Company’s Asset Quality Department performs periodic reviews of each of the Company’s business units and reports on the adequacy of management’s identification of collateral dependent and adversely classified loans, and their adherence to the Company’s loan policies and procedures.
The process of evaluating the appropriateness of the allowance for credit losses necessarily involves the exercise of judgment and consideration of numerous subjective factors and, accordingly, there can be no assurance that the estimate of expected losses will not change in light of future developments and economic conditions. Changes in assumptions and conditions could result in a materially different amount for the allowance for credit losses.
Income Taxes
The Company files a consolidated income tax return. Deferred taxes are recognized under the balance sheet method based upon the future tax consequences of temporary differences between the carrying amounts and tax basis of assets and liabilities, using the tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the periods when the related temporary differences are expected to be realized.
The amount of accrued current and deferred income taxes is based on estimates of taxes due or receivable from taxing authorities either currently or in the future. Changes in these accruals are reported as tax expense, and involve estimates of the various components included in determining taxable income, tax credits, other taxes and temporary differences. Changes periodically occur in the estimates due to changes in tax rates, tax laws and regulations and implementation of new tax planning strategies. The process of determining the accruals for income taxes necessarily involves the exercise of considerable judgment and consideration of numerous subjective factors.
Management performs an analysis of the Company’s tax positions annually and believes it is more likely than not that all of its tax positions will be utilized in future years.
Intangible Assets and Goodwill
Core deposit intangibles are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of seven to ten years and customer relationship intangibles are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of three to eighteen years. Goodwill is not amortized, but is evaluated at a reporting unit level at least annually for impairment or more frequently if other indicators of impairment are present. At least annually in the fourth quarter, intangible assets, are evaluated for possible impairment. Impairment losses are measured by comparing the fair values of the intangible assets with their recorded amounts. Any impairment losses are reported in the statement of comprehensive income.
The evaluation of remaining core deposit intangibles for possible impairment involves reassessing the useful lives and the recoverability of the intangible assets. The evaluation of the useful lives is performed by reviewing the levels of core deposits of the respective branches acquired. The actual life of a core deposit base may be longer than originally estimated due to more successful retention of customers, or may be shorter due to more rapid runoff. Amortization of core deposit intangibles would be adjusted, if necessary, to amortize the remaining net book values over the remaining lives of the core deposits. The evaluation for recoverability is only performed if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the intangibles may not be recoverable.
The evaluation of goodwill for possible impairment is performed by comparing the fair values of the related reporting units with their carrying amounts including goodwill. The fair values of the related business units are estimated using market data for prices of recent acquisitions of banks and branches.
The evaluation of intangible assets and goodwill for the year ended December 31, 2019 resulted in an impairment of customer relationship intangibles of approximately $353,000 related to BancFirst Insurance Services, Inc. The evaluation of intangible assets and goodwill for the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted in no impairments.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Debt securities that are being held for indefinite periods of time, or that may be sold as part of the Company’s asset/liability management strategy, to provide liquidity or for other reasons, are classified as available for sale and are stated at estimated fair value. Unrealized gains or losses on debt securities available for sale are reported as a component of stockholders’ equity, net of income tax.
The Company reviews its portfolio of debt securities in an unrealized loss position at least quarterly. The Company first assesses whether it intends to sell, or it is more-likely-than-not that it will be required to sell, the securities before recovery of the amortized cost basis. If either of these criteria is met, the securities amortized cost basis is written down to fair value as a current period expense. If either of the above criteria is not met, the Company evaluates whether the decline in fair value is the result of credit losses or other factors. In making this assessment, the Company considers, among other things, the period of time the security has been in an unrealized loss position, and performance of any underlying collateral and adverse conditions specifically related to the security. At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 approximately 95% of the available for sale debt securities held by the Company were issued by the U.S. Treasury, or U.S. government-sponsored entities and agencies. The Company does not consider the unrealized position of these securities to be the result of credit factors, because the decline in fair value is attributable to changes in interest rates and illiquidity, and not credit quality, and the Company does not have the intent to sell these securities and it is likely that it will not be required to sell the securities before their anticipated recovery. Therefore, the Company has not recorded an allowance for credit losses against its debt securities portfolio, as the credit risk is not material.
The estimates of fair values of debt securities and other financial instruments are based on a variety of factors. In some cases, fair values represent quoted market prices for identical or comparable instruments. In other cases, fair values have been estimated based on assumptions concerning the amount and timing of estimated future cash flows and assumed discount rates reflecting varying degrees of risk. Accordingly, the fair values may not represent actual values of the financial instruments that could have been realized as of year-end or that will be realized in the future.
Future Application of Accounting Standards
See Note (1) of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements and their expected impact on the Company’s financial statements.
Segment Information
See Note (22) of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for disclosure regarding the Company’s operating business segments.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Average Balances, Income Expenses and Rates
The following table depicts, for the periods indicated, certain information related to our average balance sheet and our average yields on assets and average costs of liabilities. Such yields are derived by dividing income or expense by the average balance of the corresponding assets or liabilities. Average balances are derived from daily averages.
The following table depicts, for the periods indicated, selected income statement data and other selected data:
Net Interest Income
Net interest income, which is the Company’s principal source of operating revenue, increased in 2020 by $24.7 million, to a total of $306.7 million, compared to an increase of $21.4 million in 2019. Net interest income increased in 2020 due to a full year of net interest income from Pegasus Bank, loan growth, PPP fee income of approximately $15.6 million and a decrease in interest rates paid on deposits. In 2019, net interest income increased primarily due to the higher average rates on federal funds and loans throughout 2019 compared to 2018 and loan growth during 2019, slightly offset by higher deposit rates throughout 2019 compared to 2018.
Net interest margin is the ratio of taxable-equivalent net interest income to average earning assets for the period. The Company’s net interest margin decreased to 3.57% for 2020, compared to 3.85% for 2019 and 3.70% for 2018. The decrease in the net interest margin in 2020 is primarily due to the lower average rates on federal funds and securities during the year. The increase in the net interest margin in 2019 is due to the increase in net interest income described above.
The Company’s net interest income and net interest margin have been, and the Company currently expects them to continue to be, impacted by the decreases in market interest rates and the expectation that interest rates will remain at these low levels for some period of time in light of the on-going response in Federal Reserve policy driven by the economic disruption arising from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Changes in the volume of earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and changes in interest rates, determine the changes in net interest income. The following volume/rate analysis summarizes the relative contribution of each of these components to the changes in net interest income in 2020 and 2019. See “Maturity and Rate Sensitivity of Loans” for additional discussion.
VOLUME/RATE ANALYSIS
Taxable Equivalent Basis
(1)
The effects of changes in the mix of earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities have been combined with the changes due to volume.
Provision for Credit Losses
The Company’s provision for credit losses was $62.6 million for 2020, compared to $8.3 million for 2019 and $3.8 million for 2018. The increase in the provision in 2020 was related to reserve build up for expected credit losses stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic and low energy prices. The Company’s provision in 2020 was based on the Company’s evaluation of the level of uncertainty and lack of clarity of the timing of an end to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the magnitude of the government’s stimulus response to it. To the extent the amount of time the economy remains adversely affected is more extended than the Company’s current projection, the Company could see a continuation of higher than normal provision in future periods. The Company establishes an allowance as an estimate of the expected credit losses in the loan portfolio at the balance sheet date. Management believes the allowance for credit losses is appropriate based upon management’s best estimate of expected losses within the existing loan portfolio. Should any of the factors considered by management in evaluating the appropriate level of the allowance for credit losses change, the Company’s estimate of expected credit losses could also change, which could affect the amount of future provisions for credit losses. Net loan charge-offs were $22.8 million for 2020 compared to $5.4 million for 2019 and $4.1 million for 2018. The net charge-offs equated to 0.35%, 0.10% and 0.08% of average loans for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Net charge-offs increased in 2020 primarily due to three loans. The rate of net charge-offs to average total loans continues to be at a low level. A more detailed discussion of the allowance for credit losses is provided under “Loans.”
Noninterest Income
Noninterest income was $137.2 million in 2020, compared to $137.2 million in 2019 and $125.2 million in 2018. Total noninterest income was flat in 2020. During 2020, the Company had an increase in sales of loans and debit card usage fees, which were primarily offset by a decrease in deposit service charges resulting from government stimulus. This compares to an increase of $12.0 million in 2019, or 9.6%. The increase in noninterest income in 2019 was due to growth in debit card usage fees, sweep fees, insurance commissions and equity security gains. The Company’s operating noninterest income has generally increased due to enhanced product lines, acquisitions and internal deposit growth. The Company had fees from debit card usage totaling $36.9 million, $33.9 million and $29.8 million for the years 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. This represents 26.9%, 24.7% and 23.8% of the Company’s noninterest income for the years 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. In addition, the Company had non-sufficient funds
fees totaling $26.6 million, $33.5 million and $31.3 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. This represents 19.4%, 24.4%, and 25.0% of the Company’s noninterest income for the years 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, there was little or no likelihood that the Company would surpass $10 billion in total assets for several years. However, with the CARES Act, including PPP loans, stimulus payments to households, and artificially high household savings rates, our deposits and assets have grown dramatically beyond reasonably foreseeable levels. To the extent the COVID-19 pandemic continues and the government response to it continues on the same or similar basis, the Company has an increasingly heightened possibility of exceeding $10 billion in total assets at December 31, 2021. Pursuant to the Durbin Amendment of the Dodd-Frank Act, this would trigger an approximate loss of income from debit card interchange fees between $17 to $20 million in subsequent years.
The Company recognized a net loss of $389,000 during 2020, a net gain of $812,000 during 2019, and a net gain of $47,000 during 2018, primarily due to transactions of equity securities. These losses and gains were primarily due to the Accounting Standard Update 2016-01 adopted on January 1, 2018, which requires the change in fair value of equity securities to be recognized through net income. The Company’s practice is to maintain a liquid portfolio of securities and not engage in trading activities. The Company has the ability and intent to hold debt securities classified as available for sale that were in an unrealized loss position until they mature or until fair value exceeds amortized cost.
The Company earned $6.1 million on the sale of loans in 2020 compared $3.4 million in 2019 and $2.9 million in 2018. The income from sales of loans increased in 2020 due to the volume increase related to record low mortgage rates. The Company expects sales from mortgage loans during 2021 to be less than in 2020, but greater than in 2019.
Noninterest Expense
Total noninterest expense increased by $16.4 million, or 6.8% to $257.7 million for 2020. This compares to an increase of $19.2 million, or 8.6%, for 2019. The increase in noninterest expense in 2020 was due to a full year of noninterest expenses of Pegasus Bank, which added approximately $9.0 million. In addition, noninterest expense increased in 2020 due to COVID-19 pandemic related salary expenses, net occupancy and depreciation from the Company’s new corporate headquarters, and acquisition expense related to the purchase of assets from Citizens, partially offset by $2.4 million in gains on sales of property carried in other real estate owned and a decrease in marketing and business promotions. The increase in noninterest expense in 2019 was primarily due to salary increases and acquisition related expenses. Acquisition related expenses were $3.1 million in 2019.
Noninterest expense included deposit insurance expense, which totaled $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Deposit insurance expense was lower for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to a one-time credit given by the FDIC in 2019 upon reaching a reserve ratio in the insurance fund.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense totaled $23.9 million in 2020, compared to $34.7 million in 2019 and $33.9 million in 2018. The effective tax rates for 2020, 2019 and 2018 were 19.4%, 20.5% and 21.2% respectively. The primary reasons for the difference between the Company’s effective tax rate and the federal statutory rate were tax-exempt income, nondeductible amortization, federal and state tax credits and state tax expense.
Certain financial information is prepared on a taxable equivalent basis to facilitate analysis of yields and changes in components of earnings. Average balance sheets, comprehensive income statements and other financial statistics are also presented on a taxable equivalent basis.
Impact of Inflation
The impact of inflation on financial institutions differs significantly from that of industrial or commercial companies. The assets of financial institutions are predominantly monetary, as opposed to fixed or nonmonetary assets such as premises, equipment and inventory. As a result, there is little exposure to inflated earnings by understated depreciation charges or significantly understated current values of assets. Although inflation can have an indirect effect by leading to higher interest rates, financial institutions are in a position to monitor the effects on interest costs and yields and respond to inflationary trends through management of interest rate sensitivity. Inflation can also have an impact on noninterest expenses such as salaries and employee benefits, occupancy, services and other costs.
Impact of Deflation
In a period of deflation, it would be reasonable to expect widely decreasing prices for real assets. In such an economic environment, assets of businesses and individuals, such as real estate, commodities or inventory, could decline. The inability of customers to repay or refinance their loans could result in credit losses incurred by the Company far in excess of historical experience due to deflated collateral values.
FINANCIAL POSITION
Cash, Federal Funds Sold and Interest-Bearing Deposits with Banks
Cash consists of cash and cash items on hand, noninterest-bearing deposits and amounts due from other banks, reserves deposited with the Federal Reserve Bank, and interest-bearing deposits with other banks. Federal funds sold consist of overnight investments of excess funds with other financial institutions. Due to the Federal Reserve Bank’s intervention into the funds market
that has resulted in a low overnight funds rate, the Company has continued to maintain the majority of its excess funds with the Federal Reserve Bank. The Federal Reserve Bank pays interest on these funds based upon the lowest target rate for the maintenance period, which decreased 1.50% during 2020 from 1.75% to 0.25% and decreased 0.75% during 2019 from 2.50% to 1.75%.
The amount of cash, federal funds sold and interest-bearing deposits with the Federal Reserve Bank carried by the Company is a function of the availability of funds presented to other institutions for clearing, and the Company’s requirements for liquidity, operating cash and reserves, available yields and interest rate sensitivity management. Balances of these items can fluctuate widely based on these various factors. The aggregate of cash and due from banks, interest-bearing deposits with banks and federal funds sold decreased $252.4 million from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the funding of PPP loans.
Securities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, total debt securities increased $63.6 million, or 12.9%, to $555.2 million. Debt securities available for sale represented 99.5% of the total debt securities portfolio at December 31, 2020, compared to 99.6% of total debt securities portfolio at December 31, 2019. Debt securities available for sale had a net unrealized gain of $9.9 million at December 31, 2020, compared to a net unrealized gain of $4.6 million at December 31, 2019. These unrealized gains are included in the Company’s stockholders’ equity as accumulated other comprehensive income, net of income tax, in the amounts of a gain of $7.4 million and a gain of $3.5 million for December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The Company does not engage in securities trading activities. Any sales of debt securities are for the purpose of executing the Company’s asset/liability management strategy, eliminating a perceived credit risk in a specific security, or providing liquidity. Debt securities that are being held for indefinite periods of time, or that may be sold as part of the Company’s asset/liability management strategy, to provide liquidity, or for other reasons, are classified as available for sale and are stated at estimated fair value. Unrealized gains or losses on debt securities available for sale are reported as a component of stockholders’ equity, net of income tax. Debt securities for which the Company has the intent and ability to hold to maturity are classified as held for investment and are stated at cost, adjusted for amortization of premiums and accretion of discounts computed under the interest method.
Management has the ability and intent to hold the debt securities classified as held for investment until they mature, at which time the Company will receive full value for the securities. Furthermore, the Company also has the ability and intent to hold the debt securities classified as available for sale for a period of time sufficient for a recovery of cost. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had net unrealized gains largely due to decreases in market interest rates over the yields available at the time the underlying securities were purchased. The fair value of those securities having unrealized losses is expected to recover as the securities approach their maturity date or repricing date, or if market yields for similar investments decline. Furthermore, as of December 31, 2020, management had no intent or requirement to sell before the recovery of the unrealized loss.
The Company invests in equity securities without readily determinable fair values. These equity securities are reported at cost minus impairment, if any, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for the identical or a similar investment of the same issuer. The realized and unrealized gains and losses are reported as securities transactions in the noninterest income section of the consolidated statements of comprehensive income. Equity securities are reported in other assets on the balance sheet. The balance of equity securities was $10.1 million for December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company reviews its portfolio of equity securities for impairment at least quarterly.
See Note (3) of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for disclosures regarding the Company’s Securities.
WEIGHTED AVERAGE YIELD OF DEBT SECURITIES
The following table summarizes weighted average taxable equivalent yields of the debt securities portfolio at December 31, 2020. The Company manages its debt securities portfolio for liquidity, as a tool to execute its asset/liability management strategy, and for pledging requirements for public funds. For the interest rate sensitivity of debt securities see the table in