ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward Looking Statement Notice
Certain statements made in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are “forward-looking statements” (within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995) regarding the plans and objectives of management for future operations. Such statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause actual results, performance or achievements of Bantec, Inc. and Subsidiaries (“we”, “us”, “our” or the “Company”) to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. The forward-looking statements included herein are based on current expectations that involve numerous risks and uncertainties. The Company’s plans and objectives are based, in part, on assumptions involving the continued expansion of business. Assumptions relating to the foregoing involve judgments with respect to, among other things, future economic, competitive and market conditions and future business decisions, all of which are difficult or impossible to predict accurately and many of which are beyond the control of the Company. Although the Company believes its assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate and, therefore, there can be no assurance the forward-looking statements included in this Annual Report will prove to be accurate. In light of the significant uncertainties inherent in the forward-looking statements included herein, the inclusion of such information should not be regarded as a representation by the Company or any other person that the objectives and plans of the Company will be achieved.
Overview
Bantec, Inc. is a distributor, construction, environmental and drone company. Through Howco Distributing Co, Bantec provides product procurement, distribution, and logistics services, to the United States Department of Defense and Defense Logistics Agency. The Company has operations based in Little Falls, New Jersey and Vancouver, Washington. The Company continues to seek strategic acquisitions and partnerships with distributor, construction, environmental and drone firms that offer growth opportunities in well established markets, as well as acquisitions and partnerships with firms that have complementary technologies, services, products and infrastructure.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of September 30, 2020, we had $593,405 in current assets, including $164,014 in cash, compared to $1,064,665 in current assets, including $149,832 in cash, at September 30, 2019. Current liabilities at September 30, 2020 totaled $16,807,686 compared to $14,697,003 at September 30, 2019. The decrease in current assets from September 30, 2019 to September 30, 2020 is primarily due to the decreases in accounts receivable of $442,339, inventory $73,959, partially offset by increases in prepaid expenses of $30,856 and cash of $14,182. The increase in current liabilities from September 30, 2019 to September 30, 2020 is primarily due to the increase in: accrued expenses and interest of $1,688,950 and convertible notes payable of approximately $483,000 primarily due to increased funding net of debt retirements, third party and government sponsored financing totaling $505,182, partially offset by decreases to accounts payable of approximately $331,000. While we have revenues as of this date, no significant construction, environmental or drone revenues are anticipated until we are implementing our full strategic plan of acquisitions and organic growth. We must raise cash to implement our strategy to grow and expand per our business plan. We anticipate over the next 12 months the cost of being a reporting public company will be approximately $250,000.
We are currently issuing shares under the S-1 offering but expect to raise additional proceeds with debt securities, and/or more loans, however if sufficient funding is not available we would be required to cease business operations. As a result, investors would lose all of their investment. Under the terms of our credit agreement with TCA, all potential new investments must first be reviewed and approved by TCA, which may constrain our options for new fundraising. However, we have been in contact with the receiver for the TCA management companies and funds and do not expect any such objections over investment opportunities.
We anticipate our short-term liquidity needs to be approximately $7,500,000 which will be used to satisfy certain of our existing current liabilities and we expect gross profits of approximately $1,500,000. To meet these needs, we intend to complete our equity financing and refinance or restructure certain existing liabilities. Once this is completed, and we implement our sales and marketing plan to sell UAV products, we anticipate minimal long-term liquidity needs which we expect to meet through equity financing or short-term borrowings.
Additionally, we will have to meet all the financial disclosure and reporting requirements associated with being a publicly reporting company. Our management will have to spend additional time on policies and procedures to make sure it is compliant with various regulatory requirements, especially that of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. This additional corporate governance time required of management could limit the amount of time management has to implement the business plan and may impede the speed of its operations.
The following is a summary of the Company’s cash flows provided by (used in) operating, investing and financing activities:
Results of Operations
Year Ended September 30, 2020 and 2019
We generated sales of $4,455,186 and $10,287,214 for the years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For the years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, we reported cost of goods sold of $3,351,438 and $9,191,809, respectively. The decrease in sales and cost of goods sold for the 2020 period is primarily due to liquidity shortfalls impacting inventory availability and management’s focus on higher margin sales at Howco. This effort has increased gross margin by approximately 14%.
For the years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, we reported selling, general, and administrative expenses of $2,830,140 as compared to $3,019,292, a decrease of $189,152 or 6%. . For the year ended September 30, 2020, selling, general, and administrative expenses consist primarily of professional and consulting fees of approximately $756,900, payroll costs of approximately $1,793,000, other expenses of approximately $179,000, rent of approximately $68,000, and travel related costs of approximately $33,000. For the year ended September 30, 2019, selling, general, and administrative expenses consist primarily of professional and consulting fees of approximately $1,123,150, payroll costs of approximately $1,465,000, and other including rent of approximately $60,000, and travel related costs of approximately $36,000. For the years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, payroll costs and professional and consulting fees included stock-based compensation and consulting fees of $149,499 and $481,583, respectively. The decrease in selling, general, and administrative costs for the 2019 periods is primarily due to the decrease in stock-based compensation and consulting fees.
For the years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, depreciation and amortization expense amounted to approximately $11,000 and $276,000, respectively, and related to the amortization of intangible assets and depreciation expense for demonstration drones.
For the years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, interest and financing costs amounted to of $1,598,246 and $1,527,262, respectively. The increase in interest and financing costs is due primarily to put premiums for stock settled debt.
During the year ended September 30, 2020 the Company incurred $992,592 net losses on debt extinguishment. During the year ended September 30, 2019 the Company incurred $57,623 net gains on debt extinguishment and derivative expenses of $24,733.
As a result, we reported a net loss of $4,328,318, or $0.05 per common share, and $7,115,159, or $2.72 per common share, for the years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Going Concern
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern, which contemplates the recoverability of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business.
For the year ended September 30, 2020, the Company has incurred a net loss of $4,328,318 and used cash in operations of $491,000. The working capital deficit, stockholders’ deficit and accumulated deficit was $16,214,281, $17,944,973 and $31,074,769, respectively, at September 30, 2020. On September 6, 2019 the Company received a default notice on its payment obligations under the senior secured credit facility agreement, defaulted on its Note Payable - Seller in September 2017, and has since defaulted on other notes. As of September 30, 2020, the Company has received demands for payment of past due amounts from several consultants and service providers. The Company is in negotiation with the receiver appointed by the court related to the senior secured creditor’s claim and has proposed a preliminary settlement. It is management’s opinion that these matters raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a period of twelve months from the issuance date of this report. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon management’s ability to further implement its business plan and raise additional capital as needed from the sales of stock or debt. The Company continues to implement cost-cutting measures and restructuring or setting up payment plans with vendors and service providers and is raising equity financing through a private placement, and is working to restructure and repay its obligations. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be required should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles applied on a consistent basis. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods.
We regularly evaluate the accounting policies and estimates that we use to prepare our consolidated financial statements. In general, management’s estimates are based on historical experience, and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the facts and circumstances. Actual results could differ from those estimates made by management.
Accounts Receivable
Trade receivables are recorded at net realizable value consisting of the carrying amount less the allowance for doubtful accounts, as needed. Factors used to establish an allowance include the credit quality of the customer and whether the balance is significant. The Company may also use the direct write-off method to account for uncollectible accounts that are not received. Using the direct write-off method, trade receivable balances are written off to bad debt expense when an account balance is deemed to be uncollectible.
Inventory
Inventory consists of finished goods, which are purchased directly from manufacturers. The Company utilizes a just in time type of inventory system where products are ordered from the vendor only when the Company has received sales order from its customers. Inventory is stated at the lower of cost and net realizable value on a first-in, first-out basis.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
The Company’s goodwill and tradename assets are deemed to have indefinite lives and, accordingly, are not amortized, but are evaluated for impairment at least annually, but more often whenever changes in facts and circumstances occur which may indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. The Company conducted its goodwill and its intangible assets impairment test as of September 30, 2019 and determined that an impairment existed as certain asset values are unsupported by the current and projected net income and cash flows of the component holding the goodwill and intangible assets, the Company’s subsidiary, Howco. Accordingly, an impairment charge of $3,420,624 was charged against the Goodwill, Tradename and Customer List assets and has been recognized as of September 30, 2019.
Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Impairment is measured by comparing the carrying value of the long-lived assets to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from use of the assets and their ultimate disposition. In instances where impairment is determined to exist, the Company writes down the asset to its fair value based on the present value of estimated future cash flows.
Revenue Recognition
The Company sells a variety of products to government entities. The purchase orders received specifies each item and its manufacturer; the Company only needs to fulfill the performance obligation by shipping the specified items. No other performance obligations exist under the terms of the contracts. The Company recognizes revenue for the agreed upon sales price when the product is shipped to the customer, which satisfies the performance obligation.
The Company sells drones and related products manufactured by third parties to various parties. The Company also offers technical services related to drone utilization. The Company began offering insulation jackets for commercial and government facilities to insulate and monitor heating and cooling equipment. Contracts for drone related products and services and insulating jacket related sales will be evaluated using the process proscribed by the Financial Accounting Standards Board. There has been no material sales for drone products and services for which full compliance with performance obligations has not been met. Sales of insulation jackets have not yet commenced. Upon significant sales for drone products and services and insulation jackets, the Company will disaggregate sales by these lines of business and within the lines of business to the extent that the product or service has different revenue recognition characteristics.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation is accounted for based on the requirements of ASC 718 - “Compensation -Stock Compensation”, which requires recognition in the financial statements of the cost of employee and director services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments over the period the employee or director is required to perform the services in exchange for the award (presumptively, the vesting period). The ASC also requires measurement of the cost of employee and director services received in exchange for an award based on the grant-date fair value of the award. The Company utilizes the Black-Sholes option pricing model and uses the simplified method to determine expected term because of lack of sufficient exercise history. Additionally, effective October 1, 2016, the Company adopted the Accounting Standards Update No. 2016-09 (“ASU 2016-09”), Improvements to Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting. Among other changes, ASU 2016-09 permits the election of an accounting policy for forfeitures of share-based payment awards, either to recognize forfeitures as they occur or estimate forfeitures over the vesting period of the award. The Company has elected to recognize forfeitures as they occur and the cumulative impact of this change did not have any effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
As of October 1, 2018, the Company has early adopted ASU 2018-7 Compensation-Stock Compensation which conforms the accounting for non-employees to the accounting treatment for employees. The new standard replaces using a fair value as of each reporting date with use of the calculated fair value as of the grant date. The implementation of the standard provides for the use of the fair market value as of the adoption date, rather than using the value as of the original grant date. Therefore, the values calculated and reported at September 30, 2018 become a proxy for the grant date value. The Company utilizes the Black-Sholes option pricing model and uses the simplified method to determine expected term because of lack of sufficient exercise history. There was no cumulative effect on the adoption date.
Derivative Liabilities
The Company has certain financial instruments that are derivatives or contain embedded derivatives. The Company evaluates all its financial instruments to determine if those contracts or any potential embedded components of those contracts qualify as derivatives to be separately accounted for in accordance with ASC 810-10-05-4 and 815-40. This accounting treatment requires that the carrying amount of any derivatives be recorded at fair value at issuance and marked-to-market at each balance sheet date. In the event that the fair value is recorded as a liability, as is the case with the Company, the change in the fair value during the period is recorded as either other income or expense. Upon conversion, exercise or repayment, the respective derivative liability is marked to fair value at the conversion, repayment or exercise date and then the related fair value amount is reclassified to other income or expense as part of gain or loss on extinguishment.
Convertible Notes with Fixed Rate Conversion Options
We may enter into convertible notes, some of which contain, predominantly, fixed rate conversion features, whereby the outstanding principal and accrued interest may be converted by the holder, into common shares at a fixed discount to the market price of the common stock at the time of conversion. This results in a fair value of the convertible note being equal to a fixed monetary amount. We record the convertible note liability at its fixed monetary amount by measuring and recording a premium, as applicable, on the Note date with a charge to interest expense in accordance with ASC 480 - “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity”.
Net Loss Per Share
Basic loss per share is calculated by dividing the loss attributable to stockholders by the weighted-average number of shares outstanding for the period. Diluted loss per share reflects the potential dilution that could occur if securities or other contracts to issue common stock were exercised or converted into common stock or resulted in the issuance of common stock that shared in the earnings (loss) of the Company. Diluted loss per share is computed by dividing the loss available to stockholders by the weighted average number of shares outstanding for the period and dilutive potential shares outstanding unless such dilutive potential shares would result in anti-dilution.