ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
BARK is a company of dog obsessed people dedicated to making dogs happy. BARK is a vertically integrated, data driven, omnichannel brand serving dogs across the four key categories of Play, Food, Health, and Home. BARK’s dog-obsessed team applies its unique, data-driven understanding of what makes each dog special to design playstyle-specific toys, delicious and satisfying treats, food, and wellness supplements, and best in class offerings that foster the health and happiness of dogs. Founded in 2012, BARK loyally serves dogs nationwide with monthly subscription offerings, BarkBox and Super Chewer; a personalized meal delivery service for dogs, BARK Eats; custom collections through online marketplaces and via brick and mortar retail partners, including Target and Amazon; wellness products that meet dogs’ needs with BARK Bright through monthly subscriptions; BARK’S add to box (“ATB”) platform; and individually on its website BarkShop.com.
During the year ended March 31, 2021 and prior to the Merger, the Company was a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on July 8, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses.
Prior to the Merger, we had neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities through March 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and, after our Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance).
Recent Developments and Subsequent Events
On December 16, 2020, the Company entered into an Agreement and Plan of Reorganization (“Merger Agreement”) by and among the Company, NSAC Merger Sub Corp., a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company incorporated in Delaware on December 14, 2020 (“Merger Sub”), and Barkbox, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“BarkBox”).
On June 1, 2021 (the “Closing Date”), pursuant to the Merger Agreement, the Company consummated (the “Closing”) the merger of Merger Sub with BarkBox, with BarkBox surviving the merger as a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (the Merger”), and the other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement (the “Transactions”). In connection with the Closing, the Company changed its name to The Original BARK Company.
Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, each stockholder of BarkBox’s common and preferred stock (including stockholders issued common stock as a result of the conversion of BarkBox’s outstanding convertible promissory notes issued in 2019 and 2020 (other than the 2025 Convertible Notes (as defined below)) received 8.7425 shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Common Stock”), per share of BarkBox’s common stock and preferred stock, respectively, owned by such BarkBox stockholder that was outstanding immediately prior to the Closing.
In addition, pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, at the effective time of the Merger, (1) options to purchase shares of BarkBox’s common stock were converted into options to purchase an aggregate of 29,257,576 shares of Common Stock and (2) warrants to purchase shares of BarkBox’s equity were converted into warrants to purchase an aggregate of 1,897,212 shares of Common Stock.
Additionally, at the Closing, BarkBox’s 5.50% convertible senior secured notes due 2025 (the “2025 Convertible Notes”) were assumed by the Company and were initially convertible at the election of the holders into 7,713,121 shares of Common Stock based on the interest accrued as of Closing.
Concurrently with the Closing, certain investors purchased an aggregate of 20,000,000 shares of Common Stock in a private placement at a price of $10.00 per share for an aggregate purchase price of $200,000,000.
In addition, at the Closing, each of the 6,358,750 outstanding shares of the Company’s Class B common stock were converted into a share of Common Stock on a one-for-one basis.
Factors Affecting Our Future Performance after the Merger
We believe that our performance and future success depend on several factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in the section of this annual report titled “Risk Factors.”
Acquisition of new subscriptions
Our ability to attract new subscriptions is a key factor for our future growth. To date we have successfully acquired new subscriptions through marketing and the development of our brands. As a result, revenue has increased each year since our launch. If we are unable to acquire sufficient new subscriptions in the future, our revenue might decline. New subscriptions could be negatively impacted if our marketing efforts are less effective in the future. Increases in advertising rates could also negatively impact our ability to acquire new subscriptions cost effectively. Consumer tastes, preferences, and sentiment for our brands may also change and result in decreased demand for our products and services.
Retention of existing subscribers
Our ability to retain subscribers is a key factor in our ability to generate revenue growth. Most of our current subscribers purchase products through subscription-based plans, where subscribers are billed and sent products on a recurring basis. The recurring nature of this revenue provides us with a certain amount of predictability for future revenue. If customer behavior changes, and customer retention decreases in the future, then future revenue will be negatively impacted.
Investments in growth
We expect to continue to focus on long-term growth through investments in product offerings and the dog and dog parent experience. We are working to enhance our offerings and expand the breadth of the products and offerings, including BARK Eats and BARK Bright. We expect to make significant investments in marketing to acquire new subscribers and customers. Additionally, we intend to continue to invest in our fulfillment and operating capabilities. In the short term, we expect these investments to increase our operating expenses; however, in the long term, we anticipate that these investments will positively impact our results of operations.
Expansion of new offerings
We expect to continue to invest in the expansion of our new offerings, including BARK Eats, BARK Bright and potential new offerings. By expanding our product lines we seek to attract new customers as well as increase sales to our existing customers. Continuing expansion into new categories, such as BARK Eats and BARK Bright will require financial investments in additional headcount, marketing and customer acquisition expenses, and additional operational capabilities and may require the purchase of new inventory. If we are unable to generate sufficient demand for these new offerings, we may not recover the financial investments we make into new categories and revenue may not increase in the future.
Impact of COVID-19
The global COVID-19 pandemic has impacted and will continue to impact our operating results, financial condition and cash flows.
We have implemented a number of measures to protect the health and safety of our workforce. These measures include substantial modifications to employee travel, employee work locations, and virtualization or cancellation of meetings, among other modifications. Currently, the vast majority of our employees are working remotely. For the employees who work in our offices, we are following the guidance from public health officials and government agencies, including implementation of enhanced cleaning measures, social distancing guidelines and wearing of masks. BARK has experienced an increase in the rate of BarkBox and Super Chewer subscriptions that we believe is partially attributable to an increase in dog ownership arising from more subscribers working remotely during the COVID-19 pandemic. This rate of growth may not be sustainable or indicative of our future rate of growth.
BARK has experienced an increase in Retail revenue across many existing and new major retail customers, while at the same time, experiencing challenges with select partners due to restrictions in mobility.
BARK experienced minor manufacturing and inbound freight disruptions during the first half of fiscal year 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, during the second half of fiscal year 2021 BARK began to experience increases in inbound freight costs due to the challenges in the current import market, as transpacific ships and trade lanes continue to be overburdened with volume and experience a significant shortage of equipment and capacity.
During the second, third and fourth quarters of fiscal year 2021, BARK saw an increase in outbound fulfillment and shipping related fees. This increase was due to price increases from carriers due to increased demand, as well as BARK opting for premium shipping with carriers to help ensure timely delivery and customer satisfaction.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact our business will depend on future developments related to the geographic spread of the disease, the duration and severity of the outbreak, travel restrictions, required social distancing, governmental mandates, business closures or governmental or business disruptions, and the effectiveness of actions taken in the United States and other countries to prevent, contain and treat the virus and any additional government stimulus programs. These impacts are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with certainty.
Key Performance Indicators after the Merger
We measure our business using both financial and operating data and use the following metrics and measures (among others) to assess the near-term and long-term performance of our overall business, including identifying trends, formulating financial projections, making strategic decisions, assessing operational efficiencies, and monitoring our business.
We present the following key performance indicators to assist investors in understanding our operating results on an on-going basis: (i) Subscription Shipments; (ii) Average Monthly Subscription Shipment Churn; (iii) Active Subscriptions; (iv) New Subscriptions; (v) Average Order Value; (vi) Customer Acquisition Cost and (vii) Lifetime Value. These key performance indicators may also assist investors in making comparisons of the Company’s operating results with those of other companies.
•
Subscription Shipments as the total number of subscription product shipments shipped in a given period. Subscription Shipments does not include gift subscriptions or one-time subscription shipments.
•
Average Monthly Subscription Shipment Churn is calculated as the average number of subscription shipments that have been cancelled in the last three months, divided by the average monthly active subscription shipments in the last three months. The number of cancellations used to calculate Average Monthly Subscription Shipment Churn is net of the number of subscriptions reactivated during the last three months.
•
Active Subscriptions is the total number of unique product subscriptions with at least one shipment during the last 12 months. Active Subscriptions does not include gift subscriptions or one-time subscription purchases.
•
New Subscriptions are the number of unique subscriptions with their first shipment occurring in a period.
•
Average Order Value is Direct to Consumer revenue for the period divided by Subscription Shipments for the same period.
•
Customer Acquisition Cost (“CAC”) is a measure of the cost to acquire New Subscriptions in our Direct to Consumer business segment. This unit economic metric indicates how effective we are at acquiring each New Subscription. CAC is a monthly measure defined as media spend in our Direct to Consumer business segment in the period indicated, divided by total New Subscriptions in such period. Direct to Consumer media spend is primarily comprised of internet and social media advertising fees.
•
Lifetime Value is the dollar value of each subscription as measured by the cumulative Direct to Consumer Gross Profit for the average life of the subscription.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures after the Merger
In addition to financial results determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, BARK that Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin, both non-GAAP financial measures, provides investors with additional useful information in evaluating our performance. We calculate Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss), adjusted to exclude: (1) interest expense, (2) depreciation and amortization, (3) stock-based compensation expense, (4) change in fair value of warrants and derivatives, (5) sales and use tax expense and (6) one-time transaction costs associated with the financing and the business combination. We calculate Adjusted EBITDA margin by dividing Adjusted EBITDA for the period by revenue for the period.
Results of Operations
The Company’s entire activity since inception through March 31, 2021 related to formation, the preparation for its initial public offering, and since the closing of its initial public offering, the search for a prospective initial business combination. It neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues.
For the year period from July 8, 2020 through March 31, 2021, we had net loss of $29,637,673, which consisted of operating costs of $1,595,783, loss on warrant liability of $27,563,109, and transaction costs incurred in connection with warrant liabilities of $511,177 offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $32,396.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On November 13, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 25,000,000 Units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $250,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 4,500,000 Private Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.50 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $6,750,000.
On November 24, 2020, the Company sold an additional 435,000 Units for total gross proceeds of $4,350,000 in connection with the underwriters’ partial exercise of their over-allotment option. Simultaneously with the partial closing of the over-allotment option, we also consummated the sale of an additional 58,000 Private Warrants at $1.50 per Private Warrant, generating total proceeds of $87,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Warrants, a total of $254,350,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $14,437,777 in transaction costs, consisting of $5,087,000 of underwriting fees, $8,902,250 of deferred underwriting fees and $448,527 of other costs. Of the total transaction costs, $13,926,600 was charged to additional paid-in capital and $511,117 was charged to other income (expense) - transaction costs incurred in connection with warrant liabilities.
For the period from July 8, 2020 (inception) through March 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $1,019,850. Net loss of $29,637,673 was impacted by a change of $27,563,109 for the change in fair value of warrant liabilities, $511,177 for transaction costs incurred in connection with warrant liabilities, and interest of $32,396 earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $575,933 of cash for operating activities.
As of March 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $254,382,396 (including approximately $32,000 of interest income and unrealized gains) consisting of U.S. Treasury Bills with a maturity of 180 days or less. Through March 31, 2021, we did not withdraw any of interest earned on the Trust Account to pay our franchise and income taxes.
As of March 31, 2021, we had cash of $306,623 held outside the Trust Account.
We expect that our cash and cash equivalents as of March 31, 2021, together with cash provided from the Trust Account upon consummation of the Merger, the PIPE investment and by our operating activities, will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses for at least the next 12 months. We are required to comply with certain financial and non financial covenants related to our borrowing agreements, which we expect to be in compliance with during the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our pace of new and existing subscriber growth and our investments in partnerships and unexplored channels. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of March 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Critical Accounting Policies prior to the Merger
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASC 815”), under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity classification and must be recorded as liabilities. As the warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, the Warrants are measured at fair value at inception and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement, with changes in fair value recognized in the Statement of Operations in the period of change.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our condensed balance sheet.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates following the Merger
We believe that the following accounting policies involve a high degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of our operations. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported in those financial statements and related notes thereto. The future effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations, cash flows and financial position are unclear. However, we believe we have used reasonable estimates and assumptions in preparing the unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements. Although we believe that the estimates we use are reasonable, due to the inherent uncertainty involved in making those estimates, actual results reported in future periods could differ from those estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Our primary source of revenue is from of our toys and treats subscription and sales or good through retailers, third parties or our website. We recognize revenue upon delivery of products and services to our subscriber or customer, as applicable. The recognition of revenue is determined through application of the following five-step model:
•
Identification of the contract(s) with subscribers or customers, as applicable;
•
Identification of the performance obligation(s) in the contract;
•
Determination of the transaction price;
•
Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligation(s) in the contract; and
•
Recognition of revenue when or as the performance obligation(s) are satisfied.
Discounts are considered fixed consideration and represent a fixed reduction to revenue for each performance obligation. The sales returns and chargebacks allowance is considered to be contingent and represents a component of variable consideration. The estimated consideration reflects potential sales returns and chargebacks as a reduction in the transaction price. We have determined that the expected value method will provide the best predictor for a refund liability associated with sales returns and chargebacks. The expected value method estimates variable consideration based on the range of possible outcomes and the probabilities of each outcome and is most appropriate when an entity has a large number of contracts that have similar characteristics. The estimate is recorded in total for sales transactions recorded in the current period and, in effect, represents a reduction in the transaction price at the time of sale.
Our contract liability represents cash collections from its customers prior to delivery of subscription products, which is recorded as deferred revenue on the consolidated balance sheets. Deferred revenue is recognized as revenue upon the delivery of the box or product.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure and record the expense related to stock-based payment awards based on the fair value of those awards as determined on the date of grant. We recognize stock-based compensation expense over the requisite service period of the individual grant, generally equal to the vesting period and uses the straight-line method to recognize stock-based compensation. For stock options with performance conditions, we record compensation expense when it is deemed probable that the performance condition will be met. We use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to determine the fair value of stock awards.
We estimate expected forfeitures of stock-based awards at the grant date and recognizes compensation cost only for those awards expected to vest. We estimate future forfeitures at the date of grant based on historical experience and revises the estimates, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates.
For stock-based awards issued to non-employees, including consultants, we record expense related to stock options based on the fair value of the options calculated using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model over the service performance period. The fair value of options granted to non-employees is remeasured over the vesting period and recognized as an expense over the period the services are rendered.
Derivative Assets and Liabilities
Our term loan and convertible note agreements contain features determined to be embedded derivatives from its host. Embedded derivatives are separated from the host contract and carried at fair value when the embedded derivative possesses economic characteristics that are not clearly and closely related to the economic characteristics of the host contract and a separate, standalone instrument with the same terms would qualify as a derivative instrument. The derivative is measured both initially and in subsequent periods at fair value, with changes in fair value recognized on the statement of operations and comprehensive loss. The Company’s valuation of embedded derivative liabilities have historically been measured using an income approach based on a discounted cash flow model, as well as a probability-weighted expected return method (“PWERM”). The Company uses various key assumptions, such as estimation of the timing and probability of expected future events, and selection of discount rates applied to future cash flows using a yield curve equivalent to the Company’s credit risk.
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering in accordance with ASC 815 under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity classification and must be recorded as liabilities. As the warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, the warrants are measured at fair value at inception and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement, with changes in fair value recognized in the Statement of Operations in the period of change.