Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation.
You should read the following discussion and analysis together with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included in “Item 8 - Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” The discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Basanite and its wholly owned subsidiaries are herein referred to as the "Company", “we”, “our”, or “us”.
Overview
This overview provides a high-level discussion of our operating results and some of the trends that affect our business. We believe that an understanding of these trends is important to understand our financial results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The Company’s wholly owned subsidiary, Basanite Industries, LLC (“BI”) manufactures BasaFlex™, a basalt fiber reinforced polymer (“BFRP”) rebar. BFRP rebar is a stronger, lighter, sustainable, non-conductive and non-corrosive alternative for traditional steel rebar and wire mesh. BI leases a fully permitted and Underwriters Laboratories (“UL”) approved 36,900 square foot facility located in Pompano Beach, Florida, equipped with five customized Pultrusion machines. Each machine has two linear production lines (a total capacity of 10 manufacturing lines). BI’s operations team is currently in the processes of optimizing and scaling the manufacturing plant to produce 11,000 to 17,000 linear feet of BFRP rebar per line, per day, depending on the product mix. BI’s own fully equipped Test Lab is utilized to evaluate, validate and verify each product’s performance attributes.
The manufacture of concrete reinforcement products made from continuous basalt fiber creates substantial benefits for the construction industry, including but not limited to, the following:
·
BasaFlex™ never rusts - steel reinforcement products rust, causing time and repair costs down the road;
·
BasaFlex™ is sustainable; with a longer lifecycle - production of our products results in exceptionally low carbon footprint when compared with steel. The lack of corrosion allows the “lifespan” of concrete products to be significantly longer; and
·
BasaFlex™ has a lower final, in place cost - the physical nature of our products relative to steel (4X lighter, easily transportable, “coil-able”, safer and easier to use) reduces the all-in cost of reinforcement when all factors are considered.
We believe that macroeconomic factors are pressuring the construction industry to consider the use of alternative reinforcement materials for the following reasons: the increasing need for global infrastructure repair; recent design trends towards increasing the lifespan of projects and materials; and increasing consideration of the long-term costs and environmental impacts of material selections. We believe we are well positioned to benefit from this renewed focus, although it is difficult to determine at this point the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic to the construction industry.
Basanite Industries submitted its first round of BasaFlex™ (Basalt Fiber Reinforced Polymer) rebar products to the Structures and Materials Department of the University of Miami (UM), Miami, Florida, an industry accredited independent testing laboratory, to obtain a Certified Test Report which allows Basanite to participate in approved fiber-reinforced polymer (FRP) applications, such as precast, architectural, flatwork and other non-structural engineered applications. On May 29th, 2020, a Certified Test Report was submitted to Basanite for engineering use. Basanite Industries has submitted a second round of BasaFlex™ rebars for additional testing, that will further certify and qualify BasaFlex™ for Federal and state government applications, to the University of Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada. Basanite expects the results to be superior to the first round of testing.
In the middle of August of 2020, Basanite began initial manufacturing operations and commenced the manufacture of its initial stock of inventory of BasaFlex™, its proprietary basalt FRP. Also during this timeframe, the Company filled key positions within its production facility and reached its primary goal of scaling to full capacity single shift operations. Basanite has begun selling across its complete product line and is currently working on securing larger orders for next year. The Company has also been preparing multiple test articles for customers who are now conducting testing for specific applications. Based on market demand, and subject to success in its fundraising efforts, Basanite is now working towards beginning two shift operations during the second quarter of 2021.
Management has also been recruiting key positions in the Company, focused initially on product development; driving sales growth; and expanding the Company’s market presence. Our hiring focused on key areas of excellence, including quality assurance; operations and other technical resources; engineering; and sales and marketing. Basanite has completed its initial hiring plan of recruiting and hiring the following key personnel for leadership positions, with over 140 years of industry experience in the industry combined:
Vesna Stanic, PhD
Director of Quality Assurance
Brian Metrocavage
Director of Technical Sales
Bob Robbins
Director of Business Development
Jesus Escalona
Structural / Civil Engineer
Eduardo Acosta
Structural / Civil Engineer
Jorge Angulo
Director of Operations
Earlier in 2020, Basanite contracted with an independent software company to develop BasaPro™, a design software specifically for use with BasaFlex™. This development effort has been completed and the software is operational. This allows both Basanite’s engineers and Basanite customer’s engineers to easily convert engineering designs for the use of BasaFlex™ in place of steel rebar in all types of concrete applications. It allows for both the conversion to BasaFlex™ from steel in existing concrete designs and, for original designs using BasaFlex™, and is based upon the application of ACI 440 and ACI 318 industry standards. The software is capable of showing all calculations and pictorial design work in conjunction with applicable building codes. This means Basanite can now communicate with the design community in their own language.
Basanite continues to receive multiple inquiries from a range of customers for its products, indicating very high levels of market interest for BasaFlex™. A significant number of these inquiries are for very large potential orders for new, multi-year construction projects. Based on our current manufacturing capacity, a number of these orders exceed our capability to deliver within the customer’s requested timeframe, and largely because of this, there is no guarantee that these orders will actually be received. To satisfy the high level of market interest, in particular with these larger customers, Basanite is planning to accelerate the expansion of the Pompano Beach facility. Our initial goal is to expand to 5 times our current capacity by Q3 of 2021, and ultimately to 7+ times our current capacity by the beginning of 2022. To accomplish this goal, Basanite has developed customized pultrusion equipment with significantly increased capacity in the same footprint as our current equipment. The brand new technology system, name BasaMax™, has been specifically designed for the manufacture of BasaFlex™ using Basanite’s patent pending process. Two versions of this equipment have been designed, and these will not only offer double the capacity of our current equipment (per machine), but also each machine will run significantly faster. A prototype is currently undergoing preliminary testing in Pompano Beach. Based on a successful trial, Basanite is planning a two-phase plant expansion, eventually including 10 of these new machines. Our goal, subject to a successful raise of the needed funding, is to have this equipment installed and be fully operational in Q4 of 2021, and to reach our targeted capacity level by the summer of 2022.
The Company was able to raise approximately $900K in the 4th quarter through the exercise of warrants from current investors; and in February 2021, the term of the existing $1M loan provided by an entity related to one of the Board of Directors and one outsider was extended, and the amount of the loan increased to approximately $1.6M. However, a number of factors continue to hinder the Company's ability to attract new capital investment. Because the Company is currently experiencing a scarcity of working capital on top of funding needed for facility upgrades, the Company has temporarily scaled back operations and issued temporary furloughs to certain employees to conserve its cash. No assurances can be given that the Company will be successful in raising future capital.
Results of Operations
Revenue - The Company had $7,161 of revenues as a result of sales of finished goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $3,892 in the prior year. Revenues have been minimal as a result of the Company’s shift in focus to the scaling of production and inventory.
Cost of goods sold - During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had cost of sales of $4,487 compared to $105,010 in the prior year. The Company has small margins as they sold existing inventory while preparing for the scaling the manufacture of BasaFlex™. In the same period in the prior year, the Company lost money on a gross margin basis due to inefficiencies in the start-up process and extremely narrow margins on the initial sales of like products.
Operating Expenses
Professional fees - During the year ended December 31, 2020, professional fees were $438,749 compared to $341,906 in the prior year. The Company has increased fees as it relates to legal fees with the ongoing litigation, and new supplier and consulting agreements as it tries to secure relationships in the industry.
Payroll and payroll taxes - During the year ended December 31, 2020, payroll and payroll taxes were $837,348 compared to $865,828 in the prior year. The decrease was due to the termination of the prior CEO in the first quarter of 2020 and the resignation of the CFO in the second quarter of 2020 compared to both being employed during the same period in the prior year.
Consulting - During the year ended December 31, 2020, consulting fees were $270,525 compared to $219,326 in the prior year. The increase is due to consulting agreements for senior management at different rates.
General and administrative - During the year ended December 31, 2020, general and administrative expenses were $1,408,948 compared to $2,483,226 in the prior year. The decrease is largely due to the decrease in stock-based compensation expense by $1,535,726 and the minimal increases in several other general and administrative expenses compared to the prior year.
Loss on inventory obsolescence - During year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had a loss of $33,062 compared to $0 in the prior year, which resulted from a review of purchased inventory on hand that was deemed unsellable.
Other Income
Disposition of fixed asset - During year ended December 310, 2020, the Company had a gain of $40,838 compared to $0 in the prior year. The gain is due to the sale of an asset during the year.
Miscellaneous income - During the year ended December 31, 2020, miscellaneous income was $70,817 as a result of a gain on the settlement of a lawsuit compared to $4,469 in the prior year. The increase is due to the net settlement of $125,000 less the contingency fee and expenses paid to the attorney for the HLM Storefront litigation.
Gain on settlement of payable - During year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had a gain of $293,678 compared to $201,617 in the prior year. The gain in the current year is due to the forgiveness by prior management of accrued wages and related expenses whereas in the prior year, the gain is largely due to the writing off of several payables that had exceeded their statute of limitations for collection.
Other Expenses
Loss on extinguishment of debt - During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had a loss of $56,948 compared to $0 in the prior year. The increase in loss is due to the settlement of various long-standing debts for restricted common shares which exceeded the value of the debt.
Impairment of fixed asset - During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had no gain or loss compared to a loss of $1,478 in the prior year.
Interest expense - During the year ended December 31, 2020, interest expense was $898,257 compared to $113,076 in the prior year. The increase is mainly due to the amortization of the debt discounts recorded for the convertible debt.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, the Company has incurred net operating losses and used cash in operations. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had an accumulated deficit of $29,643,387. The Company has incurred general and administrative expenses associated with its product development and compliance while concurrently setting up the facility, beginning operations, and developing its business. The Company also continues incurring legal fees arising from ongoing litigation. Based on information currently available, management believes that these ongoing costs are not material to the Company’s financial condition, but no assurances can be given that the materiality of these ongoing litigation costs will not change, or that litigation will be resolved in a timely fashion. We expect operating losses to continue in the short term and require additional financing for continued support of our BFRP manufacturing business until the Company can generate sufficient revenues to achieve positive cash flow. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
We have historically satisfied our working capital requirements through the sale of restricted common stock and the issuance of warrants and promissory notes. We will continue our fundraising efforts until we have obtained positive cash flow to cover our expenses. No assurances can be given that the Company will be successful in raising future capital.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had cash of $259,505 compared to $129,152 at December 31, 2019.
Notwithstanding proceeds from the sale of our common stock this year, current working capital and projected sales revenue are insufficient to maintain our current operations. In order to scale up operations and reach the level of sales revenue sufficient to provide positive cash flow, the Company requires funding of both its expansion plan and its operating deficit through the scaling period. The Company will attempt to raise this capital through third party financing, including a private placement of our securities as well as bridge loan arrangements. We cannot provide any assurances that required capital will be obtained or that the terms of such required financing may be acceptable to us. If we are unable to obtain adequate financing, we may reduce our operating activities to reduce our cash use until sufficient funding is secured.
The coronavirus (“COVID-19”) that surfaced in December 2019 and spread throughout the world resulted in Basanite undergoing a 2-month operational shutdown early in the second quarter of 2019, with normal business operations resuming in June. A second Coronavirus related event occurred in early Q4, when two employees tested positive for Coronavirus and the Company became concerned they had potentially exposed the others. Out of an abundance of caution, the Company temporarily shut down operations for one week and entered a 10-day quarantine period (during this time certain key employees remained active, working from home). The Company strictly followed CDC guidelines for required quarantining period(s) and testing of all employees before re-opening. That being said, since the beginning of Q3, COVID-19 has not materially impacted our operations or those of our third-party partners. However, the continued spread and variants of the virus could negatively impact the manufacturing, supply, distribution and sale of our products and our financial results in the future. The extent to which the coronavirus may impact our operations or those of our third-party partners will depend on future developments, which are uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence.
Cash Flows
Net cash used in operating activities amounted to $2,799,499 and $2,259,537 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $339,586 net cash for investing activities compared to $566,918 used in the prior fiscal year for the modifications and Underwriter’s Laboratories listing of the production machinery and the final payments for the enhancements made to our production facility as compared to the deposits made on machinery and equipment.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had $3,269,438 net cash provided by financing activities. Proceeds of $1,797,068 from the sale of stock from accredited investors and related parties for 15,495,629 restricted common shares issued; borrowing of $1,886,727 from the issuance of convertible and short-term notes payable, including from related parties; less $348,000 of full repayment of a convertible note; less $66,357 of full repayment of short-term notes payable.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we had $2,833,776 net cash provided by financing activities. Proceeds of $2,392,828 net cash from the sale of stock from accredited investors and related parties for 41,034,285 restricted common shares issued; borrowing of $642,760 from the issuance of convertible and short-term notes payable, including from related parties; less $50,000 of a partial repayment of a convertible note; less $54,704 of full repayment of a related party convertible note; and less $97,108 of full repayment of a demand note payable.
We do not believe that our cash on hand at December 31, 2020 will be sufficient to fund our current working capital requirements as we try to develop our fiber reinforced polymer rebar manufacturing business. We entered into convertible promissory notes and issued restricted common shares in an effort to raise additional working capital. See Note 13 - Subsequent Events in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more details. We will continue working towards securing more working capital. However, there is no assurance that we will be successful in securing working capital or, if we are, that the terms will be beneficial to our shareholders.
Summary of Critical Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates - The preparation of the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, or GAAP, requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the Consolidated Financial Statements and reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Stock-based compensation and stock awards related to convertible debt instruments are recognized based on the fair value of the awards granted. The fair value of each award or conversion feature is estimated on the grant date using the Black-Scholes pricing model. The Black-Scholes pricing model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the fair value of the underlying common stock, the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of the price of our common stock, risk-free interest rates and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. The assumptions used to determine the fair value of the stock awards represent management’s best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
There are several new accounting pronouncements issued or proposed by the FASB. Each of these pronouncements, as applicable, has been or will be adopted by the Company. Management does not believe any of these accounting pronouncements has had or will have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial position or operating results.