ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion is intended to assist in understanding our results of operations and our current financial condition. Our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain additional information that should be referred to when reviewing this material.
Certain prior year financial statements are not comparable to our current year financial statements due to the adoption of fresh-start accounting upon our emergence from chapter 11 bankruptcy on October 8, 2019. References to “Successor” or “Successor Company” relate to the financial position and results of operations of the reorganized Company subsequent to October 1, 2019, the convenience date applied for fresh-start accounting. References to “Predecessor” or “Predecessor Company” relate to the financial position and results of operations of the Company prior to, and including, October 1, 2019. Refer to Item 8. Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 2, “Reorganization” and Note 3, “Fresh-start Accounting,” for further details.
Statements in this discussion may be forward-looking. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties, including those discussed below, which could cause actual results to differ from those expressed.
Overview
We are an independent energy company focused on the acquisition, production, exploration and development of onshore liquids-rich oil and natural gas assets in the United States. During 2017 (Predecessor), we acquired certain properties in the Delaware Basin and divested our assets located in the Williston Basin in North Dakota and in the El Halcón area of East Texas. As a result, our properties and drilling activities are currently focused in the Delaware Basin, where we have an extensive drilling inventory that we believe offers attractive economics.
At December 31, 2020 (Successor), our estimated total proved oil and natural gas reserves, as prepared by our independent reserve engineering firm, Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc. (Netherland, Sewell), using Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) prices for crude oil and natural gas, which are based on preceding 12-month first day of the month average prices of West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude oil spot price of $39.54 per Bbl and Henry Hub natural gas spot price of $1.99 per MMBtu, were approximately 63.4 MMBoe, consisting of 38.2 MMBbls of oil, 12.1 MMBbls of natural gas liquids, and 78.5 Bcf of natural gas. Approximately 57% of our proved reserves were classified as proved developed as of December 31, 2020 (Successor). We maintain operational control of 99.9% of our proved reserves. Substantially all of our proved reserves and production at December 31, 2020 (Successor) are associated with our Delaware Basin properties.
Our total operating revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) were approximately $148.3 million. Our total operating revenues for the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor) were approximately $65.6 million and $159.1 million, respectively, or $224.7 million combined. Full year 2020 (Successor) production averaged 16,858 Boe/d. During the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), production averaged 20,293 Boe/d and 17,209 Boe/d, respectively, or 17,986 Boe/d combined. The decrease in total operating revenues and average daily production year over year was driven by our temporary shut-in of a portion of producing wells across all our operating areas in May and June 2020 (Successor) as a consequence of low oil prices as well as average realized prices that were lower by approximately $10.25 per Boe. The estimated production decrease associated with these temporary shut-ins was approximately 1,300 Boe/d for 2020 (Successor). In December 2020 (Successor), we divested properties that produced approximately 600 Boe/d during the nine months ended September 30, 2020 (Successor).
Our financial results depend upon many factors, but are largely driven by the volume of our oil and natural gas production and the price that we receive for that production. Our production volumes will decline as reserves are depleted unless we expend capital in successful development and exploration activities or acquire properties with existing production. The amount we realize for our production depends predominantly upon commodity prices, which are affected by changes in market demand and supply, as impacted by overall economic activity, weather, transportation
take-away capacity constraints, inventory storage levels, basis differentials and other factors. Accordingly, finding and developing oil and natural gas reserves at economical costs is critical to our long-term success.
In 2020 (Successor), we spent approximately $101.8 million on oil and gas capital expenditures. In early 2020, we ran one operated rig in the Delaware Basin, and in March 2020, as a result of changes in market conditions and commodity prices, we began to scale back our capital operations and spending and eventually released the rig. We drilled and cased 4.0 gross (4.0 net) operated wells, completed 5.0 gross (4.3 net) operated wells, and put online 7.0 gross (6.3 net) operated wells during the year.
We expect to spend approximately $40.0 million to $50.0 million on capital expenditures during 2021. Overall, we currently plan to drill two gross operated wells during the year, complete six gross operated wells, and bring six gross operated wells on production. Our 2021 capital budget currently contemplates running one operated rig in the Delaware Basin at the beginning of the year. We continuously monitor changes in market conditions and adapt our operational plans as necessary in order to maintain financial flexibility, preserve core acreage and meet contractual obligations, and therefore our capital budget is subject to change.
We expect to fund our budgeted 2021 capital expenditures with cash and cash equivalents on hand, cash flows from operations and, if necessary, borrowings under our Senior Credit Agreement. In the event our cash flows are materially less than anticipated or our costs are materially greater than anticipated and other sources of capital we historically have utilized are not available on acceptable terms, we may be required to curtail drilling, development, land acquisitions and other activities to reduce our capital spending. However, significant or prolonged reductions in capital spending will adversely impact our production and may negatively affect our future cash flows.
Oil and natural gas prices are inherently volatile and sustained lower commodity prices could have a material impact upon our full cost ceiling test calculation. The ceiling test calculation dictates that we use the unweighted arithmetic average price of crude oil and natural gas as of the first day of each month for the 12-month period ending at the balance sheet date. Using the first-day-of-the-month average for the 12-months ended March 31, 2021 of the WTI crude oil spot price of $39.95 per barrel, adjusted by lease or field for quality, transportation fees, and regional price differentials, and the first-day-of-the-month average for the 12-months ended March 31, 2021 of the Henry Hub natural gas price of $2.16 per MMBtu, adjusted by lease or field for energy content, transportation fees, and regional price differentials, our ceiling test calculation would not have generated an additional impairment at December 31, 2020 (Successor), holding all other inputs and factors constant. In addition to commodity prices, our production rates, levels of proved reserves, future development costs, transfers of unevaluated properties to our full cost pool, capital spending and other factors will determine our actual ceiling test calculation and impairment analyses in future periods.
Recent Developments
Risk and Uncertainties
We are continuously monitoring the current and potential impacts of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic on our business, including how it has and may continue to impact our operations, financial results, liquidity, contractors, customers, employees and vendors, and taking appropriate actions in response, including reducing capital expenditures, temporarily shutting-in producing wells, and implementing various measures to ensure the continued operation of our business in a safe and secure manner. COVID-19 and governmental actions to contain the pandemic have contributed to an economic downturn, reduced demand for oil and natural gas and, together with a price war between the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC)/Saudi Arabia and Russia, depressed oil and natural gas prices to historically low levels. Although OPEC and Russia subsequently agreed to reduce production, downward pressure on prices has continued and could continue for the foreseeable future, particularly given concerns over the impacts of the current economic downturn on demand. We are unable to predict the ongoing effects that these events will have on our business and financial condition due to numerous uncertainties, including the severity and duration of the COVID-19 outbreak and the impacts that governmental or other actions taken to limit the extent and duration of the outbreak, in conjunction with economic conditions, will have on our business, demand for oil and natural gas, and oil and natural gas prices. The health of our employees, contractors and vendors, and our ability to meet staffing needs in our operations and critical functions cannot be predicted, nor can the impact on our customers, vendors and contractors. Any material effect on
these parties could adversely impact us. These and other factors could affect the Company’s operations, earnings and cash flows and could cause our results to not be comparable to those of the same period in previous years. For example, we realized lower revenue as a result of commodity price declines, which began in March 2020. In response to low commodity prices, we temporarily shut-in producing wells in May and June 2020, which further contributed to lower revenues in the current year. Additionally, we incurred ceiling test impairments, which were primarily driven by a decline in the average pricing used in the valuation of our reserves. The results presented in this Form 10-K are not necessarily indicative of future operating results. For further information regarding the actual and potential impacts of COVID-19 on us, see “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Northern West Quito Assets Divestiture
On December 18, 2020 (Successor), we sold certain oil and gas properties and related assets located in Ward County, Texas (the North West Quito Assets) to Point Energy Partners Operating, LLC for a total sales price of $26.3 million in cash, subject to customary post-closing adjustments as provided in the Purchase and Sale Agreement. The effective date of the transaction was October 1, 2020 (Successor). Proceeds from the sale were recorded as a reduction to the carrying value of our full cost pool with no gain or loss recorded. We used the net proceeds from the sale to repay amounts outstanding under our Senior Credit Agreement and for general corporate purposes. Estimated proved reserves associated with the North West Quito Assets were approximately 2 MMBoe, or approximately 3% of our year-end 2019 proved reserves. The North West Quito Assets generated net production of approximately 600 Boe/d, or approximately 4% of our average daily production for the nine months ended September 30, 2020 (Successor).
Successor Senior Revolving Credit Facility
On October 29, 2020 (Successor), we entered into the Third Amendment to Senior Secured Revolving Credit Agreement and Limited Waiver (the Third Amendment). The Third Amendment, among other things, set the borrowing base to $190.0 million as of November 1, 2020, which eliminated the final monthly reduction of $5.0 million required under the Second Amendment (discussed below). The Third Amendment also reduced the amount available for issuance of letters of credit to $25.0 million and amended certain covenants including, but not limited to, covenants relating to increasing the minimum mortgaged total value of proved borrowing base properties from 85% to 90%. Additionally, the Third Amendment provided for new covenants that, among other things, require us to enter into swap agreements representing not less than 65% of our reasonably anticipated projected production from proved reserves classified as developed producing reserves for a period from the Third Amendment effective date through at least December 31, 2022 and prohibit no more than $3.0 million of our uncontested accounts payable or accrued expenses, liabilities or other obligations from remaining outstanding for longer than 90 days. Pursuant to the Third Amendment, the administrative agent and the lenders consented to a waiver of the Current Ratio (as defined in the Senior Credit Agreement) for the fiscal quarter ended September 30, 2020 and suspended testing of the Current Ratio until the fiscal quarter ending December 31, 2021.
On July 31, 2020 (Successor), we entered into the Limited Waiver to Senior Secured Revolving Credit Agreement (the Waiver) in which, the lenders consented to waive maintenance of a Current Ratio (as defined in the Senior Credit Agreement) of not less than 1.00 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2020. Our failure to comply with the Current Ratio for the three months ended June 30, 2020 (Successor) was primarily the result of our decision to shut in certain production due to low oil prices coupled with capital spending required to maintain certain of our oil and gas leasehold interests.
On April 30, 2020 (Successor), we entered into the Second Amendment to the Senior Credit Agreement (Second Amendment) which, among other things, (i) reduced the borrowing base to $200.0 million effective from April 30, 2020, which was then reduced by $5.0 million monthly starting September 1, 2020 until November 1, 2020, so that the borrowing base was scheduled to be $185.0 million on November 1, 2020, provided the borrowing base redetermination scheduled for November 1, 2020 occurred pursuant to the terms of the Senior Credit Agreement, (ii) increased interest margins to 1.50% to 2.50% for ABR-based loans and 2.50% to 3.50% for Eurodollar-based loans, (iii) provided that should our Consolidated Cash Balance (as defined pursuant to the Second Amendment) exceed $10.0 million, such amounts shall be used to prepay any borrowings under the Senior Credit Agreement and thereafter, to the extent of any uncollateralized letters of credit exposure, shall be cash collateralized in accordance with the Senior Credit Agreement
and (iv) allowed for a replacement benchmark rate to the London Interbank Offered Rate (which may include SOFR, Compounded SOFR or Term SOFR). The Second Amendment also added provisions related to a loan incurred by us under the Paycheck Protection Program of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the CARES Act). We used, and the Second Amendment required us to use, the loan proceeds for CARES Forgivable Uses under the CARES Act. Additionally, the Second Amendment waived, for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2020, that we comply with the requirement under the Senior Credit Agreement that we unwind certain swap agreements for which settlement payments were calculated in such fiscal quarter to exceed 100% of actual production.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
On April 16, 2020 (Successor), we entered into a promissory note (the PPP Loan) for a principal amount of approximately $2.2 million from Bank of Montreal under the Paycheck Protection Program of the CARES Act, which is administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA). Pursuant to the terms of the CARES Act, the proceeds of the PPP Loan may be used for payroll costs, mortgage interest, rent or utility costs. The PPP Loan bears interest at a rate of 1.0% per annum and, if not forgiven, has a maturity date of April 16, 2022. As long as we make a timely application of forgiveness to the SBA, we are not required to make any payments under the PPP Loan until the forgiveness amount is communicated to us by the SBA.
Under the terms of the CARES Act, we can apply for and be granted forgiveness for all or a portion of the PPP Loan. Such forgiveness will be determined, subject to limitations, based on the use of loan proceeds in accordance with the terms of the CARES Act during the covered period after loan origination and the maintenance or achievement of certain employee levels. We believe we are eligible for, and intend to pursue, forgiveness of the PPP Loan in accordance with the requirements and limitations under the CARES Act; however, no assurance can be provided that forgiveness of any portion of the PPP Loan will be obtained.
Acid Gas Injection Well Permits
During the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), we received permits from the Texas Railroad Commission and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality to construct and operate an acid gas injection well (AGI) by converting an existing producing gas well. AGI can provide a more cost effective alternative to sour gas treating. We are currently evaluating options for development of an AGI facility, including, but not limited to, divestiture of the assets with an associated third party treating arrangement for our sour gas production.
Listing of our Common Stock on NYSE American
Our Predecessor common stock was previously listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) under the symbol “HK.” As a result of our failure to satisfy the continued listing requirements of the NYSE, on July 22, 2019, our Predecessor common stock was delisted from the NYSE. Effective February 20, 2020, we commenced trading on the NYSE American exchange under the symbol “BATL.”
Capital Resources and Liquidity
In March 2020 (Successor), the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 a pandemic. The COVID-19 outbreak and associated government restrictions significantly impacted economic activity and markets and dramatically reduced current and anticipated demand for oil and natural gas at the same time that supply was maintained at high levels due to a price and market share war involving the OPEC/Saudi Arabia and Russia, all of which adversely impacted the prices we received for our production during the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor). We realized lower revenue as a result of these commodity price declines, which began in March 2020 (Successor). In response to low commodity prices, we temporarily shut-in producing wells in May and June 2020 (Successor), which further contributed to lower revenues in the current year. Additionally, we incurred ceiling test impairments, which were primarily driven by a decline in the average pricing used in the valuation of our reserves.
Continued actual or anticipated declines in domestic or foreign economic activity or growth rates, regional or worldwide increases in tariffs or other trade restrictions, turmoil affecting the U.S. or global financial system and markets and a severe economic contraction either regionally or worldwide, resulting from current efforts to contain the COVID-19 coronavirus or other factors, could materially affect our business and financial condition and impact our ability to finance operations by worsening the actual or anticipated future drop in worldwide oil demand, negatively impacting the price received for oil and natural gas production, adversely impacting our ability to comply with covenants in our Senior Credit Agreement or causing our lenders to reduce the borrowing base under our Senior Credit Agreement. Negative economic conditions could also adversely affect the collectability of our trade receivables or performance by our vendors and suppliers or cause our commodity hedging arrangements to be ineffective if our counterparties are unable to perform their obligations. All of the foregoing may adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and, potentially, compliance with the covenants contained in, and borrowing capacity under, our Senior Credit Agreement.
We expect to spend approximately $40.0 million to $50.0 million in capital expenditures, including drilling, completion, support infrastructure and other capital costs, during 2021. These near-term capital spending requirements are expected to be funded with cash and cash equivalents on hand, cash flows from operations and borrowings under our Senior Credit Agreement, which has a current borrowing base of $190.0 million. Amounts borrowed under our Senior Credit Agreement will mature on October 8, 2024. At December 31, 2020 (Successor), we had $158.0 million of indebtedness outstanding and approximately $4.7 million letters of credit outstanding under our Senior Credit Agreement, resulting in $27.3 million of borrowing capacity under the current borrowing base. The next redetermination is scheduled for the spring of 2021. If our borrowing base is reduced upon a redetermination, our resulting liquidity could be insufficient to fund our business and operations and the reduction could result in a borrowing base deficiency, which would require us to repay any amount outstanding in excess of the borrowing base. As part of our ongoing efforts to manage our business and liquidity, we are in regular contact with our lenders regarding matters relating to the Senior Credit Agreement and we explore alternative means to maintain our access to sufficient capital to fund our business, including refinancings, asset sales, and additional means to reduce our capital requirements. Bank of Montreal, who recently announced its plans to exit the United States oil and gas investment banking business, currently holds substantially all of the commitments under our Senior Credit Agreement. Bank of Montreal’s decision to exit its US investment banking business could lead to similar decisions with regard to its participation in oil and gas lending in the United States, resulting in the sale of our Senior Credit Agreement to another financial institution, hedge fund, or other third party and could also lead us to seek alternative forms of financing, the terms of which may be more costly, provide less liquidity, or impose more restrictive covenants. While we believe that alternatives to maintain liquidity under, or to replace, our Senior Credit Agreement are available to us should they become necessary, there can be no assurance in this regard.
The Senior Credit Agreement contains certain financial covenants, including maintenance of (i) a Total Net Indebtedness Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Senior Credit Agreement) of not greater than 3.50 to 1.00 and (ii) a Current Ratio (as defined in the Senior Credit Agreement) of not less than 1.00:1.00. We have recently, and in the past, obtained amendments to the covenants under our revolving credit agreements in circumstances where we anticipated that it might be challenging for us to comply with the financial covenants for a particular period of time. Changes in the level and timing of our production, drilling and completion costs, the cost and availability of transportation for our production and other factors varying from our expectations can affect our ability to comply with the covenants under our Senior Credit Agreement. As a consequence, we endeavor to anticipate potential covenant compliance issues and work with the lenders under our Senior Credit Agreement to address any such issues ahead of time.
Depressions in oil and natural gas prices during 2020 and our decision to temporarily shut-in a portion of our production in response to those market conditions adversely impacted our cash flows, which, combined with cash requirements associated with capital-intensive oil and gas development projects undertaken in late 2019 and early 2020, led to challenges in compliance with the Current Ratio under the Senior Credit Agreement for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2020. Thus, on July 31, 2020 (Successor), we entered into the Waiver, in which the lenders consented to waive maintenance of the Current Ratio (as defined in the Senior Credit Agreement) of not less than 1.00 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2020. In conjunction with the fall borrowing base redetermination process, and due to a decline in the value associated with our derivative contracts, we pursued additional relief from our lenders in regards to the Current Ratio. Pursuant to the Third Amendment, on October 29, 2020, the lenders waived maintenance of the Current Ratio for
the fiscal quarters ending September 30, 2020 and suspended testing of the Current Ratio until the fiscal quarter ending December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2020 (Successor), after giving effect to the Third Amendment, we were in compliance with the financial covenants under the Senior Credit Agreement.
In prior years, we have also obtained waivers and amendments for optional covenant violations. For instance, our strategic decision to transform into a pure-play, single basin company focused on the Delaware Basin in West Texas resulted in us divesting our producing properties located in other areas and acquiring primarily undeveloped acreage in the Delaware Basin. Our drilling activities once we acquired these assets required significant capital expenditure outlays to replenish production and related EBITDA from the divested producing properties. These and other factors adversely impacted our ability to comply with our debt covenants under the Predecessor credit agreement by reducing our production, reserves and EBITDA on a current and a pro forma historical basis, while making us more susceptible to fluctuations in performance and compliance more challenging. In addition, we encountered certain operational difficulties that impacted our ability to comply, including, elevated levels of hydrogen sulfide in the natural gas produced from our Monument Draw wells and limited and expensive treatment and transportation options. Severance payments to executives in 2019 also impacted our ability to comply with our financial covenants.
While we have largely been successful in obtaining modifications of our covenants as needed, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in the future. As discussed above, the primary lender under the Senior Credit Agreement has scaled back certain of its activities in the United States, and it is unknown to what extent, if any, its oil and gas lending activities in the United States may be impacted by that decision or whether that, or other factors, may impact our ability to obtain covenant modifications in the future, if necessary. In the event we are not successful in obtaining covenant modifications, if needed, there is no assurance that we will be successful in implementing alternatives that allow us to maintain compliance with our covenants or that we will be successful in obtaining alternative financing that provides us with the liquidity that we need to operate our business. Even if successful, alternative sources of financing could prove more expensive than borrowing under our Senior Credit Agreement.
When commodity prices decline significantly, as they have recently, our ability to finance our capital budget and operations may be adversely impacted. While we use derivative instruments to provide partial protection against declines in oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids prices, the total volumes we hedge are less than our expected production, varies from period to period based on our view of current and future market conditions and generally extends up to approximately 30 months. These limitations result in our liquidity being susceptible to commodity price declines. Additionally, while intended to reduce the effects of volatile commodity prices, derivative transactions may limit our potential gains and increase our potential losses if commodity prices were to rise substantially over the price established by the hedge. Our Senior Credit Agreement contains minimum hedging requirements. Pursuant to the Third Amendment, we are required to utilize fixed price swaps to hedge at least 65% of anticipated production from proved developed producing reserves through December 31, 2022. Our hedge policies and objectives may change significantly as our operational profile changes and/or commodities prices change. We do not enter into derivative contracts for speculative trading purposes.
Our future capital resources and liquidity depend, in part, on our success in developing our leasehold interests, growing our reserves and production and finding additional reserves. Cash is required to fund capital expenditures necessary to offset inherent declines in our production and proven reserves, which is typical in the capital-intensive oil and natural gas industry. We strive to maintain financial flexibility while pursuing our drilling plans and may access capital markets, pursue joint ventures, sell assets and engage in other transactions as necessary to, among other things, maintain borrowing capacity, facilitate drilling on our undeveloped acreage position and permit us to selectively expand our acreage. Our ability to complete such transactions and maintain or increase our borrowing base is subject to a number of variables, including our level of oil and natural gas production, proved reserves and commodity prices, the amount and cost of our indebtedness, as well as various economic and market conditions that have historically affected the oil and natural gas industry. Even if we are otherwise successful in growing our proved reserves and production, if oil and natural gas prices decline for a sustained period of time, our ability to fund our capital expenditures, complete acquisitions, reduce debt, meet our financial obligations and become profitable may be materially impacted.
Cash Flow
In 2020 (Successor), cash generated by operating activities, borrowings under our Senior Credit Agreement and proceeds from the North West Quito Assets divestiture were used to fund our drilling and completion program. See “Results of Operations” for a review of the impact of prices and volumes on operating revenues.
Net increase (decrease) in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash is summarized as follows (in thousands):
Operating Activities. Net cash flows provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) was $50.2 million. Net cash flows provided by operating activities for the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) were $13.7 million and net cash flows used in operating activities for the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor) were $39.7 million. Net cash flows provided by operating activities was $67.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor).
Operating cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) increased from the prior year due to decreases in our operating expenses associated with our focus on efficiencies and cost savings and a decrease in interest expense associated with lower outstanding debt due to our chapter 11 bankruptcy. In addition, realized gains from derivative contracts were higher in the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), which included the early termination of certain derivative contracts. During the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), we terminated certain derivative contracts in advance of their natural expiration dates and received net proceeds of approximately $22.9 million during the period. These increases to operating cash flows in 2020 were partially offset by decreased oil and natural gas revenues as a result of lower realized commodity prices and lower production volumes than the comparable prior year period.
For the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor), operating cash flows increased due to higher oil and natural gas revenues resulting from increased average daily production, as well as decreases in our operating expenses. For the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), operating cash flows decreased from the prior year due to increases in our operating expenses, primarily from third party water hauling and disposal costs, reorganization costs and severances paid to executives.
Operating cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor) decreased from prior year primarily due to our divestitures in 2017, in which we divested non-core producing properties in other areas for primarily undeveloped acreage in the Delaware Basin. This decrease was partially offset by $35.2 million of proceeds related to hedge monetizations that occurred during the year.
Investing Activities. Net cash flows used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) were approximately $72.4 million. Net cash flows used in investing activities for the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor) were approximately $42.8 million and $254.4 million, respectively. Net cash flows used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor) were approximately $706.5 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) we spent $101.8 million on oil and natural gas capital expenditures, of which $65.1 million related to drilling and completion costs and $33.9 million related to the development of our treating equipment and gathering support infrastructure. We received $29.0 million in proceeds from
the sale of oil and natural gas properties, primarily from the North West Quito Assets in December 2020. In addition, we received $0.5 million in insurance proceeds associated with a casualty loss on our support infrastructure.
During the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor), we spent $43.2 million on oil and natural gas capital expenditures, of which $29.2 million related to drilling and completion costs and $13.2 million related to the development of our treating equipment and our gathering support infrastructure. During the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), we spent $167.2 million on oil and natural gas expenditures, of which $158.6 million related to drilling and completion costs. During the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), we spent approximately $85.6 million on capital expenditures to develop our treating equipment and our gathering support infrastructure.
In 2018 (Predecessor), we incurred cash expenditures of $333.9 million on acquisition activities, the majority of which related to the acquisitions of acreage and related assets in the Delaware Basin located in Ward County, Texas (the West Quito Draw Properties) and in the northern tract of the Monument Draw area of the Delaware Basin, located in Ward and Winkler Counties, Texas (the Ward County Assets). Additionally, we spent $475.7 million on oil and natural gas capital expenditures, of which $444.4 million related to drilling and completion costs. We also spent approximately $117.0 million on capital expenditures primarily to develop our water recycling facilities and gas gathering and treating infrastructure. These cash outflows were offset by proceeds from the sale of our water infrastructure assets located in the Delaware Basin (the Water Assets) of $213.8 million.
Financing Activities. Net cash flows provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) were approximately $16.2 million. Net cash flows provided by financing activities for the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor) were $10.0 million and $276.7 million, respectively. Net cash flows provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor) were approximately $262.1 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), net borrowings of $14.0 million under our Senior Credit Agreement were used to fund our drilling and completions program and the development of our treating equipment and gathering support facilities. We also borrowed $2.2 million under the PPP Loan to fund payroll costs, rent and utilities.
During the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor), net borrowings of $14.0 million under our Senior Credit Agreement were used to fund our drilling and completions program and the development of our treating equipment and gathering support facilities. During the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), we received proceeds of $150.2 million from a rights offering to our unsecured senior noteholders and $5.8 million from a rights offering to our previous common stockholders, both related to our chapter 11 bankruptcy. In addition, we borrowed $130.0 million under our Senior Credit Agreement. The proceeds from our offerings and borrowings under our Senior Credit Agreement were used to refinance our DIP facility and the Predecessor credit agreement. Borrowings under our DIP facility and under our Predecessor credit agreement were used to fund our drilling and completions program, as well as the development of our treating equipment and our gathering infrastructure.
In 2018 (Predecessor), we issued an additional $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of our 6.75% senior notes due 2025. Proceeds from the private placement were approximately $202.4 million after initial purchasers’ premiums and deducting commissions and offering expenses. Additionally, we sold 9.2 million shares of common stock in a public offering at a price of $6.90 per share. The net proceeds from the offering were approximately $60.4 million after deducting underwriters’ discounts and offering expenses.
Senior Revolving Credit Facility
On October 8, 2019, we entered into the Senior Credit Agreement with Bank of Montreal, as administrative agent, and certain other financial institutions party thereto, as lenders. The Senior Credit Agreement, as amended, provides for a $750.0 million senior secured reserve-based revolving credit facility with a current borrowing base of $190.0 million. A portion of the Senior Credit Agreement, in the amount of $25.0 million, is available for the issuance of letters of credit. The maturity date of the Senior Credit Agreement is October 8, 2024. Redeterminations will occur semi-annually on May 1 and November 1, with the lenders and us each having the right to one interim unscheduled redetermination
between any two consecutive semi-annual redeterminations. The borrowing base takes into account the estimated value of our oil and natural gas properties, proved reserves, total indebtedness, and other relevant factors consistent with customary oil and natural gas lending criteria. Amounts outstanding under the Senior Credit Agreement bear interest at specified margins over the base rate of 1.50% to 2.50% for ABR-based loans or at specified margins over LIBOR of 2.50% to 3.50% for Eurodollar-based loans, which margins may be increased one-time by not more than 50 basis points per annum if necessary in order to successfully syndicate the Senior Credit Agreement. These margins fluctuate based on our utilization of the facility.
We may elect, at our option, to prepay any borrowings outstanding under the Senior Credit Agreement without premium or penalty, except with respect to any break funding payments which may be payable pursuant to the terms of the Senior Credit Agreement. We may be required to make mandatory prepayments of the outstanding borrowings under the Senior Credit Agreement in connection with certain borrowing base deficiencies, including deficiencies which may arise in connection with a borrowing base redetermination, an asset disposition or swap terminations attributable in the aggregate to more than ten percent (10%) of the then-effective borrowing base. Amounts outstanding under the Senior Credit Agreement are guaranteed by our direct and indirect subsidiaries and secured by a security interest in substantially all of the assets of us and our subsidiaries.
The Senior Credit Agreement contains certain events of default, including non-payment; breaches of representation and warranties; non-compliance with covenants; cross-defaults to material indebtedness; voluntary or involuntary bankruptcy; judgments and change in control. The Senior Credit Agreement also contains certain financial covenants, including maintenance of (i) a Total Net Indebtedness Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Senior Credit Agreement) of not greater than 3.50 to 1.00 and (ii) a Current Ratio (as defined in the Senior Credit Agreement) of not less than 1.00:1.00.
On October 29, 2020 (Successor),we entered into the Third Amendment. The Third Amendment, among other things, set the borrowing base to $190.0 million as of November 1, 2020, which eliminated the final monthly reduction of $5.0 million required under the Second Amendment. The Third Amendment also reduced the amount available for issuance of letters of credit to $25.0 million and amended certain covenants including, but not limited to, covenants relating to increasing the minimum mortgaged total value of proved borrowing base properties from 85% to 90%. Additionally, the Third Amendment provided for new covenants that, among other things, require us to enter into swap agreements representing not less than 65% of our reasonably anticipated projected production from proved reserves classified as developed producing reserves for a period from the Third Amendment effective date through at least December 31, 2022 and prohibit no more than $3.0 million of our uncontested accounts payable or accrued expenses, liabilities or other obligations from remaining outstanding for longer than 90 days. Pursuant to the Third Amendment, the administrative agent and the lenders consented to a waiver of the Current Ratio (as defined in the Senior Credit Agreement) for the fiscal quarter ended September 30, 2020 and suspended testing of the Current Ratio until the fiscal quarter ending December 31, 2021.
On July 31, 2020 (Successor), we entered into the Waiver which waived maintenance of the Current Ratio (as defined in the Senior Credit Agreement) of not less than 1.00 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2020.
On April 30, 2020 (Successor), we entered into the Second Amendment which, among other things, (i) reduced the borrowing base to $200.0 million effective from April 30, 2020, which was then to be reduced by $5.0 million monthly starting September 1, 2020 until November 1, 2020, so that the borrowing base was scheduled to be $185.0 million on November 1, 2020, provided the borrowing base redetermination scheduled for November 1, 2020 occurred pursuant to the terms of the Senior Credit Agreement, (ii) increased interest margins to 1.50% to 2.50% for ABR-based loans and 2.50% to 3.50% for Eurodollar-based loans, (iii) provided that should our Consolidated Cash Balance (as defined pursuant to the Second Amendment) exceed $10.0 million, such amounts shall be used to prepay any borrowings under the Senior Credit Agreement and thereafter, to the extent of any uncollateralized letters of credit exposure, shall be cash collateralized in accordance with the Senior Credit Agreement and (iv) allowed for a replacement benchmark rate to the London Interbank Offered Rate (which may include SOFR, Compounded SOFR or Term SOFR). The Second Amendment also added provisions related to a loan incurred by us under the Paycheck Protection Program of the CARES Act. We used, and the Second Amendment required us to use, the loan proceeds for CARES Forgivable Uses under the CARES Act. Additionally, the Second Amendment waived, for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2020, that we
comply with the requirement under the Senior Credit Agreement that we unwind certain swap agreements for which settlement payments were calculated in such fiscal quarter to exceed 100% of actual production.
On November 21, 2019 (Successor), we entered into the First Amendment to the Senior Credit Agreement which, among other things, (i) reduced the borrowing base to $240.0 million and (ii) limited the Total Net Indebtedness Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Senior Credit Agreement) as of the last day of each fiscal quarter, commencing with the fiscal quarter ending March 31, 2020, to not greater than 3.50 to 1.00.
As of December 31, 2020 (Successor), after giving effect to the Third Amendment, we were in compliance with the financial covenants under the Senior Credit Agreement.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
On April 16, 2020 (Successor), we entered into the PPP Loan for a principal amount of approximately $2.2 million from Bank of Montreal under the Paycheck Protection Program of the CARES Act, which is administered by the SBA. Pursuant to the terms of the CARES Act, the proceeds of the PPP Loan may be used for payroll costs, mortgage interest, rent or utility costs. The PPP Loan bears interest at a rate of 1.0% per annum and, if not forgiven, has a maturity date of April 16, 2022. As long as we make a timely application of forgiveness to the SBA, we are not required to make any payments under the PPP Loan until the forgiveness amount is communicated to us by the SBA.
We may elect, at our option, to prepay 20% or less of the borrowings outstanding under the PPP Loan without premium or penalty, and without notice. Prepayments of more than 20% of the outstanding borrowings require written advanced notice and payment of accrued interest. The PPP Loan contains certain events of default including non-payment, breach of representations and warranties, cross-defaults to other loans with the lender or to material indebtedness, voluntary or involuntary bankruptcy, judgments and change in control.
Under the terms of the CARES Act, we can apply for and be granted forgiveness for all or a portion of the PPP Loan. Such forgiveness will be determined, subject to limitations, based on the use of loan proceeds in accordance with the terms of the CARES Act during the covered period after loan origination and the maintenance or achievement of certain employee levels. We believe we are eligible for, and intend to pursue, forgiveness of the PPP Loan in accordance with the requirements and limitations under the CARES Act; however, no assurance can be provided that forgiveness of any portion of the PPP Loan will be obtained.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020 (Successor), we did not have any material off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect our reported results of operations and the amount of reported assets, liabilities and proved oil and natural gas reserves. Some accounting policies involve judgments and uncertainties to such an extent that there is reasonable likelihood that materially different amounts could have been reported under different conditions, or if different assumptions had been used. Actual results may differ from the estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Described below are the significant policies we apply in preparing our consolidated financial statements, some of which are subject to alternative treatments under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. We also describe the significant estimates and assumptions we make in applying these policies. We discussed the development, selection and disclosure of each of these with our audit committee. See Item 8. Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 1, “Summary of Significant Events and Accounting Policies,” for a discussion of additional accounting policies and estimates made by management.
Fresh-start Accounting
Upon our emergence from chapter 11 bankruptcy, on October 8, 2019, we adopted fresh-start accounting in accordance with the provisions set forth in ASC 852, Reorganizations, as (i) the Reorganization Value of our assets immediately prior to the date of confirmation was less than the post-petition liabilities and allowed claims and (ii) the holders of our existing voting shares of the Predecessor entity received less than 50% of the voting shares of the emerging entity. Adopting fresh-start accounting results in a new financial reporting entity with no beginning or ending retained earnings or deficit balances. Upon the adoption of fresh-start accounting, our assets and liabilities were recorded at their fair values as of the fresh-start reporting date.
We elected to adopt fresh-start accounting effective October 1, 2019, to coincide with the timing of our normal fourth quarter reporting period, which resulted in us becoming a new entity for financial reporting purposes. We evaluated and concluded that events between October 1, 2019 and October 8, 2019 were immaterial and use of an accounting convenience date of October 1, 2019 was appropriate. As such, fresh-start accounting is reflected in the accompanying consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2019 (Successor) and related fresh-start adjustments are included in the accompanying consolidated statement of operations for the period from January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor).
Fresh-start accounting requires an entity to present its assets, liabilities, and equity as if it were a new entity upon emergence from bankruptcy. The new entity is referred to as “Successor” or “Successor Company.” However, we will continue to present financial information for any periods before adoption of fresh-start accounting for the Predecessor Company. The Predecessor and Successor companies may lack comparability, as required in ASC Topic 205, Presentation of Financial Statements (ASC 205). ASC 205 states financial statements are required to be presented comparably from year to year, with any exceptions to comparability clearly disclosed. Therefore, “black-line” financial statements are presented to distinguish between the Predecessor and Successor Companies. Refer to Item 8. Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 3, “Fresh-Start Accounting,” for further details.
Oil and Natural Gas Activities
Accounting for oil and natural gas activities is subject to unique rules. Two generally accepted methods of accounting for oil and natural gas activities are available-successful efforts and full cost. The most significant differences between these two methods are the treatment of unsuccessful exploration costs and the manner in which the carrying value of oil and natural gas properties are amortized and evaluated for impairment. The successful efforts method requires unsuccessful exploration costs to be expensed as they are incurred upon a determination that the well is uneconomical while the full cost method provides for the capitalization of these costs. Both methods generally provide for the periodic amortization of capitalized costs based on proved reserve quantities. Impairment of oil and natural gas properties under the successful efforts method is based on an evaluation of the carrying value of individual oil and natural gas properties against their estimated fair value, while impairment under the full cost method requires an evaluation of the carrying value of oil and natural gas properties included in a cost center against the net present value of future cash flows from the related proved reserves, using the unweighted arithmetic average of the first day of the month for each of the 12-month prices for oil and natural gas within the period, holding prices and costs constant and applying a 10% discount rate.
Full Cost Method
We use the full cost method of accounting for our oil and natural gas activities. Under this method, all costs incurred in the acquisition, exploration and development of oil and natural gas properties are capitalized into a cost center (the amortization base or full cost pool). Such amounts include the cost of drilling and equipping productive wells, treating equipment and gathering support facilities costs, dry hole costs, lease acquisition costs and delay rentals. All general and administrative costs unrelated to drilling activities are expensed as incurred. The capitalized costs of our evaluated oil and natural gas properties, plus an estimate of our future development and abandonment costs are amortized on a unit-of-production method based on our estimate of total proved reserves. Our financial position and results of operations could have been significantly different had we used the successful efforts method of accounting for our oil and natural gas activities.
Proved Oil and Natural Gas Reserves
Estimates of our proved reserves included in this report are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States and SEC guidelines. Our engineering estimates of proved oil and natural gas reserves directly impact financial accounting estimates, including depletion, depreciation and accretion expense and the full cost ceiling test limitation. Proved oil and natural gas reserves are the estimated quantities of oil and natural gas reserves that geological and engineering data demonstrate with reasonable certainty to be recoverable in future years from known reservoirs under defined economic and operating conditions. The process of estimating quantities of proved reserves is very complex, requiring significant subjective decisions in the evaluation of all geological, engineering and economic data for each reservoir. The accuracy of a reserve estimate is a function of (i) the quality and quantity of available data; (ii) the interpretation of that data; (iii) the accuracy of various mandated economic assumptions; and (iv) the judgment of the persons preparing the estimate. The data for a given reservoir may change substantially over time as a result of numerous factors, including additional development activity, evolving production history and continual reassessment of the viability of production under varying economic conditions. Changes in oil and natural gas prices, operating costs and expected performance from a given reservoir also will result in revisions to the amount of our estimated proved reserves.
Our estimated proved reserves for the years ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), 2019 (Successor) and 2018 (Predecessor) were prepared by Netherland, Sewell, an independent oil and natural gas reservoir engineering consulting firm. For more information regarding reserve estimation, including historical reserve revisions, refer to Item 8. Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-“Supplemental Oil and Gas Information (Unaudited).”
Depletion Expense
Our rate of recording depletion expense is primarily dependent upon our estimate of proved reserves, which is utilized in our unit-of-production method calculation. If the estimates of proved reserves were to be reduced, the rate at which we record depletion expense would increase, reducing net income. Such a reduction in reserves may result from calculated lower market prices, which may make it non-economic to drill for and produce higher cost reserves. At December 31, 2020 (Successor), a five percent positive revision to proved reserves would decrease the depletion rate by approximately $0.40 per Boe and a five percent negative revision to proved reserves would increase the depletion rate by approximately $0.44 per Boe.
Full Cost Ceiling Test Limitation
Under the full cost method, we are subject to quarterly calculations of a ceiling or limitation on the amount of our oil and natural gas properties that can be capitalized on our balance sheet. If the net capitalized costs of our oil and natural gas properties exceed the cost center ceiling, we are subject to a ceiling test write-down to the extent of such excess. If required, it would reduce earnings and impact stockholders’ equity in the period of occurrence and could result in lower amortization expense in future periods. The present value of our estimated proved reserves (discounted at 10%) is a major component of the ceiling calculation and represents the component that requires the most subjective judgments. However, the associated prices of oil and natural gas reserves that are included in the discounted present value of the reserves do not require judgment. The ceiling calculation dictates that we use the unweighted arithmetic average price of oil and natural gas as of the first day of each month for the 12-month period ending at the balance sheet date. If average oil and natural gas prices decline, or if we have downward revisions to our estimated proved reserves, it is possible that write-downs of our oil and natural gas properties could occur in the future.
If the unweighted arithmetic average price of oil and natural gas as of the first day of each month for the 12-month period ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) had been 10% lower while all other factors remained constant, our ceiling amount related to our net book value of oil and natural gas properties would have been reduced by approximately $93.0 million and would have increased our full cost ceiling impairment by the same amount.
Future Development Costs
Future development costs include costs incurred to obtain access to proved reserves such as drilling costs and the installation of production equipment. Future abandonment costs include costs to dismantle and relocate or dispose of our production facilities, gathering systems and related structures and restoration costs. We develop estimates of these costs for each of our properties based upon their geographic location, type of production facility, well depth, currently available procedures and ongoing consultations with construction and engineering consultants. Because these costs typically extend many years into the future, estimating these future costs is difficult and requires management to make judgments that are subject to future revisions based upon numerous factors, including changing technology and the political and regulatory environment. We review our assumptions and estimates of future development and future abandonment costs on an annual basis. At December 31, 2020 (Successor), a five percent increase in future development and abandonment costs would increase the depletion rate by approximately $0.23 per Boe and a five percent decrease in future development and abandonment costs would decrease the depletion rate by $0.24 per Boe.
Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities
We account for our derivative activities under the provisions of ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (ASC 815). ASC 815 establishes accounting and reporting that every derivative instrument be recorded on the balance sheet as either an asset or liability measured at fair value. From time to time, in accordance with our policy, we may hedge a portion of our forecasted oil, natural gas, and natural gas liquids production. We elected to not designate any of our positions for hedge accounting. Accordingly, we record the net change in the mark-to-market valuation of these positions, as well as payments and receipts on settled contracts, in “Net gain (loss) on derivative contracts” on the consolidated statements of operations.
Income Taxes
Our provision for taxes includes both state and federal taxes. We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method wherein deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We classify all deferred tax assets and liabilities, along with any related valuation allowance, as noncurrent on the consolidated balance sheets.
In assessing the need for a valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets, we consider possible sources of taxable income that may be available to realize the benefit of deferred tax assets, including projected future taxable income, the reversal of existing temporary differences, taxable income in carryback years and available tax planning strategies. We consider all available evidence (both positive and negative) in determining whether a valuation allowance is required. Based upon the evaluation of available evidence we recorded an increase of $10.8 million to our valuation allowance as a result of increases to deferred tax assets for deferred deductions and net operating losses offset by the write-off of deferred tax assets for oil and gas properties and other deferred tax assets during 2020 (Successor). A valuation allowance of $489.5 million has been applied against our deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020 (Successor).
We follow ASC 740, Income Taxes (ASC 740). ASC 740 creates a single model to address accounting for the uncertainty in income tax positions and prescribes a minimum recognition threshold a tax position must meet before recognition in the financial statements. We apply significant judgment in evaluating our tax positions and estimating our provision for income taxes. During the ordinary course of business, there are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. The actual outcome of these future tax consequences could differ significantly from these estimates, which could impact our financial position, results of operations and cash flows. The evaluation of a tax position in accordance with ASC 740 is a two-step process. The first step is a recognition process to determine whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes, based on the technical merits of the position. In evaluating whether a tax position has met the more likely than not recognition threshold, it is presumed that the position will be examined by the
appropriate taxing authority with full knowledge of all relevant information. The second step is a measurement process whereby a tax position that meets the more likely than not recognition threshold is calculated to determine the amount of benefit/expense to recognize in the financial statements. The tax position is measured at the largest amount of benefit/expense that is more likely than not of being realized upon ultimate settlement.
Comparison of Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019 (Successor)
The table included below sets forth financial information for the periods presented. The period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor) are distinct reporting periods as a result of our adoption of fresh-start accounting upon our emergence from chapter 11 bankruptcy and are not comparable to prior periods. Refer to the paragraphs following the table below for a discussion around our results of operations.
(1) Natural gas reserves are converted to oil reserves using a ratio of six Mcf to one Bbl of oil. This ratio is based on energy equivalency, not price equivalency. The price for a barrel of oil equivalent for natural gas is substantially lower than the price for a barrel of oil.
(2) Amounts exclude the impact of cash paid/received on settled contracts as we did not elect to apply hedge accounting.
Oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids revenues were $146.8 million, $65.1 million and $158.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), production averaged 16,858 Boe/d. During the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), production averaged 20,293 Boe/d and 17,209 Boe/d, respectively. Our average daily oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids production decreased year over year due primarily to the temporary shut-in of a portion of producing wells across all operating areas during the months of May and June 2020 (Successor). Estimated production decreases associated with these temporary shut-ins was approximately 1,300 Boe/d for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor). Average realized prices (excluding the effects of hedging arrangements) were $23.79 per Boe, $34.88 per Boe and $33.71 per Boe for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. The amount we realize for our production depends predominantly upon commodity prices, which are affected by changes in market demand and supply, as impacted by overall economic activity, weather, transportation take-away capacity constraints, inventory storage levels, quality of production, basis differentials and other factors.
Lease operating expenses were $42.1 million, $12.8 million and $39.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. On a per unit basis, lease operating expenses were $6.82 per Boe, $6.86 per Boe and $8.43 per Boe for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. The decrease in lease operating expenses in 2020 results from our focus on optimization of production operations and decreased salt water disposal costs due to lower production volumes and less produced water.
Workover and other expenses were $3.7 million, $1.7 million and $5.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. On a per unit basis, workover and other expenses were $0.60 per Boe, $0.89 per Boe and $1.19 per Boe for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. The decreased costs in 2020 relate to recent strides in improving well and completion designs and fewer workovers performed.
Taxes other than income were $10.1 million, $3.7 million and $9.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. Most production taxes are based on realized prices at the wellhead. As revenues or volumes from oil and natural gas sales increase or decrease, production taxes on these sales also increase or decrease. On a per unit basis, taxes other than income were $1.63 per Boe, $2.00 per Boe and $1.96 per Boe for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively.
Gathering and other expenses were $56.0 million, $10.8 million and $36.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. Gathering and other expenses include gathering fees paid to third parties on our oil and natural gas production, operating expenses of our oil and gas gathering infrastructure, gas treating fees, rig stacking charges and other. Approximately $13.9 million, $2.7 million and $9.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively, relate to gathering and marketing fees paid to third parties on our oil and natural gas production. Oil and natural gas production volumes were lower in 2020 due to the temporary shut-in of certain producing wells during the months of May and June 2020 (Successor). Approximately $38.7 million, $8.1 million and $24.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively, relate to operating expenses on our treating equipment and gathering support facilities. In April 2019 (Predecessor), we installed a hydrogen sulfide treating plant that more efficiently removes hydrogen sulfide from our produced natural gas and reduces our reliance on expensive wellhead-level treating. Until the treating plant was operational, we incurred $10.9 million of wellhead-level costs to remove hydrogen sulfide from natural gas
produced from our Monument Draw properties during the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor). Our produced natural gas from the Monument Draw area increased in the current year due to our development activities, despite a decrease in our overall production volumes. These natural gas volumes are processed through our hydrogen sulfide treating plant in the area, which led to higher operating expenses, such as chemical costs, associated with our treating equipment during the current year. Also included are $3.4 million and $0.8 million of rig termination and stacking charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively.
Restructuring expense was approximately $2.6 million, $1.2 million and $15.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), we incurred restructuring charges related to the consolidation into one corporate office and had reductions in our workforce due to efforts to improve efficiencies and reduce future costs. In May 2020 (Successor), in furtherance of the consolidation into one corporate office, we exercised a one-time early termination option under the lease agreement for our office space in Denver, Colorado. During 2019 (for both the Successor and Predecessor periods), several senior executives resigned from their positions. These were considered terminations without cause under their respective employment agreements, which entitled them to certain benefits. Additionally, in 2019 (Predecessor), when the decision was made to consolidate into one corporate office, we began to incur restructuring charges which included both severance and relocation costs as well as incremental costs associated with hiring new employees to replace key positions.
General and administrative expense was $15.9 million, $5.1 million and $44.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. The decrease in general and administrative expense primarily results from a reduction in our payroll and employee-related benefits due to a reduction in our workforce since the prior year period and other administrative cost reductions as part of our continued focus on efficiencies and cost savings. The decrease in general and administrative expenses is also attributed to prepetition costs incurred in 2019 associated with our chapter 11 bankruptcy that year. On a per unit basis, general and administrative expense were $2.57 per Boe, $2.74 per Boe and $9.49 per Boe for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively.
Stock-based compensation expense was $2.6 million and a credit of $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor). During 2019 (for both the Successor and Predecessor periods), several senior executives resigned from their positions. In accordance with the terms of these senior executives’ employment agreements, unvested stock options and unvested shares of restricted stock were modified to vest immediately upon termination. For the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), we recognized an incremental reduction to stock-based compensation expense of $9.5 million associated with these modifications. Stock-based compensation expense also decreased in the current year due to a reduction in our workforce.
Depletion for oil and natural gas properties is calculated using the unit of production method, which depletes the capitalized costs of evaluated properties plus future development costs based on the ratio of production for the current period to total reserve volumes of evaluated properties as of the beginning of the period. Depletion expense was $60.5 million, $19.5 million and $84.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. On a per unit basis, depletion expense was $9.81 per Boe, $10.43 per Boe and $18.00 per Boe for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. The lower depletion rate in the Successor period is attributable to the change in our depletable base as a result of the adoption of fresh-start accounting and the full cost ceiling test impairments incurred in 2020.
Under the full cost method of accounting, we are required on a quarterly basis to determine whether the book value of our oil and natural gas properties (excluding unevaluated properties) is less than or equal to the “ceiling”, based upon the expected after tax present value (discounted at 10%) of the future net cash flows from our proved reserves. Any
excess of the net book value of our oil and natural gas properties over the ceiling must be recognized as a non-cash impairment expense. During 2020, the net book value of our oil and gas properties at June 30, September 30 and December 31 (Successor) exceeded the ceiling amount and we recorded full cost ceiling test impairments before income taxes of $60.1 million, $128.3 million and $26.7 million, respectively, for the periods. The ceiling test impairments during 2020 (Successor) were primarily driven by decreases in the first-day-of-the-month 12-month average prices for crude oil used in the ceiling test calculation. Additionally, during the three months ended September 30, 2020 (Successor), the transfer of $23.6 million of unevaluated property costs to the full cost pool due to our intent to focus available capital on Monument Draw also contributed to the impairment recorded for the period. During the three months ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), proved undeveloped reserves additions as a result of changes to our five year development plan partially offset the impact on the impairment of the average price decline for the period. During 2019, the net book value of our oil and gas properties at March 31, June 30 and September 30 (Predecessor) exceeded the ceiling amount and we recorded full cost ceiling test impairments before income taxes of $275.2 million, $664.4 million, and $45.6 million, respectively, for the periods. The ceiling test impairments during 2019 (Predecessor) were driven by transfers of unevaluated property to the full cost pool that occurred during the year and decreases in the first-day-of-the-month 12-month average prices for crude oil used in the ceiling test calculation. For the three months ended June 30, 2019 (Predecessor), we transferred approximately $481.7 million of unevaluated property costs to the full cost pool, the majority of which were associated with our Hackberry Draw area. For the three months ended March 31, 2019 (Predecessor), we identified certain leases in our Hackberry Draw area with near-term expirations and transferred approximately $51.0 million of associated unevaluated property costs to the full cost pool. These transfers of unevaluated property to the full cost pool in 2019 (Predecessor) were the result of our intent to focus available capital on our Monument Draw area. Changes in commodity prices, production rates, levels of reserves, future development costs, transfers of unevaluated properties, and other factors will determine our actual ceiling test calculation and impairment analyses in future periods.
On December 20, 2018 (Predecessor), we sold our water infrastructure assets located in the Delaware Basin for a total adjusted purchase price of $210.9 million. We recognized a cumulative $115.9 million gain on the sale which includes the $0.5 million addition and $3.6 million reduction in the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively, due to customary closing adjustments.
We enter into derivative commodity instruments to economically hedge our exposure to price fluctuations on our anticipated oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids production. Consistent with prior years, we have elected not to designate any positions as cash flow hedges for accounting purposes, and accordingly, we recorded the net change in the mark-to-market value of these derivative contracts in the consolidated statements of operations. At December 31, 2020 (Successor), we had a $12.6 million derivative asset, $8.6 million of which was classified as current, and we had a $26.4 million derivative liability, $22.1 million of which was classified as current. We recorded a net derivative gain of $38.8 million ($6.1 million net unrealized loss and $44.9 million net realized gain on settled and early terminated contracts) for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor). During 2020, we terminated certain derivative contracts in advance of their natural expiration dates and received net proceeds of approximately $22.9 million, which were included in the $44.9 million realized gains for the year. We recorded a net derivative loss of $16.7 million ($18.7 million net unrealized loss and $2.0 million net realized gain on settled and early terminated contracts) and a net derivative loss of $34.3 million ($45.8 million net unrealized loss and $11.5 million net realized gain on settled and early terminated contracts) for the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively.
Interest expense and other was $6.6 million, $1.3 million and $37.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (Successor), the period of October 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), respectively. Interest expense for the Successor periods represents interest associated with borrowings under the Senior Credit Agreement and the PPP Loan. Interest expense in the Predecessor period represents interest associated with the Predecessor credit agreement, the DIP facility and the 6.75% senior notes for the respective periods in which borrowings were outstanding under each type of credit facility or senior notes. In addition to interest expense, in the period from January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), we paid fees associated with consents and amendments to our Predecessor credit agreement.
Reorganization items represent (i) expenses or income incurred subsequent to August 7, 2019 (when we filed voluntary petitions for relief under chapter 11) as a direct result of the reorganization Plan, (ii) gains or losses from liabilities settled, and (iii) fresh-start accounting adjustments. The following table summarizes the net reorganization items (in thousands):
We recorded an income tax benefit of $95.8 million using the discrete effective rate method for the period of January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor), resulting from the reduction to the deferred tax liability generated by the impact of the full cost ceiling impairment on oil and natural gas properties and the deferred tax asset created by the tax loss from operations. The 7.7% effective tax rate for the period from January 1, 2019 through October 1, 2019 (Predecessor) differs from the 21% statutory rate because of non-deductible executive compensation, non-deductible realized built in losses, and valuation allowances on deferred tax assets.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
We discuss recently adopted and issued accounting standards in Item 8. Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 1, “Summary of Significant Events and Accounting Policies.”