Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
We are a medical device company that is currently focused on bone regeneration in spinal fusion using the recombinant human protein, known as NELL-1/DBX®. The NELL-1/DBX® combination product is an osteostimulative recombinant protein that provides target specific control over bone regeneration. The protein, as part of the UCB-1 technology platform has been licensed exclusively for worldwide applications to us through a technology transfer from the UCLA Technology Development Group on behalf of UC Regents (“UCLA TDG”). UCLA TDG and the Company received guidance from the FDA that NELL-1/DBX® will be classified as a combination product with a device lead.
The Company was founded by University of California professors in collaboration with an Osaka University professor and a University of Southern California surgeon in 2004 as a privately-held company with proprietary, patented technology that has been validated in sheep and non-human primate models to facilitate bone growth. Our platform technology has application in delivering improved outcomes in the surgical specialties of spinal, orthopedic, general orthopedic, plastic reconstruction, neurosurgery, interventional radiology, and sports medicine. Lead product development and clinical studies are targeted on spinal fusion surgery, one of the larger segments in the orthopedic market.
We are an “emerging growth company” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, which we refer to as the JOBS Act. We would cease to be an emerging growth company upon the earliest of: (i) the last day of the first fiscal year in which our annual gross revenues are $1.07 billion or more; (ii) the end of any fiscal year in which the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates exceeded $700.0 million as of the end of the second quarter of that fiscal year; or (iii) the date on which we have, during the previous three-year period, issued more than $1.07 billion in non-convertible debt securities. An emerging growth company may take advantage of specified reduced reporting and other burdens that are otherwise applicable generally to public companies. We have elected to take advantage of these reduced disclosure obligations, and may elect to take advantage of other reduced reporting obligations in the future.
The JOBS Act permits an emerging growth company like us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We are choosing to irrevocably “opt out” of this provision and, as a result, we will comply with new or revised accounting standards as required when they are adopted.
We are a development stage entity. The production and marketing of our products and ongoing research and development activities will be subject to extensive regulation by numerous governmental authorities in the United States. Prior to marketing in the United States, any combination product developed by us must undergo rigorous preclinical (animal) and clinical (human) testing and an extensive regulatory approval process implemented by the FDA under the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. There can be no assurance that we will not encounter problems in clinical trials that will cause us or the FDA to delay or suspend the clinical trials.
Our success will depend in part on our ability to obtain patents and product license rights, maintain trade secrets, and operate without infringing on the proprietary rights of others, both in the United States and other countries. There can be no assurance that patents issued to or licensed by us will not be challenged, invalidated, or circumvented, or that the rights granted thereunder will provide proprietary protection or competitive advantages to us.
Results of Operations
Since our inception, we devoted substantially all of our efforts and funding to the development of the NELL-1 protein and raising capital. We have not yet generated revenues from our planned operations.
During 2020, Bone Biologics had to curtail operations due to lack of necessary funds, which the company hopes to address with future financing.
The lack of capital occurring simultaneously during the COVID-19 pandemic has caused a delay in R&D activities, and a scale back in all operations other than fund raising. As a result, the company engaged in cost-cutting measures in an attempt to extend our cash resources as long as possible.
The source, timing and availability of any future financing will depend principally upon market conditions and the status of our scientific development programs.
Research and Development
Our research and development decreased from $1,095,176 during the year ended December 31, 2019 to $340,672 during the year ended December 31, 2020. The $754,504 decrease was due to the curtailing of operations during 2020. We will continue to incur significant expenses for development activities for NELL-1 in the future.
General and Administrative
Our general and administrative expenses decreased from $1,352,258 during the year ended December 31, 2019 to $484,342 during the year ended December 31, 2020. The $867,916 decrease was due to the curtailing of operations during 2020.
Interest Expense
Our interest expense increased from $975,774 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $998,076 during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $22,302 resulted from increased debt.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Going Concern and Liquidity
The Company has no significant operating history and since inception to December 31, 2020 has incurred accumulated losses of approximately $69.0 million. The Company will continue to incur significant expenses for development activities for their lead product NELL-1/DBX®. Operating expenditures for the next twelve months are estimated at $6.6 million. The accompanying consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern. As reflected in the financial statements, the Company had a stockholders’ deficit of $13,692,310 at December 31, 2020, and incurred a net loss of $1,824,690, and used net cash in operating activities of $426,933 during the year ended December 31, 2020. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments related to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
The Company will continue to attempt to raise additional debt and/or equity financing to fund future operations and to provide additional working capital. However, there is no assurance that such financing will be consummated or obtained in sufficient amounts necessary to meet the Company’s needs. If cash resources are insufficient to satisfy the Company’s on-going cash requirements, the Company will be required to scale back or discontinue its product development programs, or obtain funds if available (although there can be no certainties) through strategic alliances that may require the Company to relinquish rights to its technology, substantially reduce or discontinue its operations entirely. No assurance can be given that any future financing will be available or, if available, that it will be on terms that are satisfactory to the Company. Even if the Company is able to obtain additional financing, it may contain undue restrictions on our operations, in the case of debt financing, or cause substantial dilution for our stockholders, in the case of equity financing. We note that there is significant uncertainty from the affect that the novel coronavirus may have on the availability, cost and type of financing.
For the past several years, we have depended on our relationship with Hankey Capital for working capital to fund our operations, which has been raised in the form of both debt and equity capital. Hankey Capital, directly and indirectly, controls approximately 89% of our issued and outstanding shares of common stock (including collateral shares) and has been issued convertible notes payable with an aggregate principal balance of $11,787,875 at March 31, 2021. Representatives of Hankey Capital also currently serve as directors of the Company. No assurance can be given that any future financing will be available or, if available, that it will be on terms that are satisfactory to the Company. Even if the Company is able to obtain additional financing, it may contain undue restrictions on our operations, in the case of debt financing, or cause substantial dilution for our stockholders, in the case of equity financing.
At March 31, 2021, the Company had $312,124 available under the Second credit facility with Hankey Capital
Convertible Notes totaling $11,000,000 are secured by an aggregate of 23,404,255 collateral shares of Common Stock issued by the Company in the name of Hankey Capital (“Collateral Shares”). The Collateral Shares shall be adjusted on a yearly basis. The principal amount of the loans are pre-payable in whole or in part at any time, without premium or penalty. Upon any voluntary partial prepayment of outstanding principal, Hankey Capital will return Collateral shares to the Company in the amount necessary, if any, to maintain the loan to value ratio at no less than 50%. Upon a full payment of the outstanding principal, all Collateral Shares shall be returned and cancelled. Hankey Capital will also return Collateral Shares under the same terms in case of partial or full conversion of the Convertible Notes. All of the Company’s personal property further secure the aggregate Convertible Notes, including collateral assignments of all the Company’s license agreements and the MTF Sygnal Option Agreement.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had cash of $-0- and $24,145, respectively.
Cash Flows
The following is a summary of our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Operating activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, cash used in operating activities was $426,933 and $3,251,229 respectively. Cash expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased primarily due to the curtailing of operations during 2020.
Financing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities of $329,179 resulted from draws on our second credit facilities with Hankey Capital. During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by financing activities of $2,320,000 resulted from draws on our first and second credit facilities with Hankey Capital.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies
We believe that our critical accounting policies are as follows:
● Research and Development Costs;
● Stock Based Compensation;
● Fair Value of Financial Instruments;
● Collateral Shares.
The preparation of the accompanying consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Significant estimates include the assumptions used in the valuation of stock options and warrants and income tax valuation allowances. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs include, but are not limited to, payroll and other personnel expenses, consultants, expenses incurred under agreements with contract research and manufacturing organizations and animal clinical investigative sites and the cost to manufacture clinical trial materials. Costs related to research, design and development of products are charged to research and development expense as incurred.
Stock Based Compensation
ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation, prescribes accounting and reporting standards for all share-based payment transactions in which employee services are acquired. Transactions include incurring liabilities, or issuing or offering to issue shares, options, and other equity instruments such as employee stock ownership plans and stock appreciation rights. Share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, are recognized as compensation expense in the consolidated financial statements based on their fair values. That expense is recognized over the period during which an employee is required to provide services in exchange for the award, known as the requisite service period (usually the vesting period).
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation issued to non-employees and consultants in accordance with the provisions of ASC 505-50, Equity - based Payments to Non-Employees. Measurement of share-based payment transactions with non-employees is based on the fair value of whichever is more reliably measurable: (a) the goods or services received; or (b) the equity instruments issued. The fair value of the share-based payment transaction is determined at the earlier of performance commitment date or performance completion date.
Fair Value Measurements
We use fair value measurements to record fair value adjustments to certain assets and liabilities and to determine fair value disclosures. We base our fair values on the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. Additionally, from time to time, we may be required to record certain assets at fair value on a non-recurring basis, such as certain impaired loans held for investment and securities held to maturity that are other-than-temporarily impaired. These non-recurring fair value adjustments typically involve write-downs of individual assets due to application of lower-of-cost or market accounting.
We have established and documented a process for determining fair value. We maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when developing fair value measurements. Whenever there is no readily available market data, management uses its best estimate and assumptions in determining fair value, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if other assumptions had been used, our recorded earnings or disclosures could have been materially different from those reflected in these financial statements. For detailed information on our use of fair value measurements and our related valuation methodologies, see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this report.
Collateral Shares
The Company accounts for the common shares issued as collateral for convertible promissory notes, whether upon original issuance or upon the required annual adjustment, as debt issuance costs in the form of a loan processing fee, which is determined by reference to the par value of the Company’s common stock, with a corresponding charge to operations when such collateral shares are issued. The collateral shares are subject to significant contractual restrictions limiting their sale or transfer. As these common shares have been issued to and are held by the lender, and are contingently returnable to the Company under certain conditions, such shares are considered as issued and outstanding on the Company’s balance sheet, but are not included in earnings per share calculations for all periods presented.
In the event of an uncured event of default, the Company will record a charge to operations to recognize that the collateral shares are no longer owned or controlled by the Company, and such prospective charge to operations would be based on the fair market value of the collateral shares at that time, and which would be classified as a cost of debt capital and recognized as a charge to operations.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See discussion in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on the Company’s financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.