Item 7.
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
The Company is a leading provider of business management solutions for small and mid-sized companies. The Company has developed a management platform that integrates a knowledge-based approach from the management consulting industry with tools from the human resource outsourcing industry. This platform, through the effective leveraging of human capital, helps our business owner clients run their businesses more effectively. We believe this platform, delivered through a decentralized organizational structure, differentiates BBSI from our competitors.
We report revenues in our financial results in two categories of services: professional employer services (“PEO”) and staffing.
With our PEO clients, we enter into a co-employment arrangement in which we become the administrative employer while the client maintains physical care, custody and control of their workforce. Our PEO services are billed as a percentage of client payroll, with the gross amount invoiced including direct payroll costs, employer payroll-related taxes, workers’ compensation coverage (if provided) and a service fee. PEO customers are invoiced following the end of each payroll processing cycle, with payment generally due on the invoice date. Revenues for PEO services exclude direct payroll billings because we are not the primary obligor for those payments.
We generate staffing services revenues primarily from short-term staffing, contract staffing, on-site management and direct placement services. For staffing services other than direct placement, invoiced amounts include direct payroll, employer payroll-related taxes, workers’ compensation coverage and a service fee. Staffing customers are invoiced weekly and typically have payment terms of 30 days. Direct placement services are billed at agreed fees at the time of a successful placement.
Our business is concentrated in California, and we expect to continue to derive a majority of our revenues from this market in the future. Revenues generated in our California operations accounted for 75% of our total revenues in 2020, 77% in 2019 and 79% in 2018. Consequently, any weakness in economic conditions or changes in the regulatory or insurance environment in California could have a material adverse effect on our financial results.
Our cost of revenues for PEO services includes employer payroll-related taxes and workers' compensation costs. Our cost of revenues for staffing services includes direct payroll costs, employer payroll-related taxes, employee benefits, and workers’ compensation costs. Direct payroll costs represent the gross payroll earned by staffing services employees based on salary or hourly wages. Payroll taxes and employee benefits consist of the employer's portion of Social Security and Medicare taxes, federal and state unemployment taxes and staffing services employee reimbursements for materials, supplies and other expenses, which are paid by our customer. Workers' compensation costs consist primarily of the costs associated with our workers' compensation program, including claims reserves, claims administration fees, legal fees, medical cost containment (“MCC”) expense, state administrative agency fees, third-party broker commissions, risk manager payroll, premiums for excess insurance and the fronted insurance program, and costs associated with operating our two wholly owned insurance companies, AICE and Ecole.
Selling, general and administrative expenses represent both branch office and corporate-level operating expenses. Branch operating expenses consist primarily of branch office staff payroll and personnel related costs, advertising, rent, office supplies, professional and legal fees and branch incentive compensation. Corporate-level operating expenses consist primarily of executive and office staff payroll and personnel related costs, professional and legal fees, travel, occupancy costs, information systems costs, and executive and corporate staff incentive compensation.
Depreciation and amortization represent depreciation of property and equipment, leasehold improvements, software and internally developed software costs. Property, equipment, software and internally developed software costs are depreciated using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives, which range from 3 to 39 years. Leasehold improvements are amortized using the straight-line method over the shorter of the lease term or estimated useful life.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We have identified the following accounting estimate as critical to our business and the understanding of our results of operations. For a detailed discussion of the application of this and other accounting policies, see “Note 1 - Summary of Operations and Significant Accounting Policies” to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report. The preparation of this Annual Report on Form 10-K requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Workers' Compensation Reserves
We recognize our liability for the ultimate payment of incurred claims and claims adjustment expenses by establishing a reserve which represents our estimates of future amounts necessary to pay claims and related expenses with respect to workplace injuries that have occurred. When a claim involving a probable loss is reported, our independent third-party administrator for workers’ compensation claims (“TPA”) establishes a case reserve for the estimated amount of ultimate loss. The estimate reflects a judgment based on established case reserving practices and the experience and knowledge of the TPA regarding the nature and expected amount of the claim, as well as the estimated expenses of settling the claim, including legal and other fees and expenses of claims administration. The adequacy of such case reserves in part depends on the professional judgment of the TPA to properly and comprehensively evaluate the economic consequences of each claim.
Our reserves include an additional component for potential future increases in the cost to finally resolve open injury claims and claims incurred in prior periods but not reported (together, "IBNR") based on actuarial estimates provided by the Company’s independent actuary. IBNR reserves, unlike specific case reserves, do not apply to a specific claim but rather apply to the entire population of claims arising from a specific time period. IBNR primarily covers costs relating to:
•
Future claim payments in excess of case reserves on recorded open claims;
•
Additional claim payments on closed claims; and
•
Claims that have occurred but have not yet been reported to us.
The process of estimating unpaid claims and claims adjustment expense involves a high degree of judgment and is affected by both internal and external events, including changes in claims handling practices, modifications in reserve estimation procedures, changes in individuals involved in the reserve estimation process, inflation, trends in the litigation and settlement of pending claims, and legislative changes.
Our estimates are based on informed judgment, derived from individual experiences and expertise applied to multiple sets of data and analyses. We consider significant facts and circumstances known both at the time that loss reserves are initially established and as new facts and circumstances become known. Due to the inherent uncertainty underlying loss reserve estimates, the expenses incurred through final resolution of our liability for our workers’ compensation claims will likely vary from the related loss reserves at the reporting date. Therefore, as specific claims are paid out in the future, actual paid losses may be materially different from our current loss reserves.
A basic premise in most actuarial analyses is that historical data and past patterns demonstrated in the incurred and paid historical data form a reasonable basis upon which to project future outcomes, absent a material change. Significant structural changes to the available data can materially impact the reserve estimation process. To the extent a material change affecting the ultimate claim liability becomes known, such change is quantified to the extent possible through an analysis of internal company data and, if available and when appropriate, external data. Actuaries exercise a considerable degree of judgment in the evaluation of these factors and the need for such actuarial judgment is more pronounced when faced with material uncertainties.
We believe that the amounts recorded for our estimated liabilities for workers’ compensation claims, which are based on informed judgment, analysis of data, actuarial estimates, and analysis of other trends associated with the Company’s historical universe of claims data, are reasonable. Nevertheless, adjustments to such estimates will be required in future periods if the development of claim costs varies materially from our estimates and such future adjustments may be material to our results of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements and their potential effect on the Company's results of operations and financial condition, see “Note 1 - Summary of Operations and Significant Accounting Policies” to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report.
Forward-Looking Information
Statements in this Item or in Items 1, 1A, 3 and 9A of this report include forward-looking statements which are not historical in nature and are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These forward-looking statements include, among others, discussion of economic conditions in our market areas and their effect on revenue levels, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business operations, the competitiveness of our service offerings, our ability to attract and retain clients and to achieve revenue growth, the effect of changes in our mix of services on gross margin, the effect of tight labor market conditions, the adequacy of our workers' compensation reserves, the effect of changes in estimates of our future claims liabilities on our workers’ compensation reserves, including the effect of changes in our reserving practices and claims management process on our actuarial estimates, expected levels of required surety deposits and letters of credit, our ability to generate sufficient taxable income in the future to utilize our deferred tax assets, the effect of our formation and operation of two wholly owned licensed insurance subsidiaries, the risks of operation and cost of our fronted insurance program with Chubb, the financial viability of our excess insurance carriers, the effectiveness of our management information systems, our relationship with our primary bank lender and the availability of financing and working capital to meet our funding requirements, litigation costs, the effect of changes in the interest rate environment on the value of our investment securities and long-term debt, the adequacy of our allowance for doubtful accounts, and the potential for and effect of acquisitions.
All of our forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause the actual results, performance or achievements of the Company or industry to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Such factors with respect to the Company include our ability to retain current clients and attract new clients, the effects of governmental orders imposing business closures and shelter-in-place and social distancing requirements, difficulties associated with integrating clients into our operations, economic trends in our service areas, the potential for material deviations from expected future workers’ compensation claims experience, changes in the workers’ compensation regulatory environment in our primary markets, security breaches or failures in the Company’s information technology systems, collectability of accounts receivable, changes in effective payroll tax rates and federal and state income tax rates, the carrying values of deferred income tax assets and goodwill (which may be affected by our future operating results), the impact of and potential changes to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, escalating medical costs, and other health care legislative initiatives on our business, the effect of conditions in the global capital markets on our investment portfolio, and the availability of capital, borrowing capacity on our revolving credit facility, or letters of credit necessary to meet state-mandated surety deposit requirements for maintaining our status as a qualified self-insured employer for workers' compensation coverage or our fronted insurance program. Additional risk factors affecting our business are discussed in Item 1A of Part I of this report. We disclaim any obligation to publicly announce any revisions to any of the forward-looking statements contained herein to reflect future events or developments.
Results of Operations
The spread of COVID-19 and resulting shelter-in-place and similar restrictions across the United States are having, and will continue to have, a negative impact on the operating results of the Company. As our clients respond to the effects of efforts to address the consequences of the pandemic, including the measures taken at various levels of government to contain the virus’s spread, we expect that our ability to add new customers, as well as to grow revenues from existing customers, will be adversely affected due to economic slowdown, business closures, furloughs, hiring freezes and reductions in hours worked.
The following table sets forth the percentages of total revenues represented by selected items in the Company's consolidated statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, included in Item 8 of Part II of this report.
We report PEO revenues net of direct payroll costs because we are not the primary obligor for wage payments to our clients’ employees. However, management believes that gross billings and wages are useful in understanding the volume of our business activity and serve as an important performance metric in managing our operations, including the preparation of internal operating forecasts and establishing executive compensation performance goals. We therefore present for purposes of analysis gross billings and wage information for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Because safety incentives represent consideration payable to PEO customers, safety incentive costs are netted against PEO revenue in our consolidated statements of operations. We therefore present below for purposes of analysis non-GAAP gross workers’ compensation expense, which represents workers’ compensation costs including safety incentive costs. We believe this non-GAAP measure is useful in evaluating the total costs of our workers’ compensation program.
In monitoring and evaluating the performance of our operations, management also reviews the following ratios, which represent selected amounts as a percentage of gross billings. Management believes these ratios are useful in understanding the efficiency and profitability of our service offerings.
The presentation of revenues on a net basis and the relative contributions of staffing and professional employer services revenues can create volatility in our gross margin percentage. A relative increase in professional employer services revenue will result in a higher gross margin percentage. Improvement in gross margin percentage occurs because incremental client services revenue dollars are reported as revenue net of all related direct payroll and safety incentive costs.
We refer to employees of our PEO clients as worksite employees (“WSEs”). Management reviews average and ending WSE growth to monitor and evaluate the performance of our operations. Average WSEs are calculated by dividing the number of unique individuals paid in each month by the number of months in the period. Ending WSEs represents the number of unique individuals paid in the last month of the period.
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net income for 2020 was $33.8 million compared to net income of $48.3 million for 2019. Diluted income per share for 2020 was $4.39 compared to diluted income per share of $6.27 for 2019.
Revenues for 2020 totaled $880.8 million, a decrease of $61.5 million or 6.5% over 2019, which reflects a decrease in the Company’s professional employer service fee revenue of $42.4 million or 5.2% and a decrease in staffing services revenue of $19.0 million or 15.6%.
The reduction in PEO services revenues was primarily attributable to the effects of COVID-19 on our clients and our business. Gross billings for PEO services to continuing customers increased 0.3% compared to 2019. Gross billings increased only slightly primarily due to the impacts of COVID-19 during the year, which we expect to continue into future quarters. PEO revenue is presented net of safety incentives of $23.5 million and $31.7 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in staffing services revenue was due primarily to the impacts of COVID-19 during the 2020 period.
Gross margin for 2020 totaled $182.9 million or 20.8% of revenue compared to $208.3 million or 22.1% of revenue for 2019. The decrease in gross margin as a percentage of revenues is a result of increased pricing competitiveness in the year driven by economic and market conditions as well as the factors discussed below within the separate components of gross margin.
Direct payroll costs for 2020 totaled $78.4 million or 8.9% of revenue compared to $92.5 million or 9.8% of revenue for 2019. The decrease in direct payroll costs percentage was primarily due to the increase in professional employer services and the decrease of staffing services within the mix of our customer base compared to 2019.
Payroll taxes and benefits for 2020 totaled $418.8 million or 47.5% of revenue compared to $429.7 million or 45.6% of revenue for 2019. The increase in payroll taxes and benefits as a percentage of revenues is primarily due to the relative increase in PEO services within the mix of our customer base compared to 2019.
Workers’ compensation expense for 2020 totaled $200.7 million or 22.8% of revenue compared to $211.9 million or 22.5% of revenue for 2019. The increase in workers’ compensation expense as a percentage of revenue was primarily due to a favorable adjustment of $6.4 million in 2020 compared to a favorable adjustment of $13.4 million in 2019 related to claims incurred in prior periods.
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses for 2020 totaled $141.9 million or 16.1% of revenue compared to $153.9 million or 16.3% of revenue for 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to decreases in employee-related expenses and reduced employee profit sharing and incentive compensation of $12.1 million.
Other income, net for 2020 totaled $6.4 million compared to other income of $10.7 million for 2019. The change was attributable to a decrease in investment income of $4.5 million in 2020 due primarily to lower interest rates.
Our effective income tax rate for 2020 was 20.7% compared to 21.0% for 2019. Our income tax rate typically differs from the federal statutory tax rate of 21% primarily due to state taxes and federal and state tax credits. See “Note 9 - Income Taxes” to the consolidated financial statements incorporated into Item 8 of Part II of this report for additional information regarding income taxes.
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for 2019 compared to 2018 can be found under Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on March 3, 2020.
Fluctuations in Quarterly Operating Results
We have historically experienced significant fluctuations in our quarterly operating results, including losses in the first quarter of each year, and expect such fluctuations to continue in the future. Our operating results may fluctuate due to a number of factors such as seasonality, wage limits on statutory payroll taxes, claims experience for workers’ compensation, demand for our services, and competition. Payroll taxes, as a component of cost of revenues, generally decline throughout a calendar year as the applicable statutory wage bases for federal and state unemployment taxes and Social Security taxes are exceeded on a per employee basis. Our revenue levels may be higher in the third quarter due to the effect of increased business activity of our customers’ businesses in the agriculture, food processing and forest products-related industries. In addition, revenues in the fourth quarter may be reduced by many customers’ practice of operating on holiday-shortened schedules. Workers’ compensation expense varies with both the frequency and severity of workplace injury claims reported during a quarter and the estimated future costs of such claims. In addition, positive or adverse loss development of prior period claims during a subsequent quarter may also contribute to the volatility in the Company’s estimated workers’ compensation expense.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company's cash balance of $233.8 million, which includes cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash, decreased $39.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, compared to an increase of $132.6 million for the comparable period of 2019. The decrease in cash at December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019 was primarily due to decreased workers’ compensation claims liabilities, decreased accrued payroll, payroll taxes and related benefits, dividends payments and repurchases of common stock, partially offset by decreased trade accounts receivable, net income and proceeds from the sales and maturities of investments and restricted investments.
Net cash used in operating activities in 2020 amounted to $27.9 million, compared to net cash provided of $77.1 million for the comparable period of 2019. In 2020, cash used in operating activities was primarily due to decreased workers’ compensation claims liabilities of $80.8 million related primarily to the transfer of obligations associated with certain claims incurred between February 1, 2014 and December 31, 2017, decreased accrued payroll, payroll taxes and related benefits of $22.6 million and decreased safety incentive of $9.1 million, partially offset by decreased trade accounts receivable of $45.1 million and net income of $33.8 million
Net cash provided by investing activities totaled $4.1 million in 2020, compared to net cash provided of $66.3 million for the comparable period of 2019. In 2020, net cash provided by investing activities consisted primarily of proceeds from sales and maturities of investments and restricted investments of $113.5 million, partially offset by purchases of investments and restricted investments of $100.7 million and purchases of property, equipment and software of $8.6 million.
Net cash used in financing activities in 2020 was $15.7 million compared to net cash used of $10.8 million for the comparable period of 2019. In 2020, cash was primarily used for dividend payments of $9.1 million, repurchases of common stock of $8.1 million, and common stock repurchased on vesting of stock awards of $1.4 million, partially offset by proceeds from exercises of stock options of $3.1 million.
As part of its fronted workers’ compensation insurance program with Chubb, the Company makes monthly collateral payments into trust accounts (the “Chubb trust accounts”). The balance in the Chubb trust accounts was $290.7 million and $393.5 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Included within the Chubb trust account at December 31, 2020, is $122.2 million of restricted cash. The restricted cash accrues interest at the 3-month Treasury bill yield rate plus 0.25%. The Chubb trust account balances are included as a component of the current and long-term restricted cash and investments on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets.
On June 29, 2020, the Company entered into a loss portfolio transfer agreement to remove all outstanding workers’ compensation claims obligations for claims incurred under its fronted insurance program between February 1, 2014 and December 31, 2017. This transaction reduced the Company’s outstanding workers’ compensation liabilities and trust account balances by $115.7 million. As part of the loss portfolio transfer and due to the Company’s continued favorable claims experience, third-party collateral requirements were reduced by $48.9 million, resulting in an increase in cash and cash equivalents and a decrease in restricted cash and investments.
On September 30, 2020, the Company entered into an amended credit agreement (the “Agreement”) with the Bank, which reverted to the provisions set forth in the agreement prior to May 15, 2020. The Agreement reduced the revolving credit line from $50.0 million back to $33.0 million; the sublimit for standby letters of credit remains at $8.0 million. At December 31, 2020, $6.2 million of the sublimit for standby letters of credit was used. The Agreement expires on July 1, 2022.
Advances under the revolving credit line bear interest, as selected by the Company, of (a) the daily floating rate of one-month LIBOR plus 1.75% or (b) the fixed rate of LIBOR plus 1.75%. The Agreement also provides for an unused commitment fee of 0.375% per year on the average daily unused amount of the revolving credit line, as well as a fee of 1.75% of the face amount of each letter of credit reserved under the line of credit. The Company had no outstanding borrowings on its revolving credit line at December 31, 2020 and 2019. The credit facility is collateralized by the Company’s accounts receivable and other rights to receive payment.
The Agreement also provides for a $63.7 million standby letter of credit (the “Chubb Letter of Credit”). The Chubb Letter of Credit has an expiration date of July 1, 2021, subject to automatic renewal in specified circumstances. The Bank has been granted a security interest of first priority in certain blocked securities accounts (collectively, the “Collateral Accounts”). The Company has agreed to deposit in the Collateral Accounts 50% of the Company’s consolidated net income (after tax and less cash dividends) for each quarter plus, to the extent necessary, an additional amount by May 15 each year so that the deposits in the Collateral Accounts for the prior year total at least $16 million. Through the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company deposited $38.9 million into the Collateral Accounts.
The initial fee paid under the Chubb Letter of Credit in June 2018 was equal to 2.5% of the face amount thereof. Upon annual renewal, the fees payable to the Bank quarterly in advance include (a) a fee at the annual rate of 2.5%, calculated based on the difference between the face amount of the Chubb Letter of Credit and 95% of the aggregate value of the Collateral Accounts as of the end of the previous quarter, (b) a fee at the annual rate of 1.0% calculated based on the balance of the face amount, and (c) other fees upon the payment or negotiation of each drawing under the Chubb Letter of Credit.
The Agreement requires the satisfaction of certain financial covenants as follows:
•
EBITDA [net income before taxes plus interest expense (net of capitalized interest expense), depreciation expense, and amortization expense] on a rolling four-quarter basis must be not less than $30 million at the end of each fiscal quarter; and
•
the ratio of restricted and unrestricted cash and investments to workers’ compensation and safety incentive liabilities must be at least 1.0:1.0, measured quarterly.
The Agreement imposes certain additional restrictions unless the Bank provides its prior written consent as follows:
•
incurring additional indebtedness is prohibited, other than purchase financing for the acquisition of assets, provided that the aggregate of all purchase financing does not exceed $1,000,000 at any time;
•
the Company may not terminate or cancel any of the AICE policies; and
•
if an event of default would occur, including on a pro forma basis, no dividends or distributions would be permitted to be paid and redemptions and repurchases of the Company’s stock would be permitted only up to $15 million in any rolling 12-month period.
The Agreement also contains customary events of default and specified cross-defaults under the Company's workers' compensation insurance arrangements. If an event of default under the Agreement occurs and is continuing, the Bank may declare any outstanding obligations under the Agreement to be immediately due and payable. At December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with all covenants.
The Company maintains a mortgage loan with the Bank with a balance of approximately $3.7 million and $4.0 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, secured by the Company’s corporate office building in Vancouver, Washington. This loan requires payment of monthly installments of $18,375, bearing interest at the one-month LIBOR plus 2.0%, with the unpaid principal balance due July 1, 2022. LIBOR likely will no longer be in general use as a reference rate by financial institutions by December 31, 2021.
Management expects that the funds anticipated to be generated from operations, current liquid assets, and availability under the Company’s revolving credit facility will be sufficient in the aggregate to fund the Company’s working capital needs for the next twelve months.
Contractual Obligations
The Company's contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 are summarized below:
(1) As of December 31, 2020, the Company has additional operating leases that have not yet commenced of $2.9 million and remaining balances on short-term operating leases of $7,290.
Inflation
Inflation generally has not been a significant factor in the Company's operations during the periods discussed above. The Company has taken into account the impact of escalating medical and other costs in establishing reserves for future workers' compensation claims payments.