Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A") is intended to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of our management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and certain other factors that may affect our future results. Unless otherwise noted, transactions and other factors significantly impacting our financial condition, results of operations and liquidity are discussed in order of magnitude. Our MD&A should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Refer to Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, in our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended February 1, 2020, for discussion of the results of operations for the year ended February 1, 2020, compared to the year ended February 2, 2019, which is incorporated by reference herein.
Overview
Our purpose is to enrich lives through technology. We have two reportable segments: Domestic and International. The Domestic segment is comprised of the operations, including our Best Buy Health business, in all states, districts and territories of the U.S. under various brand names including Best Buy, Best Buy Business, Best Buy Express, Best Buy Health, CST, Geek Squad, GreatCall, Lively, Magnolia and Pacific Kitchen and Home and the domain names bestbuy.com and greatcall.com. The International segment is comprised of all operations in Canada and Mexico under the brand names Best Buy, Best Buy Express, Best Buy Mobile and Geek Squad and the domain names bestbuy.ca and bestbuy.com.mx. During the third quarter of fiscal 2021 we made the decision to exit our operations in Mexico. Refer to Note 2, Restructuring, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Our fiscal year ends on the Saturday nearest the end of January. Fiscal 2021, fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 included 52 weeks. Our business, like that of many retailers, is seasonal. A large proportion of our revenue and earnings is generated in the fiscal fourth quarter, which includes the majority of the holiday shopping season in the U.S., Canada and Mexico.
Comparable Sales
Throughout this MD&A, we refer to comparable sales. Comparable sales is a metric used by management to evaluate the performance of our existing stores, websites and call centers by measuring the change in net sales for a particular period over the comparable prior-period of equivalent length. Comparable sales includes revenue from stores, websites and call centers operating for at least 14 full months. Stores closed more than 14 days, including but not limited to relocated, remodeled, expanded and downsized stores, or stores impacted by natural disasters, are excluded from comparable sales until at least 14 full months after reopening. Acquisitions are included in comparable sales beginning with the first full quarter following the first anniversary of the date of the acquisition. Comparable sales also includes credit card revenue, gift card breakage, commercial sales and sales of merchandise to wholesalers and dealers, as applicable. Comparable sales excludes the impact of revenue from discontinued operations and the effect of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates (applicable to our International segment only). Online sales are included in comparable sales. Online sales represent those initiated on a website or app, regardless of whether customers choose to pick up product in store, curbside, at an alternative pick-up location or take delivery direct to their homes. All periods presented apply this methodology consistently.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of novel coronavirus disease (“COVID-19”) as a pandemic. All stores that were temporarily closed as a result of COVID-19 or operating a curbside-only operating model are included in comparable sales.
On November 24, 2020, we announced our decision to exit our operations in Mexico. As a result, all revenue from Mexico operations has been excluded from our comparable sales calculation beginning in December of fiscal 2021.
On March 1, 2018, we announced our intent to close all of our 257 remaining Best Buy Mobile stand-alone stores in the U.S. As a result, all revenue related to these stores has been excluded from our comparable sales calculation beginning in March 2018. On October 1, 2018, we acquired all outstanding shares of GreatCall, Inc. (“GreatCall”) and on May 9, 2019, we acquired all outstanding shares of Critical Signal Technologies, Inc. (“CST”). Consistent with our comparable sales policy, the results of GreatCall are included in our comparable sales calculation beginning in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, and the results of CST are included in our comparable sales calculation beginning in the third quarter of fiscal 2021.
We believe comparable sales is a meaningful supplemental metric for investors to evaluate revenue performance resulting from growth in existing stores, websites and call centers versus the portion resulting from opening new stores or closing existing stores. The method of calculating comparable sales varies across the retail industry. As a result, our method of calculating comparable sales may not be the same as other retailers' methods.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This MD&A includes financial information prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ("GAAP"), as well as certain adjusted or non-GAAP financial measures, such as constant currency, non-GAAP operating income, non-GAAP effective tax rate and non-GAAP diluted earnings per share ("EPS"). We believe that non-GAAP financial measures, when reviewed in conjunction with GAAP financial measures, can provide more information to assist investors in evaluating current period performance and in assessing future performance. For these reasons, our internal management reporting also includes non-GAAP financial measures. Generally, our non-GAAP financial measures include adjustments for items such as restructuring charges, goodwill impairments, price-fixing settlements, gains and losses on investments, intangible asset amortization, certain acquisition-related costs and the tax effect of all such items. In addition, certain other items may be excluded from non-GAAP financial measures when we believe doing so provides greater clarity to management and our investors. These non-GAAP financial measures should be considered in addition to, and not superior to or as a substitute for, GAAP financial measures. We strongly encourage investors and shareholders to review our financial statements and publicly-filed reports in their entirety and not to rely on any single financial measure. Non-GAAP financial measures as presented herein may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
In our discussions of the operating results of our consolidated business and our International segment, we sometimes refer to the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates or the impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, which are references to the differences between the foreign currency exchange rates we use to convert the International segment’s operating results from local currencies into U.S. dollars for reporting purposes. We also may use the term "constant currency," which represents results adjusted to exclude foreign currency impacts. We calculate those impacts as the difference between the current period results translated using the current period currency exchange rates and using the comparable prior period currency exchange rates. We believe the disclosure of revenue changes in constant currency provides useful supplementary information to investors in light of significant fluctuations in currency rates.
Refer to the Non-GAAP Financial Measures section below for detailed reconciliations of items impacting non-GAAP operating income, non-GAAP effective tax rate and non-GAAP diluted EPS in the presented periods.
Business Strategy and COVID-19 Update
In fiscal 2021 our Enterprise comparable sales grew 9.7% as we leveraged our unique capabilities, including our supply chain expertise, flexible store operating model and ability to shift quickly to digital, to meet what was clearly elevated demand for products that help customers work, learn, cook, entertain and connect in their homes. We provided customers with multiple options for how, when and where they shopped with us to ensure it satisfied their need for safety and convenience. The pandemic environment underscored our purpose to enrich lives through technology, and the capabilities we strengthened in fiscal 2021 will benefit us going forward as we execute our strategy.
Our strong financial performance allowed us to share our success with the community, our shareholders, and, importantly, our employees. In the third quarter of fiscal 2021, we made a $40 million donation to the Best Buy Foundation to accelerate the progress towards our goal to reach 100 Teen Tech Centers across the U.S. We believe our Teen Tech Centers help to further our commitments towards economic and social justice in our communities by making a measurable difference in the lives of underserved teens who may not otherwise have access to technology. In addition, we resumed our share repurchase program during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 and increased our quarterly dividend by 27% to $0.70 per share. For our employees, we provided hourly appreciation pay for those who were working on the frontlines, paid recognition bonuses to field employees and established multiple hardship funds for anyone impacted physically, emotionally or financially by COVID-19. Starting August 1, 2020, we also raised our starting wage to $15 per hour for all domestic employees and enhanced our employee benefits.
Throughout the pandemic and across all the ways customers can shop, we adhered to safety protocols that limited store capacity, followed strict social distancing practices and used proper protective equipment, including requiring our employees and customers to wear masks.
This COVID-19 pandemic and the shift in customer buying behavior underscores the importance of our strong multi-channel capabilities. In fiscal 2021 our Domestic online revenue grew 144% compared to last year. We believe it is essential to provide options that let customers choose what works best for them. To best serve our customers during the pandemic, we had to be innovative and flexible. Early in the year, we quickly rolled out enhanced curbside pick-up across our stores to provide our customers convenience when we made the difficult decision to close our stores in March 2020. In May 2020 we developed an in-store appointment model that provided our customers with an option to shop in our stores as we prepared to open stores back up to customer shopping. We developed solutions like virtual consultations with advisors and video chats with our store associates. In addition, we made significant improvements to the functionality and customer experience of our app to support shopping, support and fulfillment. We provided fulfillment options that customers have come to expect from all retailers like fast and free home delivery, in-store pick-up and curbside pick-up.
As we look forward, the environment is still evolving, and our operating model and supporting cost structure are evolving as well. The pandemic has accelerated the evolution of retail and compelled us to change our operating model in the best interest of our employees and customers. We have also expedited some planned strategic changes that we believe will allow us to emerge from this time even stronger.
During the third quarter of fiscal 2021 we made the difficult decision to exit our operations in Mexico and began taking other actions to more broadly align our organizational structure in support of our strategy. As a result, we recorded $144 million of charges in our International segment in fiscal 2021, including $23 million of inventory markdowns within cost of sales and $121 million within restructuring charges primarily comprised of asset impairments, currency translation adjustments and termination benefits. As of January 30, 2021, the exit was substantially complete and we do not expect to incur material future restructuring charges in fiscal 2022 related to the exit.
We also recorded $133 million of restructuring charges in our Domestic segment in fiscal 2021, primarily related to termination benefits associated with field and corporate organizational changes in support of our strategy, as well as impairments of technology assets held in service of our Mexico operations.
As we continue to evolve our Building the New Blue Strategy, it is possible that we will incur material future restructuring costs, but we are unable to forecast the timing and magnitude of such costs. Refer to Note 2, Restructuring, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
We believe the following will be permanent and structural implications of the pandemic relevant to Best Buy:
• Customer shopping behavior will be permanently changed in a way that is even more digital and puts customers entirely in control to shop how they want. Our strategy is to embrace that reality, and lead, not follow.
• Our workforce will need to evolve in a way that meets the needs of customers while also providing more flexible opportunities for our people.
• Technology is playing an even more crucial role in people’s lives, and, as a result, our purpose to enrich lives through technology has never been more important. Said differently, people are using technology to address their needs in ways they never contemplated before, and we play a vital role in bringing technology to life for both customers and our vendor partners.
These implications are extensive and interdependent, and we are, as quickly as possible, both implementing change today and assessing future changes across our entire business, including how we evolve our stores and labor model, and how we spend our investment dollars.‌
In summary, during fiscal 2021 we managed through the challenging environment in a way that allowed us to accelerate many aspects of our strategy to deliver on our purpose. Our teams showed perseverance and commitment through the year and collectively changed the way we do business at a pace we never imagined.
Results of Operations
In order to align our fiscal reporting periods and comply with statutory filing requirements, we consolidate the financial results of our Mexico operations on a one-month lag. Consistent with such consolidation, the financial and non-financial information presented in our MD&A relative to these operations is also presented on a lag. Our policy is to accelerate the recording of events occurring in the lag period that significantly affect our consolidated financial statements. Other than the restructuring charges incurred related to our decision to exit our operations in Mexico, no such events were identified for the periods presented.
Consolidated Results
Selected consolidated financial data was as follows ($ in millions, except per share amounts):
(1)Because retailers vary in how they record costs of operating their supply chain between cost of sales and SG&A, our gross profit rate and SG&A rate may not be comparable to other retailers' corresponding rates. For additional information regarding costs classified in cost of sales and SG&A, refer to Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In fiscal 2021 we generated $47.3 billion in revenue and our comparable sales increased 9.7%. The impact of the pandemic drove strong customer demand for products to help them work, learn, cook, entertain and connect in their homes. Our strong sales performance resulted in operating income rate expansion of 50 basis points compared to fiscal 2020.
Revenue, gross profit rate, SG&A rate and operating income rate changes in fiscal 2021 were primarily driven by our Domestic segment. For further discussion of each segment's rate changes, see Segment Performance Summary, below.
Segment Performance Summary
Domestic Segment
Selected financial data for the Domestic segment was as follows ($ in millions):
(1)Comparable online sales are included in the comparable sales calculation.
The increase in revenue in fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by the comparable sales growth across most of our product categories, partially offset by the loss of revenue from permanent store closures in the past year. Online revenue of $18.7 billion increased 144.4% on a comparable basis in fiscal 2021, primarily due to higher conversion rates and increased traffic as we saw a channel shift in our customer shopping behavior as a result of COVID-19.
Domestic segment stores open at the end of each of the last three fiscal years, excluding stores that were temporarily closed as a result of COVID-19 in fiscal 2021, were as follows:
We continuously monitor store performance. As we approach the expiration date of our leases, we evaluate various options for each location, including whether a store should remain open.
Domestic segment revenue mix percentages and comparable sales percentage changes by revenue category were as follows:
Continued strong demand in categories that help our customers work, learn, cook, entertain and connect from home contributed to our Domestic comparable sales changes across most of our categories. Notable comparable sales changes by revenue category were as follows:
• Computing and Mobile Phones: The 13.0% comparable sales growth was driven primarily by computing, tablets and networking, partially offset by declines in mobile phones.
• Consumer Electronics: The 0.2% comparable sales decline was driven primarily by headphones and digital imaging, partially offset by growth in home theater.
• Appliances: The 23.2% comparable sales growth was driven by both large and small appliances.
• Entertainment: The 17.9% comparable sales growth was driven primarily by gaming and virtual reality, partially offset by declines in movies.
• Services: The 1.4% comparable sales decline was primarily driven by our repair, delivery and installation services.
Our gross profit rate decreased in fiscal 2021 primarily due to higher supply chain costs as a result of the increased mix of online revenue and lower profit-sharing revenue from our private label and co-branded credit card arrangement, partially offset by a more favorable promotional environment.
Our SG&A decreased in fiscal 2021 primarily due to lower store payroll expense and other actions taken at the onset of the pandemic, such as the temporary suspension of the 401(k) employer match, reduced advertising and lower store overhead expenses. These decreases were partially offset by increases in variable costs associated with higher sales volume and a $40 million donation to the Best Buy Foundation. Lower store payroll expense was primarily due to fewer labor hours as a result of reduced store operating hours, lower store-generated revenue and efficiencies in our labor model, which was partially offset by increased wage rates. SG&A also includes $81 million of employee retention credits as a result of the Federal Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act.
Restructuring charges in fiscal 2021 related to termination benefits associated with actions taken to more broadly align our organizational structure in support of our strategy. Refer to Note 2, Restructuring, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Our operating income rate increased in fiscal 2021 primarily driven by increased leverage from higher sales volume on our fixed expenses, which resulted in favorable SG&A rates, partially offset by the decrease in gross profit rate and restructuring charges described above.
International Segment
Selected financial data for the International segment was as follows ($ in millions):
The increase in revenue in fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by comparable sales growth across most of our product categories, partially offset by the negative impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations related to our operations in Mexico and Canada, and lower revenue in Mexico as a result of our decision in the third quarter of fiscal 2021 to exit operations.
International segment stores open at the end of each of the last three fiscal years, excluding stores that were temporarily closed as a result of COVID-19 in fiscal 2021, were as follows:
International segment revenue mix percentages and comparable sales percentage changes by revenue category were as follows:
Similar to the Domestic segment, strong demand in categories that help our customers work, learn, cook, entertain and connect from home contributed to our International comparable sales changes across most of our categories. Notable comparable sales changes by revenue category were as follows:
• Computing and Mobile Phones: The 23.8% comparable sales growth was driven primarily by computing, tablets and networking, partially offset by declines in mobile phones.
• Consumer Electronics: The 0.3% comparable sales growth was driven primarily by home theater and health and fitness, partially offset by declines in smart home and digital imaging.
• Appliances: The 20.9% comparable sales growth was driven by both small and large appliances.
• Entertainment: The 52.1% comparable sales growth was driven primarily by gaming and virtual reality.
• Services: The 11.0% comparable sales decline was driven primarily by warranty and repair services.
• Other: The 9.4% comparable sales growth was driven primarily by baby products.
Our gross profit rate declined in fiscal 2021 primarily due to operations in Canada, which was largely driven by higher supply chain costs as a result of the increased mix of online revenue and a lower mix of higher margin services revenue. Gross profit also decreased $23 million as a result of inventory markdowns associated with our decision to exit our operations in Mexico.
Our SG&A decreased in fiscal 2021 primarily due to operations in Canada as a result of lower store payroll expense, partially offset by higher incentive compensation.
Restructuring charges in fiscal 2021 primarily related to asset impairments, currency translation adjustments and termination benefits associated with our decision to exit our operations in Mexico. Refer to Note 2, Restructuring, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Our operating income rate decreased in fiscal 2021 primarily driven by restructuring charges and the lower gross profit rate described above, partially offset by a favorable SG&A rate driven by increased leverage from higher sales volume on our fixed expenses.
Additional Consolidated Results
Other Income (Expense)
Our investment income and other decreased in fiscal 2021 primarily due to less favorable interest rates on our investments, partially offset by an increase in the fair value of a minority equity investment.
Interest expense decreased in fiscal 2021 primarily due to more favorable interest rates related to our interest rate swap contracts, partially offset by an increase in interest expense as a result of our short-term draw on our $1.25 billion five-year senior unsecured revolving credit facility. Refer to Note 8, Debt, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding our revolving credit facility.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense increased in fiscal 2021 primarily due to an increase in pre-tax earnings. Our effective tax rate increased in fiscal 2021 primarily due to an increase in losses for which tax benefits were not recognized, a decrease in the tax benefit from stock-based compensation and the impact of higher pre-tax earnings on discrete tax benefits, partially offset by an increase in the tax benefit from federal tax credits and the resolution of discrete tax matters.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Reconciliations of operating income, effective tax rate and diluted EPS (GAAP financial measures) to non-GAAP operating income, non-GAAP effective tax rate and non-GAAP diluted EPS (non-GAAP financial measures) were as follows ($ in millions, except per share amounts):
For additional information regarding the nature of charges discussed below, refer to Note 2, Restructuring; Note 3, Acquisitions; Note 4, Goodwill and Intangible Assets; Note 6, Derivative Instruments; and Note 11, Income Taxes, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(1)Represents inventory markdowns recorded within cost of sales associated with the decision to exit operations in Mexico.
(2)Represents a price-fixing litigation settlement received in relation to products purchased and sold in prior fiscal years.
(3)Represents charges associated with acquisitions, including: (1) the non-cash amortization of definite-lived intangible assets, including customer relationships, tradenames and developed technology; and (2) acquisition-related transaction costs primarily comprised of professional fees.
(4)Represents charges associated with actions taken to better align the company’s organizational structure with its strategic focus and the decision to exit operations in Mexico in fiscal 2021, charges and subsequent adjustments associated with U.S. retail operating model changes in fiscal 2020, and charges and subsequent adjustments primarily associated with the closure of Best Buy Mobile stand-alone stores in the U.S. in fiscal 2019.
(5)Represents adjustments resulting from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (“tax reform”) enacted into law in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2018, including amounts associated with a deemed repatriation tax and the revaluation of deferred tax assets and liabilities, as well as a one-time bonus for certain employees in response to future tax savings created by tax reform.
(6)Represents an increase in the fair value of a minority equity investment in fiscal 2021 and a gain on sale of investments in fiscal 2019.
(7)Represents the summation of the calculated income tax charge related to each non-GAAP non-income tax adjustment. The non-GAAP adjustments primarily relate to the U.S. and Mexico. As such, the income tax charge is calculated using the statutory tax rate of 24.5% for all U.S. non-GAAP items for all periods presented. There is no income tax charge for Mexico non-GAAP items, as there was no tax benefit recognized on these expenses in the calculation of GAAP income tax expense.
Our non-GAAP operating income rate increased in fiscal 2021 primarily driven by increased leverage from higher sales volume on our fixed expenses, which resulted in a favorable SG&A rate, partially offset by a decrease in gross profit rate.
Our non-GAAP effective tax rate increased in fiscal 2021 primarily due to a decrease in the tax benefit from stock-based compensation and the impact of higher pre-tax earnings on discrete tax benefits, partially offset by an increase in the tax benefit from federal tax credits and the resolution of discrete tax matters.
Our non-GAAP diluted EPS increased in fiscal 2021 primarily driven by increases in non-GAAP operating income and lower diluted weighted-average common shares outstanding from share repurchases.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We closely manage our liquidity and capital resources. Our liquidity requirements depend on key variables, including the level of investment required to support our business strategies, the performance of our business, capital expenditures, credit facilities, short-term borrowing arrangements and working capital management. Capital expenditures and share repurchases are a component of our cash flow and capital management strategy which, to a large extent, we can adjust in response to economic and other changes in our business environment. We have a disciplined approach to capital allocation, which focuses on investing in key priorities that support our strategy.
Cash and cash equivalents were as follows ($ in millions):
The increase in cash and cash equivalents in fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by the increase in operating cash flows and a reduction in share repurchases, which were temporarily suspended from March to November of fiscal 2021.
Cash Flows
Cash flows from total operations were as follows ($ in millions):
Operating Activities
The increase in cash provided by operating activities in fiscal 2021 was primarily due to higher inventory turnover and the timing of inventory purchases and payments to meet continued higher demand. The increase was also driven by the timing of payments related to accrued compensation and benefits and higher earnings.
Investing Activities
The decrease in cash used in investing activities in fiscal 2021 was primarily due to the absence of acquisitions.
Financing Activities
The decrease in cash used in financing activities in fiscal 2021 was primarily due to lower share repurchases, which were temporarily suspended from March to November of fiscal 2021.
Sources of Liquidity
Funds generated by operating activities, available cash and cash equivalents, our credit facilities and other debt arrangements are our most significant sources of liquidity. We believe our sources of liquidity will be sufficient to fund operations and anticipated capital expenditures, share repurchases, dividends and strategic initiatives, including business combinations. However, in the event our liquidity is insufficient, we may be required to limit our spending. There can be no assurance that we will continue to generate cash flows at or above current levels or that we will be able to maintain our ability to borrow under our existing credit facilities or obtain additional financing, if necessary, on favorable terms.
We have a $1.25 billion five-year senior unsecured revolving credit facility (the "Facility”) with a syndicate of banks. Refer to Note 8, Debt, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on the terms of the Facility. In light of the uncertainty surrounding the impact of COVID-19 and to maximize liquidity, we executed a short-term draw on the full amount of the Facility on March 19, 2020, which remained outstanding until July 27, 2020, when the amounts we had borrowed under the Facility were repaid in full. There were no borrowings outstanding under the Facility as of January 30, 2021, or February 1, 2020.
Our ability to continue to access the Facility is subject to our compliance with its terms and conditions, including financial covenants. The financial covenants require us to maintain certain financial ratios. As of January 30, 2021, we were in compliance with all financial covenants. If an event of default were to occur with respect to any of our other debt, it would likely constitute an event of default under the Facility as well.
Our credit ratings and outlook as of March 18, 2021, are summarized below. On February 26, 2021, Moody’s upgraded its rating to A3 and confirmed its outlook of Stable. Standard & Poor’s rating and outlook remained unchanged from the prior year.
Credit rating agencies review their ratings periodically, and, therefore, the credit rating assigned to us by each agency may be subject to revision at any time. Factors that can affect our credit ratings include changes in our operating performance, the economic environment, conditions in the retail and consumer electronics industries, our financial position and changes in our business strategy. If changes in our credit ratings were to occur, they could impact, among other things, interest costs for certain of our credit facilities, our future borrowing costs, access to capital markets, vendor financing terms and future new-store leasing costs.
Restricted Cash
Our liquidity is also affected by restricted cash balances that are primarily restricted to use for workers' compensation and general liability insurance claims. Restricted cash, which is included in Other current assets on our Consolidated Balance Sheets, was $131 million and $126 million as of January 30, 2021, and February 1, 2020, respectively.
Capital Expenditures
Our capital expenditures typically include investments in our information technology (including e-commerce), stores and distribution capabilities. Capital expenditures were as follows ($ in millions):
(1)Store-related projects are primarily comprised of store remodels and various merchandising projects.
(2)Total capital expenditures exclude non-cash capital expenditures of $32 million, $10 million and $53 million in fiscal 2021, fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, respectively. Non-cash capital expenditures are comprised of finance leases, as well as additions to property and equipment included in accounts payable.
Debt and Capital
As of January 30, 2021, we had $500 million of principal amount of notes due October 1, 2028 (“2028 Notes”) and $650 million of principal amount of notes due October 1, 2030 (“2030 Notes”). Upon issuance of our 2030 Notes, we cash settled the associated Treasury Rate Lock ("T-Lock") contracts entered into in fiscal 2021 to hedge the base interest rate variability on a portion of our then-expected refinancing of our maturing $650 million of principal amount of notes due March 15, 2021 (“2021 Notes”). The net proceeds from the 2030 Notes were used to replace our 2021 Notes that we retired in December 2020 by exercising our option to redeem the notes at par. Refer to Note 6, Derivative Instruments, and Note 8, Debt, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information about our T-Lock contracts and outstanding debt.
Share Repurchases and Dividends
We repurchase our common stock and pay dividends pursuant to programs approved by our Board. The payment of cash dividends is also subject to customary legal and contractual restrictions. Our long-term capital allocation strategy is to first fund operations and investments in growth and then return excess cash over time to shareholders through dividends and share repurchases while maintaining investment-grade credit metrics.
On February 23, 2019, the Board authorized a $3.0 billion share repurchase program. On February 16, 2021, the Board approved a new $5.0 billion share repurchase program, replacing the existing program which had $1.7 billion remaining available for repurchases as of January 30, 2021. There is no expiration date governing the period over which we can repurchase shares under this authorization. We temporarily suspended all share repurchases from March to November of fiscal 2021 to conserve liquidity in light of COVID-19-related uncertainties. Between the end of fiscal 2021 on January 30, 2021, and March 18, 2021, we repurchased an incremental 8.1 million shares of our common stock at a cost of $873 million. On February 25, 2021, we announced our plans to spend at least $2 billion on share repurchases in fiscal 2022.
Share repurchase and dividend activity were as follows ($ and shares in millions, except per share amounts):
Dividends declared and paid increased in fiscal 2021 primarily due to an increase in the regular quarterly cash dividend per share. On February 25, 2021, we announced the Board’s approval of a 27% increase in the regular quarterly dividend to $0.70 per share.
Other Financial Measures
Our current ratio, calculated as current assets divided by current liabilities, remained relatively unchanged at 1.2 as of January 30, 2021, compared to 1.1 as of February 1, 2020. Our debt to earnings ratio, calculated as total debt (including current portion) divided by net earnings, remained unchanged at 0.8 as of January 30, 2021, and February 1, 2020.
Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
We do not have outstanding off-balance-sheet arrangements. Contractual obligations as of January 30, 2021, were as follows ($ in millions):
For additional information regarding the nature of contractual obligations discussed below, refer to Note 6, Derivative Instruments; Note 7, Leases; Note 8, Debt; and Note 13, Contingencies and Commitments, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(1)Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable, are legally binding and specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. Purchase obligations do not include agreements that are cancelable without penalty. Additionally, although they do not contain legally binding purchase commitments, we included open purchase orders in the table above. Substantially all open purchase orders are fulfilled within 30 days.
(2)Lease obligations exclude $56 million of legally binding fixed costs for leases signed but not yet commenced.
(3)Operating lease obligations exclude payments to landlords covering real estate taxes and common area maintenance. These charges, if included, would increase total operating lease obligations by $0.7 billion as of January 30, 2021.
(4)Represents principal amounts only and excludes interest rate swap valuation adjustments related to our long-term debt obligations.
(5)Interest payments related to our 2028 Notes and 2030 Notes include the variable interest rate payments included in our interest rate swaps.
Additionally, we have $1.25 billion in undrawn capacity on our Facility as of January 30, 2021, which if drawn upon, would be included as short-term debt on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make assumptions and estimates about future events and apply judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and the related disclosures. We base our assumptions, estimates and judgments on historical experience, current trends and other factors believed to be relevant at the time our consolidated financial statements are prepared. Because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such differences could be material.
Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Other than our adoption of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-02, Leases, in the first quarter of fiscal 2020, and our adoption of ASU 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, in the first quarter of fiscal 2019, we have not made any material changes to our accounting policies or methodologies during the past three fiscal years. We believe that the following accounting estimates are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results. These estimates require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments and generally incorporate significant uncertainty.
Vendor Allowances
Description
We receive funds from our merchandise vendors through a variety of programs and arrangements for product advertising and product placement, primarily in the form of allowances based on purchases or sales volumes. We recognize allowances based on purchases and sales as a reduction of cost of sales when the associated inventory is sold. Allowances for advertising and placement are recognized as a reduction of cost of sales ratably over the corresponding performance period. Funds that are determined to be a reimbursement of specific, incremental and identifiable costs incurred to sell a vendor's products are recorded as an offset to the related expense when incurred.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate
Due to the quantity and diverse nature of our vendor agreements, estimates are made to determine the amount of funding to be recognized in earnings or deferred as an offset to inventory. These estimates require a detailed analysis of complex factors, including (1) proper classification of the type of funding received; and (2) the methodology to estimate the portion of purchases-based funding that should be recognized in cost of sales in each period, which considers factors such as inventory turn by product category and actual sell-through of inventory.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions
A 10% change in our vendor funding deferral as of January 30, 2021, would have affected net earnings by approximately $33 million in fiscal 2021. The overall level of deferral has remained relatively stable over the last three years.
Goodwill
Description
Goodwill is not amortized but is evaluated for impairment annually in the fiscal fourth quarter or whenever events or circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. The impairment test involves a comparison of the fair value of each reporting unit with its carrying value. Fair value reflects the price a potential market participant would be willing to pay for the reporting unit in an arms-length transaction.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate
Determining fair value of a reporting unit is complex and typically requires analysis of discounted cash flows and other market information, such as trading multiples and other observable metrics. Cash flow analysis requires judgment regarding many factors, such as revenue growth rates, expenses and capital expenditures. Market information requires judgmental selection of relevant market comparables. We have goodwill in two reporting units - Best Buy Domestic and Best Buy Health - with carrying values of $444 million and $542 million, respectively, as of January 30, 2021. There is greater uncertainty surrounding the key assumptions used to estimate the fair value of the Best Buy Health reporting unit and therefore a greater degree of complexity and judgment involved in our impairment analysis. Our valuation of Best Buy Health incorporates relatively higher levels of revenue growth than our valuation of Best Buy Domestic and, consequently, estimation of factors such as new customer growth, customer retention rates, capital expenditure requirements, advertising and cost to serve expenses and weighted-average cost of capital rates that incorporate significant judgment.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions
A 10% change in the fair value of the Best Buy Health reporting unit as of January 30, 2021, would not have had a material effect on our net earnings in fiscal 2021. Since acquisition, our estimate of the fair value of Best Buy Health has remained relatively stable.
Inventory Markdown
Description
Our merchandise inventories were $5.6 billion as of January 30, 2021. We value our inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value through the establishment of inventory markdown adjustments. Markdown adjustments reflect the excess of cost over the net recovery we expect to realize from the ultimate sale or other disposal of inventory and establish a new cost basis. No adjustment is recorded for inventory that we are able to return to our vendors for full credit.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate
Markdown adjustments involve uncertainty because the calculations require management to make assumptions and to apply judgment about the expected revenue and incremental costs we will generate for current inventory. Such estimates include the evaluation of historical recovery rates, as well as factors such as product type and condition, forecasted consumer demand, product lifecycles, promotional environment, vendor return rights and the expected sales channel of ultimate disposition. We also apply judgment in the assumptions about other components of net realizable value, such as vendor allowances and selling costs.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions
A 10% change in our markdown adjustment as of January 30, 2021, would have affected net earnings by approximately $13 million in fiscal 2021. The level of markdown adjustments has remained relatively stable over the last three fiscal years.
Tax Contingencies
Description
Our income tax returns are periodically audited by U.S. federal, state and local and foreign taxing authorities. Taxing authorities audit our tax filing positions, including the timing and amount of income and deductions and the allocation of income among various tax jurisdictions. At any one time, multiple tax years are subject to audit by the various taxing authorities. In evaluating the exposures associated with our various tax filing positions, we may record a liability for such exposures. A number of years may elapse before a particular matter, for which we have established a liability, is audited and fully resolved or clarified. We adjust our liability for unrecognized tax benefits and income tax provisions in the period in which an uncertain tax position is effectively settled, the statute of limitations expires for the relevant taxing authority to examine the tax position or when more information becomes available. Our effective income tax rate is also affected by changes in tax law, the tax jurisdiction of new stores or business ventures, the level of earnings and the results of tax audits.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate
Our liability for unrecognized tax benefits contains uncertainties because management is required to make assumptions and apply judgment to estimate the exposures associated with our various tax filing positions. Such assumptions can include complex and uncertain external factors, such as changes in tax law, interpretations of tax law and the timing of such changes, and uncertain internal factors such as taxable earnings by jurisdiction, the magnitude and timing of certain transactions and capital spending.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions
Although we believe that the judgments and estimates discussed herein are reasonable, actual results could differ, and we may be exposed to losses or gains that could be material. To the extent we prevail in matters for which a liability has been established or are required to pay amounts in excess of our established liability, our effective income tax rate in a given financial statement period could be materially affected. An unfavorable tax settlement generally would require use of our cash and may result in an increase in our effective income tax rate in the period of resolution. A favorable tax settlement may reduce our effective income tax rate in the period of resolution.
Service Revenue
Description
We sell support plans as part of a bundled service offer which may include items such as technical support, price discounts on future purchases, anti-virus software and one-time service repairs. We allocate the transaction price to all performance obligations identified in the contract based on their relative fair value. For technical support services, we typically recognize revenue over time on a usage basis, an input method of measuring progress over the related contract term. This method involves the estimation of expected usage patterns, primarily derived from historical information.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate
There is judgment in (1) measuring the relative standalone selling price for bundled performance obligations, and (2) assessing the appropriate recognition and methodology for each performance obligation, and for those based on usage, estimating the expected pattern of consumption across a large portfolio of customers. When insufficient reliable and relevant history is available to estimate usage, we generally recognize revenue ratably over the life of the contract until such history has accumulated.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions
A 10% change in the amount of services membership deferred revenue as of January 30, 2021, would have affected net earnings by approximately $13 million in fiscal 2021. The amount of services membership deferred revenue has remained relatively stable over the last three fiscal years.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of new applicable accounting pronouncements, see Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.