Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Certain statements in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of Brunswick Corporation are forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements are based on current expectations, estimates, and projections about Brunswick’s business and by their nature address matters that are, to different degrees, uncertain. Actual results may differ materially from expectations and projections as of the date of this filing due to various risks and uncertainties. For additional information regarding forward-looking statements, refer to Forward-Looking Statements above.
Certain statements in Management’s Discussion and Analysis are based on non-GAAP financial measures. GAAP refers to generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. A “non-GAAP financial measure” is a numerical measure of a registrant’s historical or future financial performance, financial position or cash flows that excludes amounts, or is subject to adjustments that have the effect of excluding amounts, that are included in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP in the consolidated statements of operations, balance sheets or statements of cash flows of the issuer; or includes amounts, or is subject to adjustments that have the effect of including amounts, that are excluded from the most directly comparable measure so calculated and presented. For example, the discussion of our cash flows includes an analysis of free cash flows and total liquidity; the discussion of our net sales include a discussion of net sales on a constant currency basis; the discussion of our earnings includes a presentation of operating earnings and operating margin excluding restructuring, exit and impairment charges, purchase accounting amortization, acquisition-related costs and other applicable charges; and diluted earnings per common share, as adjusted. Non-GAAP financial measures do not include operating and statistical measures.
We include non-GAAP financial measures in Management’s Discussion and Analysis, as management believes that these measures and the information they provide are useful to investors because they permit investors to view our performance using the same tools that management uses to better evaluate our ongoing business performance. In order to better align our reported results with the internal metrics used by management to evaluate business performance as well as to provide better comparisons to prior periods and peer data, non-GAAP measures exclude the impact of purchase accounting amortization related to the Power Products and Freedom Boat Club acquisitions.
Brunswick does not provide forward-looking guidance for certain financial measures on a GAAP basis because it is unable to predict certain items contained in the GAAP measures without unreasonable efforts. These items may include restructuring, exit and impairment costs, special tax items, acquisition-related costs, and certain other unusual adjustments.
Overview and Outlook
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization announced that infections of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) had become a world-wide pandemic. National, state and local authorities have enforced social distancing and imposed quarantine and isolation measures on large portions of the population, including mandatory business closures. These measures have had and continue to have serious adverse impacts on domestic and foreign economies of uncertain severity and duration.
On March 23, 2020, we temporarily suspended manufacturing operations at most engine and boat production facilities to ensure the health and safety of affected employees and to balance inventory levels with anticipated reductions in near-term demand. On April 13, 2020, we resumed partial operations and limited production activities in certain manufacturing facilities and, in the ensuing weeks, continued to open additional manufacturing facilities.
Our distribution business operated throughout the pandemic and the dealer network continued to sell products, enabling boaters to get out on the water. Approximately half of the dealer network was closed in some capacity in April, but the network was fully operational by mid-May. The pandemic also affected Freedom Boat Club, as many of its locations were closed in April due to local stay-at-home restrictions, particularly in Florida. However, once doors reopened, several locations had their busiest weekends in history with strong membership increases across the network.
Production ramp-up activities became a primary focus in the second half of the year, as we experienced an unprecedented surge in retail demand as a consequence of the need for social distancing friendly recreation. This surging retail demand environment resulted in our lowest pipeline inventory levels in over twenty years, at 19 weeks on hand as of the end of the year.
As of February 12, 2021, all global manufacturing and distribution facilities are online with a continued focus on rigorously applying, evolving and automating COVID-19 mitigation procedures, while continuing to ramp-up global production
to meet unprecedented market demand. We will continue to actively monitor the impact of COVID-19 and may take further actions that alter business operations as may be required by government authorities, or that are determined to be in the best interest of our employees, customers, dealers, suppliers and stakeholders. The full extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our business, operations and financial results will depend on evolving factors that we cannot accurately predict. Refer to Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors for further information.
Change in Reportable Segments
Effective January 1, 2020, we changed our management reporting and updated our reportable segments to Propulsion, Parts and Accessories and Boat (inclusive of Business Acceleration) to align with our strategy. Refer to Note 6 - Segment Information in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
CARES Act
On March 27, 2020, the President of the United States signed the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act). The tax provisions include changes to the net operating loss rules, a temporary increase to the limitation on deductible business interest expense, and accelerated depreciation on qualified improvement property. In addition, the CARES Act has provisions designed to encourage eligible employers to keep employees on payroll, despite experiencing economic hardship related to COVID-19, with an employee retention tax credit (Employee Retention Credit). At this time, we do not expect the CARES Act to have a material impact on our results of operations.
Under the CARES Act, we deferred approximately $4 million of U.S. income tax payments from the first and second quarters to the third quarter of 2020 and approximately $2.7 million of non-U.S. tax payments from the first, second and third quarters of 2020 to the fourth quarter of 2020 and the first quarter of 2021. In addition, we deferred the payment of $22 million of payroll taxes normally due between March 27, 2020 and December 31, 2020. These payroll taxes are payable in two equal installments, due in the fourth quarters of 2021 and 2022, and will be paid no later than their prescribed due dates.
The Employee Retention Credit is a payroll tax credit against certain employment taxes equal to 50 percent of the qualified wages and healthcare costs an eligible employer incurs after March 12, 2020, and before January 1, 2021. We calculated an employee retention credit of $6.5 million across all segments which was recognized in full during 2020. These costs were recognized in Cost of sales and Selling, general and administrative expense.
Discontinued Operations
On June 27, 2019, we completed the sale of our Fitness business. This business, which was previously reported within our Fitness segment, is being reported as discontinued operations for all periods presented.
Our results for all periods presented, as discussed in Management's Discussion and Analysis, are presented on a continuing operations basis, unless otherwise noted. Refer to Note 3 - Discontinued Operations in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Presentation of Sea Ray Results
In December 2017, the Board of Directors authorized the exit of our Sea Ray business, including the Meridian brand, and as a result, we reclassified the assets and liabilities as held for sale on the Consolidated Balance Sheets and presented the results of the business as discontinued operations on the Consolidated Statements of Operations in the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2017. In June 2018, the Board of Directors authorized the end of the sale process for our Sea Ray business and as a result, we again reported the results of the business within continuing operations beginning in the second quarter of 2018. As part of this action, we decided to restructure the businesses, including discontinuing Sea Ray Sport Yacht & Yachts models and winding down yacht production, while reinventing Sea Ray Sport Boat and Sport Cruiser operations. Refer to the Form 8-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) on July 19, 2018 for further information.
We largely completed the wind down of our Sea Ray Sport Yacht & Yachts operations during 2018. Non-GAAP figures exclude the results of Sport Yacht & Yachts operations in 2018, and certain amounts in 2019 related to changes in estimated liabilities.
Acquisition of Power Products
On August 9, 2018, we completed our acquisition of the Global Marine Business of Power Products Holdings, LLC (Power Products) for $909.6 million in cash, on a cash-free, debt-free basis. For further discussion regarding the acquisition, refer to Note 5 - Acquisitions in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Overview
Our 2020 results represent our eleventh consecutive year of growth, resulting from strong operating performance in a healthy marine market. We sought to achieve the following financial objectives in 2020:
•Deliver revenue growth.
•Increase earnings before income taxes, as well as deliver improvements in operating margin percentage, excluding non-recurring charges.
•Continue to generate strong free cash flow and execute our capital strategy.
Achievements against our financial objectives in 2020 were as follows:
Deliver revenue growth:
Ended the year with a 6% increase in net sales when compared with 2019 due to the following:
•The Propulsion segment delivered top-line growth, increasing market share, leveraging what we believe is the strongest product lineup in the industry and accelerating penetration in saltwater, repower, and international commercial markets.
•The Parts & Accessories (P&A) segment delivered strong top-line growth as a result of increased boating participation, which drove strong aftermarket sales, together with high demand for our full range of OEM systems and services, as boat production increased during the second-half of the year across the industry.
•The Boat segment contributed to the revenue growth over the second half of 2020 as U.S. marine retail demand continued to surge through year-end. The surge in retail demand resulted in historically-low pipeline inventory levels, with 40% percent fewer boats in dealer inventory at the end of 2020 versus the end of 2019. Freedom Boat Club also exceeded expectations during 2020 by adding over 40 new locations and almost 10,000 new memberships.
•International net sales increased 9 percent and 10 percent in 2020 on a GAAP and constant currency basis, respectively, primarily driven by Asia-Pacific, Europe, and Rest-of-World regions, partially offset by declines in Canada.
Increase earnings before income taxes, as well as deliver improvements in operating margin percentage, excluding non-recurring charges:
•Reported earnings before income taxes were $472.7 million in 2020 compared with earnings before income taxes of $110.7 million in 2019; adjusted earnings before income taxes were $511.2 million in 2020 versus $465.2 million in 2019.
•Gross margin percentage improved 60 basis points when compared with 2019 reflecting the impact of higher sales across all segments during the second half of the year, as well as favorable changes in sales mix, partially offset by the impact of production suspensions and stay-at-home restrictions earlier in the year.
•Operating margin improved by 90 basis points when compared with 2019 primarily due to the factors affecting gross margin percentage discussed above. Operating margin, as adjusted, was up 40 basis points compared with 2019.
Continue to generate strong free cash flow and execute against our capital strategy:
•Generated free cash flow of $629.3 million in 2020 enabling us to execute our capital strategy as follows:
•Deployed $182 million of capital in our businesses for product and capacity initiatives;
•Retired $155 million of long term debt;
•Completed approximately $118 million of share repurchases; and
•Increased our dividend for the 8th consecutive year.
•Maintained investment grade credit rating through the COVID-related recession
•Ended the year with $587.0 million of cash and marketable securities
Net earnings from continuing operations increased to $374.7 million in 2020 from $30.4 million in 2019. The 2019 results included an after-tax, non-cash charge of $310.3 million related to pension settlement costs as well as a net tax benefit of $17.2 million primarily related to a favorable rate change impact on state deferred tax assets as well as a reassessment of the state valuation allowance.
Outlook for 2021
While we remain very cognizant of macroeconomic headwinds and other related uncertainties, our continued strong performance in a robust marine retail environment has created improved visibility into our substantial growth opportunities for 2021. The progression of the pandemic remains very dynamic, and the resulting impact on our dealers, OEM partners, suppliers, and the macro-economy is difficult to fully predict. However, given our improved clarity on our ability to drive growth, we are providing the following guidance for 2021. We anticipate:
•U.S. marine industry retail unit demand up low-to-mid single digit percent for the year versus 2020;
•Net Sales between $4.75 and $5.0 billion;
•Adjusted operating margins to grow between 60 and 100 basis points, with operating expenses as a percent of sales to be lower than in 2020;
•Adjusted diluted EPS in the range of $6.00 to $6.40; and
•Free cash flow generation to be in excess of $300 million.
For the Propulsion segment, we anticipate net sales growth for the year to be in the high-single to low double-digit percent range, with operating margins up more than 20 basis points versus 2020. We expect earnings growth to include margin expansion associated with new product introductions, increased factory absorption from elevated production levels and currency tailwinds, partially offset by regional sales mix, increased tariffs due to volume increases, and some increase in spending on products, technology, and other strategic priorities.
For the Parts & Accessories segment, we anticipate organic net sales growth in the mid-single digit percent range for 2021. We expect margins to grow slightly in the year. This area will continue to be the primary focus of our M&A activity as we look for opportunities to further build out our technology and systems portfolio.
The Boat segment will be focused on improving operational performance, fulfilling demand and refilling pipelines in a very robust retail environment, which should lead to top line growth of more than 30 percent and strong improvement in operating earnings and margins. With three-quarters of our entire calendar-year 2021 wholesale orders already received, and with several brands largely sold-out into 2022, we anticipate consistent production throughout the year, which should result in cost efficiencies. We anticipate exiting 2021 with operating margins approaching our double-digit target for the segment.
We are planning for the effective tax rate in 2021 to be approximately 23 percent based on existing tax law, which does not reflect any potential changes in statutory tax rates.
These 2021 expectations assume no major additional pandemic-related business continuity issues. In addition, the level of recovery of the global economy, continued stable channel operations, the ability to moderate labor and input costs, and the absence of significant additional disruption to our global operations and supply chain, will be important factors in determining whether we ultimately perform in line with our targets.
Matters Affecting Comparability
Certain events occurred during 2020, 2019 and 2018 that we believe affect the comparability of the results of operations. The tables below summarize the impact of changes in currency exchange rates, the impact of recent acquisitions and the impact of Sport Yacht & Yachts operations on our net sales:
Sport Yacht & Yachts Wind-down. The results of Sport Yacht & Yachts operations are summarized in the table below.
(A) During 2019, results included $(0.7) million of charges within Net sales related to estimated retail sales incentives to support the sale of Sport Yacht & Yachts in the dealer pipeline. During 2018, results included $16.0 million of charges within Net sales to support the sale of Sport Yacht & Yachts in the dealer pipeline at that time.
Acquisitions. We completed acquisitions during 2019 and 2018 that affect the comparability of net sales. The impacts on consolidated and segment sales comparisons are reflected above. Refer to Note 5 - Acquisitions in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Changes in foreign currency rates. Percentage changes in net sales expressed in constant currency reflect the impact that changes in currency exchange rates had on comparisons of net sales. To determine this information, net sales transacted in currencies other than U.S. dollars have been translated to U.S. dollars using the average exchange rates that were in effect during the comparative period. The percentage change in net sales expressed on a constant currency basis better reflects the changes in the underlying business trends, excluding the impact of translation arising from foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations. Approximately 24 percent of our annual net sales are transacted in a currency other than the U.S. dollar. Our most material exposures include sales in Euros, Canadian dollars, Chinese yuan, and Australian dollars.
Additionally, operating earnings comparisons were negatively affected by foreign exchange rates by approximately $10 million in 2020 when compared with 2019, and were negatively affected by foreign exchange rates by approximately $15 million in 2019 when compared with 2018. These estimates include the impact of translation on all sales and costs transacted in a currency other than the U.S. dollar and the impact of hedging activities.
Restructuring, exit and impairment charges. We recorded restructuring, exit and impairment charges during 2020, 2019 and 2018. The following table summarizes these charges by cash charges and non-cash charges.
(A) Restructuring, exit and impairment activities within the Boat segment during 2018 primarily related to the wind-down of Sport Yacht & Yachts operations.
See Note 4 - Restructuring, Exit and Impairment Activities in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further details on charges and initiatives.
Purchase accounting amortization. As part of purchase accounting for the Freedom Boat Club and Power Products acquisitions, we recognized definite-lived intangible assets as well as a fair value adjustment to inventory for Power Products, both of which are amortized over their useful lives. During 2020, 2019 and 2018, we recorded $30.1 million, $29.5 million and $12.0 million respectively, of purchase accounting amortization within Selling, general and administrative expense. During 2018, we also recorded $9.2 million of purchase accounting amortization within Cost of sales.
Acquisition and IT related costs.. In connection with the Freedom Boat Club and Power Products acquisitions in 2019 and 2018, respectively, we recorded $1.7 million, $2.6 million and $13.8 million, of acquisition costs in Selling, general and administrative expense (SG&A), during 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
In addition, during 2020 and 2019, we recorded $3.7 million and $2.2 million, respectively, of IT transformation costs in SG&A within Corporate/Other resulting from the Fitness separation.
Pension settlement charges. During 2019, we fully exited our remaining defined benefit pension plans and as a result, we recorded a pretax pension settlement benefit of $1.1 million and pretax pension settlement charge of $292.8 million, in 2020 and 2019, respectively. There were no pension settlement charges in 2018. See Note 17 - Postretirement Benefits in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further details.
Tax items. We recognized an income tax provision of $98.0 million and $80.3 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The income tax provision in 2019 included a net charge of $17.5 million related to the settlement of our qualified defined benefit plans. The tax impact of this action consisted of a tax benefit of $73.9 million from the pension settlement charge, which was netted against a tax charge of $91.4 million resulting from the release of disproportionate tax effects in Accumulated other comprehensive income. Additionally, the income tax provision for 2019 included a net benefit of $17.2 million primarily related to favorable rate change impacts on state deferred tax assets as well as a reassessment of the state valuation allowance. The 2018 income tax provision of $57.3 million included a net benefit of $4.8 million primarily related to 2017 U.S. tax reform updates.
See Note 12 - Income Taxes in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further details.
Results of Operations
Consolidated
The following table sets forth certain amounts, ratios and relationships calculated from the Consolidated Statements of Operations for 2020, 2019 and 2018:
NM = not meaningful
bpts = basis points
(A)Gross margin is defined as Net sales less Cost of sales as presented in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
The following is a summary of Adjusted operating earnings and Adjusted diluted earnings per common share from continuing operations:
2020 vs. 2019
Net sales increased 5.8 percent during 2020 when compared with 2019. Refer to the Propulsion, Parts & Accessories, and Boat segments discussions for further details on the drivers of net sales changes.
Gross margin percentage increased 60 basis points in 2020 when compared with 2019, reflecting impacts of higher sales partially offset by the impacts of production suspensions and stay-at-home restrictions earlier in the year.
SG&A increased during 2020 and includes purchase accounting amortization and acquisition and IT transformation-related costs, as applicable. Excluding those items, SG&A as a percentage of sales was relatively consistent in 2020 compared with 2019. Research and development expense increased in 2020 versus 2019, but remained consistent as a percentage of Net Sales.
During 2020, we recorded restructuring, exit and impairment charges of $4.1 million compared with $18.8 million in 2019. See Note 4 - Restructuring, Exit and Impairment Activities in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further details.
We recognized equity earnings of $4.5 million and $7.3 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, which were mainly related to our marine and technology-related joint ventures.
In 2019, we fully exited our remaining defined benefit pension plans and as a result, recorded a $1.1 million benefit in 2020, associated with a final settlement adjustment. In 2019, we recorded $292.8 million of charges related to these pension settlement actions. Refer to Note 17 - Postretirement Benefits in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
We recognized $(6.1) million and $(2.1) million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, in Other expense, net. Other expense, net primarily includes other postretirement benefit costs and remeasurement gains and losses resulting from changes in foreign currency rates.
Net interest expense decreased in 2020 compared with 2019 due to a reduction in average daily debt outstanding. Refer to Note 16 - Debt in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
We recognized an income tax provision of $98.0 million and $80.3 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The income tax provision in 2019 included a net charge of $17.5 million related to the settlement of our qualified defined benefit plans. The impact of this action consisted of a tax benefit of $73.9 million from the pension settlement charge, which was netted against a tax charge of $91.4 million resulting from the release of disproportionate tax effects in Accumulated other comprehensive income. Additionally, the income tax provision for 2019 included a net benefit of $17.2 million, primarily related favorable rate change impacts on state deferred tax assets as well as a reassessment of the state valuation allowance.
The effective tax rate, which is calculated as the income tax provision as a percentage of earnings before income taxes, was 20.7 percent and 72.6 percent for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
See Note 12 - Income Taxes in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further details on the impacts of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act as well as a reconciliation of our effective tax rate and statutory Federal income tax rate.
Due to the factors described in the preceding paragraphs, operating earnings, net earnings from continuing operations and diluted earnings per common share from continuing operations increased during 2020. Diluted earnings per common share from continuing operations benefited from common stock repurchases in both years.
2019 vs. 2018
Net sales decreased slightly during 2019 when compared with 2018. Refer to the Propulsion, Parts & Accessories, and Boat segments discussions for further details on the drivers of net sales changes.
Gross margin percentage increased, reflecting benefits from the absence of the Sport Yacht & Yachts operations in 2019, which had a negative gross margin impact in 2018, as well as improvements in the Propulsion and Parts & Accessories segment including benefits from the Power Products acquisition as well as favorable changes in sales mix. These positive factors exceeded the impact of lower sales, tariffs and unfavorable changes in foreign exchange rates. Additionally, the gross margin percentage reflected favorable comparisons versus the prior year due to unfavorable plant efficiencies associated with production ramp-up for new products and warehouse management integration in the first half of 2018.
Selling, general and administrative expense (SG&A) decreased and included purchase accounting amortization, acquisition-related costs, and the impacts of Sport Yacht & Yachts operations. Excluding these items, operating expenses were relatively flat on a percentage of net sales basis as lower variable compensation expense and benefits from cost reduction programs were offset by a full year of Power Products results and the acquisition of Freedom Boat Club. Research and development expense was relatively consistent in 2019 versus 2018, reflecting continued investment in new products across all segments.
During 2019, we recorded restructuring, exit and impairment charges of $18.8 million compared with $54.8 million in 2018. See Note 4 - Restructuring, Exit and Impairment Activities in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further details.
We recognized equity earnings of $7.3 million and $7.7 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively, which were mainly related to our marine joint ventures. Equity earnings in 2018 included a $2.3 million gain on the sale of an equity investment as discussed in Note 9 - Investments in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
In 2019, we recorded $292.8 million of charges related to pension settlement actions as discussed in Note 17 - Postretirement Benefits in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. There were no pension settlement actions in 2018.
We recognized $(2.1) million and $(4.3) million in 2019 and 2018, respectively, in Other expense, net. Other expense, net primarily includes pension and other postretirement benefit costs, as well as remeasurement gains and losses resulting from changes in foreign currency rates.
Net interest expense increased $29.6 million to $72.7 million in 2019 compared with 2018 primarily due to debt activity as discussed in Note 16 - Debt in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Transaction financing charges of $5.1 million in 2018 related to the 364-Day Senior Unsecured Bridge Facility which was secured in connection with the Power Products acquisition.
Income tax provision for 2019 was $80.3 million and included a net charge of $17.5 million related to the settlement of our qualified defined benefit plans. The tax impact of this action consisted of a tax benefit of $73.9 million from the pension settlement charge, which was netted against a tax charge of $91.4 million resulting from the release of disproportionate tax effects in Accumulated other comprehensive income. Additionally, the income tax provision for 2019 included a net benefit of $17.2 million, primarily related to favorable rate change impacts on state deferred tax assets as well as a reassessment of the state valuation allowance. The 2018 results reflect an income tax provision of $57.3 million which included a net benefit of $4.8 million primarily related to 2017 U.S. tax reform updates. The effective tax rate for 2019 and 2018 was 72.6 percent and 18.5 percent, respectively.
Our effective tax rate also reflects the benefit of having earnings from foreign entities that are in jurisdictions that have lower statutory tax rates than the U.S. with the most significant impact related to China and Poland, which have applicable statutory tax rates of 15 percent and 19 percent, respectively.
See Note 12 - Income Taxes in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further details on the impacts of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act as well as a reconciliation of our effective tax rate and statutory Federal income tax rate.
Due to the factors described in the preceding paragraphs, operating earnings increased, while net earnings from continuing operations and diluted earnings per common share from continuing operations decreased during 2019. Diluted earnings per common share from continuing operations benefited from common stock repurchases in both years.
Segments
We have three reportable segments: Propulsion, Parts & Accessories, and Boat. Refer to Note 6 - Segment Information in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for details on the segment operations.
Propulsion Segment
The following table sets forth the Propulsion segment results for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
bpts = basis points
2020 vs. 2019
The Propulsion segment net sales increased $185.5 million or 11.0 percent in 2020 versus the prior year as a result of strong demand, especially in the higher horsepower outboard engine categories and related controls, rigging and propeller business as original equipment manufacturer (OEM) customers continued to ramp-up production during the year, and increased capacity enabled elevated sales to dealer and international channels as well as significant U.S. and international market share gains. These sales increases were partially offset by production disruptions at Mercury and its OEM engine customers in the first half of the year due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
International sales were 36 percent of the Propulsion segment's net sales in 2020. International sales increased 24 percent on a GAAP basis and 26 percent on a constant currency basis from the prior year, primarily due to increases in Asia-Pacific, particularly in higher horsepower engines used for commercial purposes.
The Propulsion segment operating earnings for the year increased $45.2 million or 18.8% in 2020 versus the prior year as a result of increased sales volumes and favorable changes in sales mix, partially offset by unfavorable absorption resulting from product disruptions in the first half of the year, higher variable compensation costs, and increased investment in new product development and technology.
2019 vs. 2018
The Propulsion segment net sales decreased $66.4 million or 3.8 percent in 2019 versus the prior year, resulting from lower sales of outboard engines 150 horsepower and below and sterndrive engines, partially offset by robust demand for higher horsepower engines, particularly in 175 to 300 horsepower categories introduced in 2018 and 400 and 450 horsepower engines released in 2019.
International net sales were 32 percent of the Propulsion segment's net sales in 2019. International sales increased 2 percent on a GAAP basis and 6 percent on a constant currency basis from the prior year, primarily driven by increases in Europe, Asia-Pacific and Rest-of-World regions, partially offset by declines in Canada.
The Propulsion segment operating earnings for the year decreased $3.5 million or 1.4 percent in 2019 versus the prior year as a result of volume declines, the impact of tariffs, as well as unfavorable changes in foreign exchange rates, partially offset by favorable changes in sales mix described above and cost control measures.
Parts & Accessories Segment
The following table sets forth the Parts & Accessories (P&A) segment results for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
NM = not meaningful
bpts = basis points
2020 vs. 2019
The P&A segment net sales increased by $128.7 million or 9.3 percent in 2020 versus the prior year due to strong sales growth across all product categories. 2020 results were bolstered by healthy boat usage as a consequence of the need for social
distancing friendly recreation and by favorable weather conditions in the U.S. throughout the year, especially compared with 2019. These sales increases were partially offset by stay-at-home restrictions resulting from the pandemic, which disrupted dealer, retail, and OEM operations in many locations in the first half of the year.
International sales were 28 percent of the P&A segment's net sales in 2020. International sales increased 4 percent year over year on both a GAAP and a constant currency basis. The increase in net sales was driven by Asia-Pacific and Europe, partially offset by Latin America.
The P&A segments operating earnings were $275.4 million in 2020, an increase of 16.0 percent mainly due to the increase in net sales as well as favorable product mix, partially offset by cost reduction actions.
2019 vs. 2018
The P&A segment net sales increased $145.8 million or 11.8 percent in 2019 versus the prior year, due to benefits from the Power Products acquisition, which had an accretive impact of 13 percent to the segment's revenue growth rate. International net sales were 29 percent of the segment's net sales in 2019. International sales increased 13 percent and 18 percent versus the prior year on a GAAP basis as well as on a constant currency basis, respectively. The increase in net sales was driven by Europe, Asia-Pacific and Rest-of-World regions, partially offset by declines in Latin America and Canada.
The P&A segment operating earnings were $237.5 million in 2019, an increase of 26.3 percent, mainly as a result of benefits from the Power Products acquisition as well as favorable cost control measures. Partially offsetting these positive factors were the impact of tariffs, unfavorable changes in foreign exchange rates and volume declines.
Boat Segment
The following table sets forth Boat segment results for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
NM = not meaningful
bpts = basis points
2020 vs. 2019
The Boat segment net sales decreased $84.0 million or 6.3 percent versus 2019 resulting from lower wholesale volume due to the temporary suspension of manufacturing in most plants and the associated ramp-up of activities earlier in the year resulting from the pandemic. This decline was partially offset by increases in the second half of the year resulting from significantly higher wholesale volume to dealers to meet increased customer demand at the retail level and to begin refilling pipeline inventories. Freedom Boat Club, which represents approximately 2.5 percent of segment sales, also achieved higher net sales due to an increase in new memberships and new franchisee locations.
International sales were 23 percent of the Boat segment's net sales in 2020, and decreased 10 percent on both a GAAP basis and constant currency basis, reflecting declines in most regions, which was partially offset by increases in Europe.
The Boat segment operating earnings were $70.2 million in 2020, a decrease of 7.9 percent compared with 2019, due to lower net sales along with unfavorable impact of absorption resulting from production disruptions, which were partially offset by benefits from cost reduction measures.
2019 vs. 2018
The Boat segment net sales decreased $137.0 million versus 2018, reflecting planned pipeline reductions in the aluminum freshwater and saltwater fishing boat categories and the exit of Sport Yacht & Yachts operations. Excluding the impact of Sport Yacht & Yachts operations, recreational fiberglass net sales increased as a result of improvement at Sea Ray, with a more favorable mix toward boats with expanded content driving sales. The planned reductions in wholesale unit shipments in the aluminum freshwater boat category were in response to a challenging retail market environment in the first half of the year, due in part to unfavorable weather conditions. Premium boat brands, including Boston Whaler, Sea Ray and Lund, all performed strongly at retail in their key product categories. International sales were 24 percent of the segment's net sales in 2019 and decreased 7 percent on a GAAP basis. On a constant currency basis, international sales decreased 5 percent primarily due to declines in Europe and Asia-Pacific.
The Boat segment operating earnings were $76.2 million in 2019, an increase of $67.1 million compared with 2018, as a result of reduced losses associated with the exit of the Sport Yacht & Yacht operations. Excluding this factor, operating earnings decreased as a result of lower volume, higher retail discounts required to lower pipelines during the second-half of 2019 and planned spending on profit improvement initiatives. Additionally, comparisons were negatively affected by less favorable plant efficiencies at certain boat facilities in the first quarter of 2019 versus 2018, due in part to new product integrations. These negative factors excluded benefits from cost control measures.
Corporate/Other
The following table sets forth Corporate/Other results for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
NM = not meaningful
Corporate operating expenses increased by $8.8 million in 2020 compared with 2019 primarily due to higher variable compensation expense.
Corporate operating expenses decreased by $2.4 million in 2019 compared with 2018 primarily as a result of several factors which included cost containment measures largely completed by the end of the third quarter of 2019, partially offset by higher restructuring, exit, impairment and other charges.
Cash Flow, Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table sets forth an analysis of free cash flow for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
(A) We define "Free cash flow" as cash flow from operating and investing activities of continuing operations (excluding cash provided by or used for acquisitions, investments, purchases or sales/maturities of marketable securities and other investing activities, as well as the cash impact of Sport Yacht & Yachts operations, net of tax) and the effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents. Free cash flow is not intended as an alternative measure of cash flow from operations, as determined in accordance with GAAP in the United States. We use this financial measure both in presenting results to shareholders and the investment community and in our internal evaluation and management of our businesses. We believe that this financial measure and the information it provides are useful to investors because it permits investors to view our performance using the same tool that we use to gauge progress in achieving our goals. We believe that the non-GAAP financial measure "Free cash flow" is also useful to investors because it is an indication of cash flow that may be available to fund investments in future growth initiatives.
Our major sources of funds for capital investments, acquisitions, share repurchase programs and dividend payments are cash generated from operating activities, available cash and marketable securities balances, proceeds from divestitures and potential borrowings. We evaluate potential acquisitions, divestitures and joint ventures in the ordinary course of business.
2020 Cash Flow
Net cash provided by operating activities of continuing operations in 2020 totaled $800.0 million versus $475.3 million in 2019. The increase is primarily due to higher net earnings and favorable working capital usage, driven mainly by decreases in inventory levels and increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses.
The primary drivers of Net cash provided by operating activities of continuing operations in 2020 were net earnings, net of non-cash items, and a decrease in working capital. Working capital is defined as Accounts and notes receivable, Inventories and Prepaid expenses and other, net of Accounts payable and Accrued expenses as presented in the Consolidated Balance Sheets, excluding the impact of acquisitions and non-cash adjustments. Inventory decreased $109.3 million, primarily due to the increase in net sales during 2020 and production disruptions in the first half of the year. Accounts and notes receivable increased $19.9 million primarily due to the increase in net sales during the fourth quarter of 2020. Accrued expenses and Accounts payable increased $75.3 million and $64.5 million, respectively, primarily due to production increases, which were partially offset by timing of payments.
Net cash used for investing activities of continuing operations was $239.4 million, which included capital expenditures of $182.4 million. Our capital spending was focused on investments in new products. We also purchased $55.9 million of marketable securities in 2020.
Net cash used for financing activities was $361.8 million, primarily related to payments of long-term debt including current maturities, common stock repurchases and cash dividends paid to common shareholders. Refer to Note 16 - Debt in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further details on our debt activity during the year ended December 31, 2020.
2019 Cash Flow
In 2019, Net cash provided by operating activities of continuing operations totaled $475.3 million versus $274.5 million in 2018. This comparison reflected lower pension contributions and higher net earnings, net of non-cash items (pension settlement charges, depreciation and amortization, impairments and income tax impacts not yet realized in cash) in 2019, which were partially offset by unfavorable working capital usage trends.
The primary drivers of Net cash provided by operating activities were net earnings from continuing operations net of non-cash expense items, partially offset by an increase in working capital. Inventory increased $50.5 million primarily related to
finished goods in the Propulsion and P&A segments, to support higher sales volumes after pipeline reduction efforts in 2019. Accrued expenses decreased $44.7 million, Accounts payable decreased $32.7 million and Accounts and notes receivable decreased $41.4 million primarily as a result of lower sales in the fourth quarter.
Net cash used for investing activities of continuing operations during 2019 totaled $287.0 million, which included capital expenditures of $232.6 million and cash paid for the acquisition of Freedom Boat Club of $64.1 million. Refer to Note 5 - Acquisitions in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further details on the Freedom Boat Club acquisition. Our capital spending focused on investments in capacity expansion initiatives as well as new products. Net cash provided by investing activities of discontinued operations was $481.7 million and was primarily related to proceeds from the sale of the Fitness business.
Net cash used for financing activities was $600.8 million during 2019 and primarily related to common stock repurchases, net payments from issuances of long-term debt and cash dividends paid to common shareholders. Refer to Note 16 - Debt in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further details on our debt activity during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We view our highly liquid assets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 as:
The following table sets forth an analysis of Total liquidity as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(A) See Note 16 - Debt in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further details on our lending facility.
(B) We define Total liquidity as Cash and cash equivalents and Short-term investments in marketable securities as presented in the Consolidated Balance Sheets, plus amounts available for borrowing under our lending facilities. Total liquidity is not intended as an alternative measure to Cash and cash equivalents and Short-term investments in marketable securities as determined in accordance with GAAP in the United States. We use this financial measure both in presenting our results to shareholders and the investment community and in our internal evaluation and management of our businesses. Management believes that this financial measure and the information it provides are useful to investors because it permits investors to view our performance using the same metric that management uses to gauge progress in achieving its goals. Management believes that the non-GAAP financial measure "Total liquidity" is also useful to investors because it is an indication of our available highly liquid assets and immediate sources of financing.
Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities totaled $576.3 million as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $255.2 million from $321.1 million as of December 31, 2019. Total debt as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 was $951.4 million and $1,109.3 million, respectively. Our debt-to-capitalization ratio decreased to 39 percent as of December 31, 2020, from 46 percent as of December 31, 2019.
During 2020 and 2019, gross borrowings under our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (Credit Facility) totaled $610.0 million and $655.0 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, there were no borrowings outstanding and available borrowing capacity totaled $395.0 million, net of $5.0 million of letters of credit outstanding under the Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the financial covenants in the Credit Facility. The maximum amount utilized under the Credit Facility during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, including letters of credit outstanding, was $397.1 million. In addition, during 2020, borrowings under our unsecured commercial paper program (CP Program) totaled $175.0 million, all of which were repaid. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the maximum amount outstanding under the CP Program was $100.0 million. Refer to Note 16 - Debt in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further details.
The level of borrowing capacity under our Credit Facility and CP Program is limited by both a leverage and interest coverage test. These covenants also pertain to termination provisions included in our wholesale financing joint venture arrangements with Wells Fargo Distribution Finance. Based on our anticipated earnings generation throughout the year, we expect to maintain sufficient cushion against the existing debt covenants.
We believe that we have adequate sources of liquidity to meet our short-term and long-term needs.
2021 Cash Flow Outlook and Capital Plan
We anticipate generating free cash flow in excess of $300 million in 2021, which likely reflects a return to more normal, historical free cash flow levels. 2020 saw a significant amount of cash generated from the liquidation of inventories, which will not repeat in 2021, and we estimate working capital to increase by $140 to $150 million for the year, primarily to rebuild inventories in our Propulsion and P&A segments.
We anticipate executing a balanced capital strategy in 2021, leveraging our strong cash position. We plan to retire approximately $100 million of our long-term debt obligations, with our interest expense estimated to be approximately $60 million for the year. During 2020, we paused certain capital expenditures during the pandemic to conserve cash until the second half of the year. We anticipate returning to more normal levels of capital spending during 2021, between $200 and $220 million, including new product investments in all of our businesses, cost reduction and automation projects, and select additional capacity initiatives. Finally, we plan to continue our systematic approach to share repurchases, with our plan including between $80 million and $120 million of repurchases in 2021, spread relatively evenly across the year.
Financial Services
Refer to Note 10 - Financing Joint Venture in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information about our financial services.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Guarantees. We have reserves to cover potential losses associated with guarantees and repurchase obligations based on historical experience and current facts and circumstances. Historical cash requirements and losses associated with these obligations have not been significant. See Note 13 - Commitments and Contingencies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of these arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth a summary of our contractual cash obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(A) See Note 16 - Debt in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on our debt. “Debt” refers to future cash principal payments. Debt also includes our capital leases as discussed in Note 21 - Leases in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(B) See Note 21 - Leases in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(C) Purchase obligations represent agreements with suppliers and vendors as part of the normal course of business.
(D) Amounts primarily represent long-term deferred compensation plans.
(E) Other long-term liabilities primarily includes long-term warranty contracts, future projected payments related to our nonqualified pension plans and deferred revenue. We are not required to make contributions to the qualified pension plan in 2020.
Legal Proceedings
See Note 13 - Commitments and Contingencies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Environmental Regulation
In the Propulsion segment, we continue to develop engine technologies to reduce engine emissions to comply with current and future emissions requirements. In the P&A segment, we are working to develop electrification and other technologies to reduce our environmental footprint. The Boat segment continues to pursue fiberglass boat manufacturing technologies and techniques to reduce air emissions at its boat manufacturing facilities. The costs associated with these activities may have an adverse effect on segment operating margins and may affect short-term operating results. Environmental regulatory bodies in the United States and other countries may impose more stringent emissions standards and/or other environmental regulatory requirements than are currently in effect. By following our environmental management system processes to drive sustainable, responsible practices, we comply with current regulations and expect to comply fully with any new regulations; compliance will most likely increase the cost of these products for us and the industry, but is not expected to have a material adverse effect on our competitive position.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the amount of reported assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and revenues and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results may differ from those estimates. If current estimates for the cost of resolving any specific matters are later determined to be inadequate, results of operations could be adversely affected in the period in which additional provisions are required. We have discussed the development and selection of the critical accounting policies with the Audit and Finance Committee of the Board of Directors and believe the following are the most critical accounting policies that could have an effect on our reported results.
Revenue Recognition and Sales Incentives. Revenue is recognized as performance obligations under the terms of contracts with customers are satisfied; this occurs when control of promised goods (engines, engine parts and accessories, boats, and fitness equipment) is transferred to the customer. We recognize revenue related to the sale of extended warranty contracts that extend the coverage period beyond the standard warranty period over the life of the extended warranty period.
Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration expected to be entitled to in exchange for transferring goods or providing services. We have excluded sales, value add, and other taxes collected concurrent with revenue-producing activities from the determination of the transaction price for all contracts. We have elected to account for shipping and handling activities that occur after the customer has obtained control of a good as a fulfillment activity. For all contracts with customers, we have not adjusted the promised amount of consideration for the effects of a significant financing component as the period between the transfer of the promised goods and the customer's payment is expected to be one year or less.
See Note 2 - Revenue Recognition in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
Warranty Reserves. We record an estimated liability for product warranties at the time revenue is recognized. The liability is estimated using historical warranty experience, projected claim rates and expected costs per claim. We adjust our liability for specific warranty matters when they become known and the exposure can be estimated. Our warranty liabilities are affected by product failure rates as well as material usage and labor costs incurred in correcting a product failure. If actual costs differ from estimated costs, we must make a revision to the warranty liability.
Goodwill. Goodwill results from the excess of purchase price over the net assets of businesses acquired. We review goodwill for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the fair value of a reporting unit may be below its carrying value. As part of the annual test, we may perform a qualitative, rather than quantitative, assessment to determine whether the fair values of our reporting units are "more likely than not" to be greater than their carrying values. In performing this qualitative analysis, we consider various factors, including the effect of market or industry changes and the reporting units' actual results compared with projected results.
If the fair value of a reporting unit does not meet the "more likely than not" criteria discussed above, we perform a quantitative assessment which begins by measuring the fair value of the reporting unit. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, a goodwill impairment is recorded equal to the carrying value of the reporting unit less its fair value, not to exceed the carrying value of goodwill.
We calculate the fair value of our reporting units considering both the income approach and the guideline public company method. The income approach calculates the fair value of the reporting unit using a discounted cash flow approach utilizing a Gordon Growth model. Internally forecasted future cash flows, which we believe reasonably approximates market participant assumptions, are discounted using a weighted average cost of capital (Discount Rate) developed for each reporting unit. The Discount Rate is developed using market observable inputs, as well as considering whether or not there is a measure of risk related to the specific reporting unit’s forecasted performance. Fair value under the guideline public company method is determined for each unit by applying market multiples for comparable public companies to the unit’s current and forecasted financial results. The key uncertainties in these calculations are the assumptions used in determining the reporting unit’s forecasted future performance, including revenue growth and operating margins, as well as the perceived risk associated with those forecasts in determining the Discount Rate, along with selecting representative market multiples.
We did not record any goodwill impairments in 2020, 2019 or 2018 in continuing operations. Refer to Note 3 - Discontinued Operations for further information on the Fitness goodwill impairment recorded during 2019.
Other intangible assets. Our primary intangible assets are customer relationships and trade names acquired in business combinations. Intangible assets are initially valued using a methodology commensurate with the intended use of the asset. The customer relationships are valued using the income approach, specifically the multi-period excess earnings method (MPEEM). The fair value of trade names is measured using a relief-from-royalty (RFR) approach, which assumes the value of the trade name is the discounted amount of cash flows that would be paid to third parties had we not owned the trade name and instead licensed the trade name from another company. Higher royalty rates are assigned to premium brands within the marketplace based on name recognition and profitability, while other brands receive lower royalty rates. The basis for future sales projections for both the RFR and MPEEM are based on internal revenue forecasts by brand, which we believe represent reasonable market participant assumptions. The future cash flows are discounted using an applicable Discount Rate as well as any potential risk premium to reflect the inherent risk of holding a standalone intangible asset.
The key uncertainties in the RFR and MPEEM calculations, as applicable, are: the selection of an appropriate royalty rate, assumptions used in developing internal revenue growth and expense forecasts, assumed customer attrition rates, as well as the perceived risk associated with those forecasts in determining the discount rate and risk premium.
The costs of amortizable intangible assets are recognized over their expected useful lives, typically between three and fifteen years, using the straight-line method. Intangible assets that are subject to amortization are evaluated for impairment using a process similar to that used to evaluate long-lived assets described below. Intangible assets not subject to amortization are assessed for impairment at least annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that an asset may be impaired. The impairment test for indefinite-lived intangible assets consists of a comparison of the fair value of the intangible asset with its carrying amount. An impairment loss is recognized for the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value of the asset.
Refer to Note 5 - Acquisitions and Note 11 - Goodwill and Other Intangibles in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
Long-Lived Assets. We continually evaluate whether events and circumstances have occurred that indicate the remaining estimated useful lives of our definite-lived intangible assets and other long-lived assets may warrant revision or that the remaining balance of such assets may not be recoverable. Once an impairment indicator is identified, we test for recoverability of the related asset group using an estimate of undiscounted cash flows over the asset group's remaining life. If an asset group's carrying value is not recoverable, we record an impairment loss based on the excess of the carrying value of the asset group over the long-lived asset group's fair value. Fair value is determined using observable inputs, including the use of appraisals from independent third parties, when available, and, when observable inputs are not available, based on our assumption of the data that market participants would use in pricing the asset, based on the best information available in the circumstances. Specifically, we use discounted cash flows to determine the fair value of the asset when observable inputs are unavailable. We tested our long-lived asset balances for impairment as indicators arose during 2020, 2019 and 2018, resulting in impairment charges of $0.9 million, $3.0 million and $12.7 million, respectively, which are recognized either in Restructuring, exit and impairment charges or Selling, general and administrative expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Income Taxes. Deferred taxes are recognized for the future tax effects of temporary differences between financial and income tax reporting using tax rates in effect for the years in which the differences are expected to reverse. We evaluate the realizability of net deferred tax assets and, as necessary, record valuation allowances against them. We estimate our tax obligations based on historical experience and current tax laws and litigation. The judgments made at any point in time may change based on the outcome of tax audits and settlements of tax litigation, as well as changes due to new tax laws and regulations and our application of those laws and regulations. These factors may cause our tax rate and deferred tax balances to increase or decrease. See Note 12 - Income Taxes in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further details.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for the recent accounting pronouncements that have been adopted during the year ended December 31, 2020, or will be adopted in future periods.