ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains certain forward-looking statements that involve risk and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those set forth under the Section entitled “Risk Factors” in Item 1A, and other documents we file with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Historical results are not necessarily indicative of future results.
Special Note Regarding Smaller Reporting Company Status
As a result of having been a “smaller reporting company” (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended), we are allowed and have elected to omit certain information, including three years of year-to-year comparisons and tabular disclosure of contractual obligations, from this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations; however, we have provided all information for the periods presented that we believe to be appropriate and necessary.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage regenerative medicine company developing novel therapeutics for cardiovascular and pulmonary diseases with large unmet medical needs. We are committed to applying our expertise in the fields of autologous and allogeneic cell-based therapies to improve the lives of patients with cardiovascular and pulmonary conditions.
Our CardiAMP cell therapy platform provides an autologous bone marrow derived cell therapy (using a patient’s own cells) for the treatment of two clinical indications: heart failure that develops after a heart attack (BCDA-01) and chronic myocardial ischemia (BCDA-02). Our allogeneic mesenchymal stem cell therapy platform, derived from donor cells and intended to be provided “off the shelf,” is also being advanced for two indications, heart failure (BCDA-03) and for the pulmonary indication of acute respiratory distress that has developed from COVID-19 (BCDA-04).
Our Helix™ Biotherapeutic Delivery System platform or “Helix” delivers therapeutics into the heart muscle with a helical needle from within the heart. It enables local delivery of cell and gene-based therapies, including our own cell therapies to treat cardiac indications. The Helix system is CE marked in Europe and under investigational use in the United States. We selectively partner with firms developing other cell, gene and protein therapies utilizing the Helix and other biotherapeutic delivery systems that we have developed.
Our AVANCE™ product offering for transseptal cardiac procedures has begun early commercialization activities in the United States through commission-only 1099 sales representatives.
To date, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to research and development efforts relating to our therapeutic candidates and biotherapeutic delivery systems, including conducting clinical trials, developing manufacturing and sales capabilities, in-licensing related intellectual property, providing general and administrative support for these operations and protecting our intellectual property. We have also generated modest revenues from sales of our approved products. We have funded our operations primarily through the sales of equity and convertible debt securities, and certain government and private grants.
CardiAMP Cell Therapy System for Heart Failure and Chronic Myocardial Ischemia
The Company’s lead platform, CardiAMP cell therapy, is an autologous cell therapy being advanced for two indications in pivotal clinical trials: heart failure and chronic myocardial ischemia.
The CardiAMP Heart Failure Trial is a Phase III, multi-center, randomized, double-blinded, sham-controlled study of up to 260 patients at 40 centers nationwide, which includes a 10-patient roll-in cohort. The Phase III pivotal trial is designed to provide the primary support for the safety and efficacy of the CardiAMP Cell Therapy System for heart failure which develops after a patient has a heart attack (BCDA-01). The trial is active at 24 clinical sites and 91 patients have been enrolled to date. The independent DSMB completed a prespecified data review on December 17, 2020, including all data for the 86 patients enrolled and 60 randomized patients that had reached their one-year follow-up at that date. The DSMB performed a risk-benefit review, indicated no safety concerns, and recommended in writing that the study continue as planned.
Enrollment remains our primary focus and challenge. To complete the heart failure trial enrollment requires our active centers to randomize an additional seven patients each on average. Our clinical centers appear to be coming out of COVID-19 with renewed energy and interest in the trial. Enrollment is expected to be enhanced in the months ahead by reductions in COVID-19 cases over time, the recent successful CardiAMP Heart Failure DSMB review, the recent CardiAMP Heart Failure positive results published in the peer reviewed International Journal of Cardiology, the addition of new high-enrolling clinical sites to the trial, obtaining FDA authorization to subsequently provide therapy for patients in the control arm of the trial that otherwise would not receive it, enhanced outreach to sites and increased clinical marketing activities. Starting the parallel CardiAMP Chronic Myocardial Ischemia trial is also anticipated to enhance enrollment in the CardiAMP Heart Failure trail.
The CardiAMP Chronic Myocardial Ischemia Trial is a Phase III, multi-center, randomized, double-blinded, controlled study of up to 343 patients at up to 40 clinical sites. The Phase III pivotal trial is designed to provide the primary support for the safety and efficacy of the CardiAMP Cell Therapy System for the indication of chronic myocardial ischemia (BCDA-02). This therapeutic approach uses many of the same novel aspects as the CardiAMP Heart Failure Trial and is expected to leverage our experience and investment in the heart failure trial. The trial has been activated and we are working towards initial patient enrollment in the first quarter of 2021.
We are continuing to assess the evolving impact of COVID-19 on the CardiAMP trials, including recent spikes and new emerging variants. Some of our clinical centers stopped performing elective procedures during the initial outbreak and advised that they would not be performing elective procedures until restrictions on elective procedures were lifted. Many centers also delayed patient follow-up visits out of concern for patient exposure to COVID-19. In alignment with recent FDA guidance on clinical trials, “FDA Guidance on Conduct of Clinical Trials of Medical Products during COVID-19 Pandemic Guidance for Industry, Investigators, and Institutional Review Boards,” the Company has taken steps to address unavoidable protocol deviations due to COVID-19 illness and/or COVID-19 control measures.
The Department of Health & Human Services Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, or CMS, has designated that both CardiAMP pivotal trials qualify for Medicare national coverage. Covered costs include patient screening, the CardiAMP Cell Therapy System and procedure, and clinical follow-up at one and two years after the procedure. Private insurance plans covering 50 million insured Americans follow this CMS reimbursement policy and are similarly anticipated to cover these costs. This coverage significantly reduces our cost of conducting these pivotal trials.
Allogeneic Cell Therapy for Cardiac and Pulmonary Disease
Our second therapeutic platform is our investigational culture expanded bone marrow derived allogeneic, Neurokinin-1 Receptor Positive mesenchymal stem cells (NK1R+ MSC). This “off the shelf” mesenchymal cell therapy is being advanced for cardiac and pulmonary disease.
We are actively working to secure FDA acceptance of an Investigational New Drug (IND) application for a Phase I/II trial using the CardiALLO Cell Therapy System to deliver these allogeneic cells for the treatment of ischemic systolic heart failure (BCDA-03). We are working to receive FDA acceptance of the IND in 2021.
The Company also intends to submit an IND for the use of its allogeneic cell therapy for Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) caused by COVID-19 (BCDA-04). Based on clinical reports on COVID-19, respiratory failure complicated by ARDS is a leading cause of death for COVID-19 patients. ARDS is a type of respiratory failure characterized by rapid onset of widespread inflammation in the lungs. BCDA-04 is on a similar timeline with BCDA-03 and we are working towards FDA acceptance of the IND in 2021.
Recent Developments
Partner Agreement for Catheter Biotherapeutic Delivery Product Candidates
On February 17, 2021, the Company entered into an agreement with a leading international pharmaceutical company to assess the Helix™ Biotherapeutic Delivery System in preclinical testing. Under the terms of the agreement, the Company received a $500,000 up-front payment, a portion of which is creditable for BioCardia biotherapeutic delivery systems, support and training. The agreement includes a one-year option to negotiate a non-exclusive worldwide license for therapeutic delivery of certain cell types for cardiac indications.
Purchase Agreement with Lincoln Park
On March 29, 2021, we and Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC, (Lincoln Park) entered into a purchase agreement (the LPC Purchase Agreement) pursuant to which Lincoln Park purchased $2 million of shares of our common stock (373,832 shares) at a purchase price of $5.35 per share. Under the LPC Purchase Agreement, we have the right to sell to Lincoln Park shares of common stock having an aggregate value of up to $20 million, including the initial $2 million purchase, subject to certain significant limitations of the amount and timing of any such sales due to the terms and conditions set forth in the LPC Purchase Agreement.
In consideration for entering into the LPC Purchase Agreement, we agreed to issue an aggregate of 75,000 shares of common stock as a commitment fee. We also agreed to issue to Lincoln Park up to an aggregate of 50,000 additional shares of common stock as a further commitment fee based on a pro-rata percentage of the $20 million of common stock issued to Lincoln Park under the Purchase Agreement. On March 29, 2021, we issued 80,000 shares of common stock as commitment shares (which includes 5,000 commitment shares issued on a pro rata basis in respect of the initial purchase by Lincoln Park of $2 million of shares). We will not receive any cash proceeds from the issuance of any of the foregoing commitment shares.
The net proceeds under the LPC Purchase Agreement to us will depend on the frequency and prices at which shares of common stock are sold to Lincoln Park. Actual sales of shares of common stock to Lincoln Park under the LPC Purchase Agreement (beyond the initial purchase of $2 million of shares) and the amount of such net proceeds will depend on a variety of factors, including market conditions, the trading price of the common stock and determination by us as to other available and appropriate sources of funding for us. We expect to use the proceeds from this agreement for general corporate purposes and working capital.
Litigation Settlement
On March 12, 2021, we agreed to settle, pending final documentation and dismissal, the legal proceedings and any and all claims, counterclaims, actions and/or proceedings relating to or arising from the case captioned Boston Scientific Corp., et al., v. BioCardia Inc., Case No. 3:19-05645-VC, U.S.D.C., N. D. Cal. We expect the settlement will not result in any material benefit or liability to the Company. See Note 17 of our notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Financial Overview
Revenue
We currently have a portfolio of enabling and delivery products, from which we have generated modest revenue. Net product revenues include commercial sales of our Morph vascular access system in the US and EU and collaboration agreement revenues include revenue from partnering agreements with corporate and academic institutions. Under these partnering agreements, we provide our Helix biotherapeutic delivery system and customer training and support for use in preclinical and clinical studies.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold includes the costs of raw materials and components, manufacturing personnel and facility costs and other indirect and overhead costs associated with manufacturing our commercial enabling and delivery products, which generate net product revenue.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of:
•
salaries and related overhead expenses, which include share-based compensation and benefits for personnel in research and development functions;
•
fees paid to consultants and contract research organizations, or CROs, including in connection with our preclinical studies and clinical trials and other related clinical trial fees, such as for investigator grants, patient screening, laboratory work, clinical trial management and statistical compilation and analysis;
•
costs related to acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial materials;
•
costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements; and
•
payments related to licensed products and technologies.
We expense all research and development costs in the periods in which they are incurred. Costs for certain development activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress of completion of specific tasks using information and data provided to us by our vendors and clinical sites. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services to be received in future periods for use in research and development activities are deferred and capitalized. The capitalized amounts are then expensed as the related goods are delivered and the services are received.
We plan to increase our research and development expenses for the foreseeable future as we continue the pivotal CardiAMP Heart Failure Trial, advance the pivotal CardiAMP Chronic Myocardial Ischemia Trial, further develop our autologous and allogeneic cell therapy candidates. We typically use our employee and infrastructure resources across multiple research and development programs, and accordingly, we have not historically allocated resources specifically to our individual programs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs for employees in executive, finance and administration, sales, corporate development and administrative support functions, including share-based compensation expenses and benefits. Other selling, general and administrative expenses include sales commissions, rent, accounting and legal services, obtaining and maintaining patents, the cost of consultants, occupancy costs, insurance premiums and information systems costs.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income and expense consist primarily of interest income we earn on our cash, cash equivalents and investments, changes in fair value of redemptive features embedded in convertible notes, loss on extinguishment of convertible notes, gain on extinguishment of Paycheck Protection Program note payable, and interest charges we incurred in periods during 2020 and 2019 when we had debt outstanding.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities. We evaluate these estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various judgements that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not clear from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We define our critical accounting policies as those that require us to make subjective estimates and judgments about matters that are uncertain and are likely to have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations as well as the specific manner in which we apply those principles. The following discussion addresses what we believe to be the critical accounting policies used in the preparation of our financial statements that require significant estimates and judgments.
Research and Development-Clinical Trial Accruals
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our expenses resulting from our obligations under contracts with vendors and consultants and clinical site agreements in connection with conducting clinical trials. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiations which vary from contract to contract and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided to us under such contracts. Our clinical trial accrual is dependent upon the timely and accurate reporting of expenses of our CROs and other third-party vendors.
Our objective is to reflect the appropriate clinical trial expenses in our financial statements by matching those expenses with the period in which services and efforts are expended. We account for these expenses according to the progress of the trial as measured by patient progression and the timing of various aspects of the trial. We determine accrual estimates through discussion with applicable personnel and outside service providers as to the progress or state of completion of clinical trials, or the services completed. During the course of a clinical trial, we adjust the rate of clinical trial expense recognition if actual results differ from the estimates. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known at that time. Although we do not expect that our estimates will be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in our reporting amounts that are too high or too low for any particular period. Through December 31, 2020, there had been no material adjustments to our prior period estimates of accrued expenses for clinical trials. However, due to the nature of estimates, we cannot provide assurance that we will not make changes to our estimates in the future as we become aware of additional information about the status or conduct of our clinical trials.
Share-Based Compensation
We measure and recognize share-based compensation expense for equity awards to employees, directors and consultants based on fair value at the grant date. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model, or BSM, to calculate the fair value of stock options, which includes subjective assumptions such as the risk-free interest rate, the expected volatility in the value of the Company’s common stock, and the expected term of the option. Restricted stock units (RSUs) are measured based on the fair market values of the underlying stock on the dates of grant. Share-based compensation expense recognized in the statements of operations is based on awards at the time of grant and is reduced for actual forfeitures at the time that the forfeitures occur. Compensation cost for employee share-based awards will be recognized over the vesting period of the applicable award on a straight-line basis.
Results of Operations
The table set forth below summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands). The results of operations from 2019 compared to 2018 and related discussion can be found in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on April 9, 2020, and such results and related discussion are incorporated herein by reference.
Revenue. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $145,000 compared to $710,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $565,000 decrease was primarily due to lower revenue generating partnership activities in 2020 coupled with reduced volumes of commercial catheter sales as we transition our commercial offerings to a limited launch of the Morph AVANCE™ and Morph DNA product families. We expect collaboration agreement revenues to increase in 2021 depending on progress in these existing collaborative programs and the initiation of new partnership relationships. Net product revenue is expected to be modest in 2021 and will be subject to customer demand, the availability of production resources for our new Morph product family members, and the timing of FDA clearance for market release of different models and sizes during the year.
Cost of Goods Sold. Cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $4,000 compared to $358,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, decreasing by $354,000 primarily due to the decrease in net product revenue. We expect cost of goods sold to increase modestly in 2021 relative to sales, depending on the timing and demand for our new Morph product family members and the associate production costs which will vary depending on volume.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses were approximately $9.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to approximately $8.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of $1.2 million or 14%. Research and development in both periods focused on advancing our pivotal CardiAMP Heart Failure Trial and Chronic Myocardial Ischemia trials and development of our Neurokinin-1 Receptor Positive allogeneic cell therapies for cardiovascular and respiratory diseases. The $1.2 million increase in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to cost of additional personnel and supporting systems to enhance enrollment and monitoring in our pivotal trials, accelerate development activities, and strengthen supporting functions. We expect research and development expenses to increase moderately as we continue enrolling in our pivotal trials, advance regulatory approvals for our therapies, and improve our cell processing, manufacturing capabilities and delivery platforms.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses were approximately $5.9 million during the year end December 31, 2020 compared to approximately $6.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $142,000 decrease in 2020 compared to 2019, was primarily due to additional stock-based compensation expense related to the modification of certain stock option awards in 2019 that did not recur in 2020, partially offset by higher corporate expenses, including business insurance premiums and additional franchise taxes due related to prior financings. We expect selling, general and administrative expenses to decrease modestly in 2021 relative to 2020.
Other Income (Expense). In 2020, Other income (expense) consisted primarily of interest expense and the gain on extinguishment associated with the Paycheck Protection Program loan obtained on May 1, 2020 and forgiven on November 7, 2020. In 2019, Other income (expense) consisted primarily of amounts recognized in relation to the accounting for the convertible notes, including a gain on change in fair value of the embedded redemption feature of $52,000, interest expense associated with the accretion of the debt discount of $104,000, and a loss upon extinguishment of $521,000. Interest income of $21,000 and $87,000 was earned on cash and cash equivalents for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred net losses each year since our inception and as of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $116.1 million. We anticipate that we will continue to incur net losses for at least the next several years.
We have funded our operations principally through the sales of equity and convertible debt securities as well as the cash acquired through the Merger. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $21.4 million.
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities. Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled approximately $12.4 million, which is the sum of (i) our net loss of $15.0 million, adjusted for non-cash income and expenses totaling $3.0 million (share-based compensation, gain on extinguishment of the Paycheck Protection Program note payable, reduction in the carrying amount of right-of-use assets and depreciation), and (ii) changes in operating assets and liabilities of approximately $367,000. Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled approximately $9.4 million, which is the sum of (i) our net loss of $14.7 million, adjusted for non-cash income and expenses totaling $3.9 million (share-based compensation, loss on extinguishment of convertible notes, reduction in the carrying amount of right-of-use assets and depreciation), and (ii) changes in operating assets and liabilities of approximately $1.4 million.
The increase in cash used for operating activities of $2.9 million in 2020 compared to 2019 related primarily to increased spending to advance our allogeneic pivotal trials and therapeutic development programs coupled with decreases in advance payments from a customer and legal fees paid that have not yet been reimbursed by a related party under the Litigation Funding Agreement discussed in the notes to the financial statements. We expect net cash used in operating activities to remain relatively consistent in 2021.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities of $32,000 and $146,000 during the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively consists of purchases of property and equipment, primarily lab equipment and related infrastructure.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of proceeds from sales of common stock totaling approximately $27.9 million (net of issuance costs) and proceeds from the Paycheck Protection note payable totaling $506,000, partially offset by tax withholding-related payments on the settlement of restricted unit awards. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled approximately $9.8 million and consisted of proceeds from the sale of common stock and related warrants and proceeds from convertible loans payable.
Future Funding Requirements
To date, we have generated modest revenue from sales of our approved products. We do not know when, or if, we will generate any revenue from our development stage biotherapeutic programs. We do not expect to generate any revenue from sales of our CardiAMP, CardiALLO or Neurokinin-1 Receptor Positive allogeneic therapeutic candidates unless and until we obtain regulatory approval. At the same time, we expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing development activities, particularly as we continue the research, development and clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for, our therapeutic candidates. In addition, subject to obtaining regulatory approval for any of our therapeutic candidates and companion diagnostic, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses for product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. We anticipate that we will need additional funding in connection with our continuing operations.
As discussed in the notes to the financial statements, we raised approximately $17.6 million in December 2020 from the sale of common stock under registered direct offerings, and approximately $10.3 million in May 2020 from a public offering of common stock, net of fees, discounts and offering expenses. In April 2019, we raised approximately $8.8 million from a public offering of common stock and warrants, net of underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses. We use our sources of capital primarily for clinical development, pursuing regulatory approval and commercialization of our product candidates, including advancing our partnering programs with corporate and academic institutions.
In March 2021, we entered into the LPC Purchase Agreement with Lincoln Park. Pursuant to the terms of the LPC Purchase Agreement, Lincoln Park agreed to purchase from us up to $20.0 million of our common stock (subject to certain limitations) from time to time during the term of the LPC Purchase Agreement. Pursuant to the terms of the LPC Purchase Agreement, at the time we signed the LPC Purchase Agreement, we sold 373,832 shares of our common stock at a price of $5.35 per share pursuant to the LPC Purchase Agreement for gross proceeds of $2 million (and issued 80,000 shares of common stock to Lincoln Park as consideration for its commitment to purchase shares of our common stock, which consisted of 75,000 shares for Lincoln Park’s initial commitment and 5,000 shares issued on a pro rata basis in respect of Lincoln Park’s initial purchase of 373,832 shares). We may sell up to an additional $18 million of shares of our common stock from time to time at various prices pursuant to the terms of the LPC Purchase Agreement. See Note 19 of our notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Based upon our current operating plan, we believe that the cash and cash equivalents of $21.4 million as of December 31, 2020 are sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months from the date of issuance of these financial statements. We have based our estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we may use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of our therapeutic candidates, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenditures necessary to complete the development of our therapeutic candidates.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
the progress, costs, results and timing of our CardiAMP and CardiALLO autologous and Neurokinin-1 Receptor Positive allogeneic clinical trials and related development programs;
•
FDA acceptance of our CardiAMP and CardiALLO allogeneic and Neurokinin-1 Receptor Positive allogeneic therapies for heart failure and for other potential indications;
•
the outcome, costs and timing of seeking and obtaining FDA and any other regulatory approvals;
•
the costs associated with securing, establishing and maintaining commercialization and manufacturing capabilities;
•
the number and characteristics of product candidates that we pursue, including our product candidates in preclinical development;
•
the ability of our product candidates to progress through clinical development successfully;
•
our need to expand our research and development activities;
•
the costs of acquiring, licensing or investing in businesses, products, product candidates and technologies;
•
our ability to maintain, expand and defend the scope of our intellectual property portfolio, including the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make, or that we may receive, in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, defense and enforcement of any patents or other intellectual property rights;
•
the general and administrative expenses related to being a public company;
•
our need and ability to hire additional management and scientific, medical and sales personnel;
•
the effect of competing technological and market developments; and
•
our need to implement additional internal systems and infrastructure, including financial and reporting systems.
Until such time that we can generate meaningful revenue from the sales of approved therapies and products, if ever, we expect to finance our operating activities through public or private equity or debt financings, government or other third-party funding, marketing and distribution arrangements, and other collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements or a combination of these approaches. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interests of our common stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include conversion discounts or covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through government or other third-party funding, marketing and distribution arrangements or other collaborations, or strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs, products, or therapeutic candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of our notes to the consolidated financial statements for information regarding recent accounting pronouncements that are of significance or potential significance to us.