Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involves risks and uncertainties. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” for a discussion of forward-looking statements and important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements. All information presented herein is based on our fiscal calendar. Unless otherwise stated, references to particular years, quarters, months or periods refer to our fiscal years ended December 31 and the associated quarters, months and periods of those fiscal years.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company utilizing our differentiated platform to discover and develop novel antibody-based immunotherapeutics to treat a range of solid tumor types. While more traditional oncology drug discovery approaches attempt to generate antibodies against known targets, our approach relies on the human immune system to direct us to unique antibody-target pairs from patients experiencing a clinically meaningful, active immune response against their tumors. These unique antibody-target pairs represent a potentially novel and previously unexplored landscape of immuno-oncology targets. We believe the fact that our approach has the potential to deliver novel, previously unexplored immuno-oncology targets provides us with a significant competitive advantage over traditional approaches which focus on known targets that many companies are aware of and can pursue. We have utilized our drug discovery approach to identify over 2,000 distinct human antibodies that bind preferentially to tumor tissue from patients who are not the source of the antibody. Our lead product candidate, ATRC-101, is a monoclonal antibody with a novel mechanism of action and target derived from an antibody identified using our discovery platform. ATRC-101 reacts in vitro with a majority of human ovarian, non-small cell lung, colorectal and breast cancer samples from multiple patients. It has demonstrated robust anti-tumor activity as a single agent in multiple preclinical models, including one model in which PD-1 checkpoint inhibitors typically display limited activity. We have initiated a Phase 1b clinical trial in patients with select solid tumors in which the first patient was dosed in February 2020. Our efforts beyond ATRC-101 are focused on expanding our clinical pipeline by advancing additional product candidates using our large library of "hit" antibodies that bind preferentially to tumor tissue across patients. To that end, via internal efforts and partnerships, we are both continuing to develop our platform and combining the novel antibodies that are generated by our platform with antibody "weaponization" technologies.
We commenced operations in 2010, and have since devoted substantially all of our resources to research and development, identifying product candidates, undertaking preclinical studies, conducting clinical trials, raising capital, building our management team and building our intellectual property portfolio. We do not have any products approved for marketing or sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve or sustain profitability will depend on the successful development, regulatory approval and eventual commercialization of one or more of our current or future product candidates.
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through equity offerings of our securities and a [charitable investment]. Our net losses were $86.3 million and $67.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $250.4 million. We anticipate that a substantial portion of our capital resources and efforts in the foreseeable future will be focused on discovering, completing the necessary development, obtaining regulatory approval for and preparing for potential commercialization of product candidates. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments of $240.1 million. Although it is difficult to predict our funding requirements, we anticipate that our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2020, should enable us to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months, assuming our programs and collaborations advance as currently contemplated.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for the foreseeable future. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from period to period, depending on the timing of our planned preclinical
- 77 -
studies and clinical trials and expenditures on other research and development activities. We expect our expenses will increase substantially over time as we:
◾ complete clinical trials for ATRC 101 and initiate preclinical studies on any additional product candidates that we may pursue in the future;
◾ continue research and development to expand our growing library of more than 2,000 antibodies and develop potential future product candidates from that collection;
◾ continue to invest in advancing our differentiated discovery platform, and the underlying technologies;
◾ seek marketing approvals for product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
◾ maintain, protect and expand our portfolio of intellectual property rights, including patents, trade secrets and know-how;
◾ implement additional operational, financial and management systems; and
◾ attract, hire and retain additional administrative, clinical, regulatory and research personnel.
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, COVID-19, a disease caused by a novel strain of the coronavirus, was characterized as a pandemic by the World Health Organization. In response to COVID-19, we have taken, and continue to take, proactive measures to prioritize health and safety, including of our employees and other personnel, and to maintain business continuity. Following guidance from federal, state and local authorities, we transitioned to a fully remote working environment in March 2020. As a result, our laboratories and office locations were closed for more than two months and partially re-opened in June 2020 for lab-based personnel and certain essential personnel only. All onsite personnel are required to adhere to our COVID-19 safety protocols for their protection. All other personnel are still working remotely. In addition, in our clinical trial for ATRC-101, we experienced delays due to COVID-19 in initiating sites, achieving patient compliance with study-related procedures, and enrolling patients during the second and third quarters of fiscal 2020, although we have not experienced enrollment delays since that time. The financial results for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflect a decrease in overall operating expenses as a result of these impacted activities.
To date, the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material adverse impact on our productivity or our business, and as of December 31, 2020, we have not identified any significant disruption or impairment of our assets due to the pandemic. However, we cannot predict the potential future impacts of COVID-19, including its variants, on us and third parties with whom we conduct business, including on our clinical studies and our clinical trial for ATRC-101 and related timelines, as well as our preclinical activities. These impacts will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the duration of the outbreak and the effectiveness of actions taken in the United States and other countries to contain, vaccinate against, and treat the disease and other factors identified in Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in this Form 10-K. Given these uncertainties, COVID-19 could impact our business operations and our ability to execute on our associated business strategies and initiatives, and adversely impact our consolidated results of operations and our financial condition in the future, and could disrupt the business of third parties with whom we do business, including our existing and potential future collaborators. We will continue to closely monitor and evaluate the nature and extent of the impacts of COVID-19 on our business, consolidated results of operations, and financial condition.
On March 27, 2020, the U.S. government enacted the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or CARES Act, which provides emergency assistance for individuals, families, and businesses affected by COVID-19. One such measure is the employer retention payroll tax credit, under which, eligible employers may claim a credit against applicable employment taxes. The maximum credit may be worth up to $5,000 per eligible employee. We assessed our eligibility under the provision and recognized a payroll tax credit of $598,000 in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
We have no products approved for marketing or commercial sale and have never generated any revenue from product sales.
- 78 -
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses represent costs incurred in performing research, development and manufacturing activities in support of our own product development efforts, including Phase 1b clinical trials for ATRC-101, intellectual property legal expenses, salaries, employee benefits and stock-based compensation for personnel contributing to research and development activities, laboratory supplies, outsourced research and development expenses, professional services and allocated facilities-related costs. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in our differentiated discovery platform to expand our pipeline of product candidates, advance our product candidates into and through preclinical studies and clinical trials and pursue regulatory approval of our product candidates.
General and Administrative
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, allocated facilities costs and other expenses for outside professional services, including legal, human resource, audit and accounting services. We expect to incur additional general and administrative expenses as we continue to support the growth of our business and incur the costs of compliance associated with being a public company.
Interest and Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) includes other income which represents amounts received from partners for research and discovery services, interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents and investments, interest expense, revaluation expense resulting from the liability recorded for certain preferred stock warrants and gains or losses on the periodic disposals of property and equipment.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations during the respective periods:
*
Not meaningful
- 79 -
Research and Development
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses incurred during the respective periods:
Research and development expenses increased by $7.3 million, or 13%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to higher personnel-related expenses of $5.5 million as a result of additional employee headcount, a $4.2 million increase in facility expenses due to expansion of lab facilities and activities in an additional location, a $1.9 million increase in laboratory supplies and equipment expenses attributable to increased research headcount, offset by a $4.0 million decrease in product and other contract services as a result of lower ATRC-101 manufacturing costs, partially offset by an increase in clinical trial activities.
General and Administrative
The following table summarizes our general and administrative expenses incurred during the respective periods:
General and administrative expenses increased by $9.0 million, or 50%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The increase consists of a $4.7 million increase in personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation, as a result of additional employee headcount and a $0.8 million increase in consulting, legal and other services costs primarily due to increasing legal costs for corporate governance and business development, a $1.6 million increase in other expenses related to software subscriptions and employee relations, and a $1.8 million increase in facility related expense primarily attributable to our new office facilities.
Other Income
Other income is comprised of amounts earned from research and discovery services provided to partners under service agreements. Other income decreased by $0.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 due largely to the completion of service for Bristol Myers Squibb Company.
- 80 -
Interest Income
Interest income decreased to $1.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $3.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 due primarily to a significant decrease in market interest rates on fixed income and money market securities.
Interest Expense
Interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 pertained to the interest portion of payments made on capital leases under which we acquired certain property and equipment.
Preferred Stock Warrant Liability Revaluation
Preferred stock warrant liability revaluation recognizes changes in the fair value of the preferred stock warrants. Upon the closing of the IPO, the warrants to purchase 49,997 shares of our preferred stock were converted to warrants to purchase 49,997 shares of our Class A common stock. We recognized no expense during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the $123,000 remeasurement expense recognized during the same period in 2019, as these warrants were reclassified to equity and not subject to remeasurement in the current period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources; Plan of Operations
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments totaling $240.1 million. Our cash and cash equivalents primarily consist of bank deposits and money market funds. Our investments consist of U.S. government treasury and agency securities, commercial paper and corporate debt securities.
Due to our significant research and development expenditures, we have generated significant operating losses since inception. We have funded our operations primarily through the sale of convertible preferred stock and common stock. We have also received more than $15 million under our agreement with the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to date.
In June 2019, we completed our initial public offering, or IPO, of 6,452,500 shares of our Class A common stock and 2,000,000 shares of our Class B common stock at an offering price of $17.00 per share, including 1,102,500 shares pursuant to the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares of the Company’s Class A common stock. We received net proceeds of $130.8 million in our IPO, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $10.1 million and offering expenses of $2.8 million.
In July 2020, we issued and sold 7,642,125 shares of our Class A common stock, and 781,250 shares of our Class B common stock at an offering price of $16.00 per share. We received net proceeds of $126.1 million from this offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $8.1 million and other offering expenses of $0.6 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $250.4 million.
Our management evaluates whether there are relevant conditions and events that in the aggregate raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern and to meet its obligations as they become due within one year from the date that the financial statements are issued. We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments will be sufficient to fund our operating and capital needs for at least the next 12 months.
We are subject to risks and uncertainties common to early-stage companies in the biotechnology industry, including, but not limited to, development by competitors of new technological innovations, dependence on key personnel, protection of proprietary technology, compliance with government regulations and the ability to secure additional capital to fund operations. Identification and development of product candidates will require significant additional research and development efforts, including extensive preclinical and clinical testing and regulatory approval prior to commercialization. These efforts require significant amounts of additional capital, adequate personnel and
- 81 -
infrastructure and extensive compliance-reporting capabilities. Even if our drug development efforts are successful, it is uncertain when, if ever, we will realize significant revenue from product sales.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $66.7 million, which consisted of a net loss of $86.3 million, partially offset by $15.2 million in non-cash charges and a net change of $4.5 million in our net operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges consisted of depreciation and amortization of $2.4 million and stock-based compensation of $12.5 million. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in accrued expense of $0.8 million resulting from an increase in personnel-related expenses as a result of additional employee headcount, a $0.8 million increase in other current liabilities resulting from an increase in contract liabilities from our new arrangement with an external partner, and a $8.4 million increase in deferred rent primarily due to increases in lease incentive obligations and deferred rent, which was partially offset by a $5.4 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets attributable to increases in tenant improvement receivable from the Company’s leasehold improvement construction for San Carlos location and prepaid insurance.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $58.5 million, which consisted of a net loss of $67.5 million, partially offset by $7.2 million in non-cash charges and a net change of $1.7 million in our net operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges consisted of depreciation and amortization of $1.7 million and stock-based compensation of $6.1 million, partially offset by accretion of discount on investments of $0.8 million. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to increases in accounts payable of $0.8 million and accrued expense of $2.5 million resulting from an increase in personnel-related expenses as a result of additional employee headcount and costs related to contractual manufacturing services, partially offset by an increase in prepaid expenses of $2.4 million as a result of increases in prepaid rent and prepaid insurance, partially offset by decreases in vendor prepayments and deposit.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities of $159.0 million was primarily related to $154.1 million in net purchases of investments attributable to the proceeds from the common stock offering in July 2020 and $5.0 million in purchases of property and equipment.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in investing activities of $27.9 million was primarily related to $24.6 million in net purchases of investments and $3.4 million in purchases of property and equipment.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $128.9 million, which primarily related to $126.7 million proceeds from the common stock offering, net of underwriting discounts and commissions, and $1.0 million and $1.9 million proceeds from our 2019 Employee Stock Purchase Plan and employee stock option exercises, respectively, partially offset by $0.6 million in common stock offering costs.
- 82 -
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by financing activities was $131.2 million, which primarily related to $133.6 million proceeds from the IPO, net of underwriting discounts and commissions, partially offset by $2.8 million in payments related to IPO costs.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Our liquidity is not dependent on the use of off-balance sheet financing arrangements (as that term is defined in Item 303(a) (4) (ii) of Regulation S-K) and as of December 31, 2020, we had no such arrangements. There has been no material change in our contractual obligations other than in the ordinary course of business since our fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. Since inception, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
The operating lease obligations noted above represent operating lease obligations related to our currently occupied premises in South San Francisco, California and premises in San Carlos, California, which we are obligated to occupy in the future. These leases expire at various dates through the first half of 2033.
In July 2019, we entered into a lease agreement, or the San Carlos Lease, for the lease of approximately 99,557 rentable square feet of office space located in San Carlos, California, which is intended to serve as our permanent headquarters, office and laboratory space following the completion of construction and certain tenant improvements. The term of the San Carlos Lease commenced in August 2020, and the premises were delivered to us for the construction of certain tenant improvements. The term will end on the date that is 144 months from the first day of the first full month after rent commences. Base rent for the San Carlos Lease is $557,519 per month, with annual increases of 3%. We are obligated to provide a security deposit of $1.1 million in the form of a letter of credit.
In July 2019, concurrently with the execution and delivery of the San Carlos Lease, we also entered into a lease agreement, or the Temporary Lease, for the lease of approximately 74,788 rentable square feet of office space located in South San Francisco, California, which is intended to serve as our temporary headquarters, office and laboratory space while our permanent headquarters is under construction. The Temporary Lease commenced in August 2019, and is expected to end 90 days following the substantial completion of certain tenant improvements and construction on the space covered by the San Carlos Lease. Base rent for the Temporary Lease is $280,455 per month, with annual increases of 3%.
The capital lease obligations noted above represent certain property and equipment we acquired under capital leases. In 2017, we financed purchases of $226,000 in equipment under a capital lease agreement. Outstanding amounts under the capital lease agreements are generally secured by liens on the related property and equipment.
In addition, we enter into contracts in the normal course of business with contract research organizations for preclinical and clinical studies as well as with contract development manufacturing organizations for the manufacture of materials for those studies. These agreements generally provide for termination at the request of either party with less than one-year notice and are, therefore, cancelable contracts and not reflected in the table above.
- 83 -
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated, and reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with ASC 360-10, Property, Plant & Equipment-Overall, we review long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of property and equipment may not be recoverable. Determination of recoverability is based on an estimate of undiscounted future cash flows resulting from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition. In the event that such cash flows are not expected to be sufficient to recover the carrying amount of the assets, we write down the assets to their estimated fair values and recognize the loss in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss.
Research and Development Expenses and Accrued Research and Development Costs
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Research and development expenses consist of personnel costs for our research and product development employees. Also included are non-personnel costs such as professional fees payable to third parties for preclinical studies, clinical trials and research services, laboratory supplies and equipment maintenance and depreciation, intellectual property licenses and other consulting costs.
We estimate preclinical studies, clinical trials and research expenses based on the services performed, pursuant to contracts with research institutions that conduct and manage preclinical studies, clinical trials and research services on our behalf. We estimate these expenses based on discussions with management and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of services and the contracted fees to be paid for such services. We record the estimated costs of research and development activities based upon the estimated amount services provided but not yet invoiced, and include these costs in development expenses. We accrue for these costs based on factors such as estimates of the work completed and in accordance with agreements established with our third party service provides under the service agreements. We make significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrued liabilities balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accrued liabilities. We have not experienced any material differences between accrued costs and actual costs incurred. However, the status and timing of actual services performed may vary from our estimates, resulting in adjustments to expense in future periods. Changes in these estimates that result in material changes to our accruals could materially affect our results of operations. Payments associated with licensing agreements to acquire exclusive license to develop, use, manufacture and commercialize products that have not reached technological feasibility and do not have alternate future use are expensed as incurred.
Payments made to third parties under these arrangements in advance of the performance of the related services by the third parties are recorded as prepaid expenses until the services are rendered. We evaluate these payments for current or long-term classification based on when we expect to receive these services.
Stock-Based Compensation
We maintain a stock-based compensation plan as a long-term incentive for employees, consultants and members of our board of directors. The plan allows for the issuance of non-statutory options, or NSOs, incentive stock options, restricted stock and restricted stock units to employees and NSOs to nonemployees.
- 84 -
Stock-based payments are measured using fair-value-based measurements and recognized as compensation expense over the service period in which the awards are expected to vest. Our fair-value-based measurements of awards to employees and directors as of the grant date utilize the single-option award-valuation approach, and we use the straight-line method for expense attribution. The valuation model used for calculating the estimated fair value of stock awards is the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes model requires us to make assumptions and judgments about the variables used in the calculations, including the expected term (weighted-average period of time that the options granted are expected to be outstanding), the expected volatility of our common stock, the related risk-free interest rate and the expected dividend. We have elected to recognize forfeitures of stock-based payment awards as they occur.
For stock-based awards issued to non-employees, we record expense related to stock options based on the fair value of the options calculated using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model over the service performance period.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of highly subjective assumptions which determine the fair value of stock-based awards. These assumptions include:
◾ Expected Term. The expected term represents the period that stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. The expected term for option grants is determined using the simplified method. The simplified method deems the term to be the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the stock-based awards.
◾ Expected Volatility. Since we have been privately held and do not have any trading history for our common stock, the expected volatility was estimated based on the average volatility for comparable publicly traded biotechnology companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies were chosen based on their similar size, stage in the life cycle or area of specialty.
◾ Risk-Free Interest Rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of option.
◾ Expected Dividend. We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies.
We elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards, including but not limited to Topic 842, the new lease accounting standard, that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date that we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with the new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates. We early adopted Accounting Standards Update 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606), and Accounting Standards Update 2018-07, Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting (Accounting Standards Codification Topic 718), as the JOBS Act does not preclude an emerging growth company from early adopting a new or revised accounting standard earlier than the time that such standard applies to private companies. We expect to use the extended transition period for any other new or revised accounting standards during the period in which we remain an emerging growth company.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (i) December 31, 2024, (ii) the last day of our first fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of at least $1.07 billion, (iii) the date on which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” under the rules of the SEC, which means the market value of our voting and non-voting common equity that is held by non-affiliates is equal to or exceeds $700.0 million as of the prior June 30th
- 85 -
and (iv) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-K for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.