ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
THE BRINK’S COMPANY
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF
FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
AS OF DECEMBER 31, 2020 AND 2019
AND FOR EACH OF THE YEARS IN THE THREE-YEAR PERIOD ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020
Page
OPERATIONS
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Analysis of Results 23
Income and Expense Not Allocated to Segments
Other Operating Income and Expense
Nonoperating Income and Expense
Income Taxes
Noncontrolling Interests
Non-GAAP Results Reconciled to GAAP
Foreign Operations
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Overview
Operating Activities
Investing Activities
Financing Activities
Effect of Exchange Rate Changes on Cash and Cash Equivalents
Capitalization
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
Contractual Obligations
Contingent Matters
APPLICATION OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Deferred Tax Asset Valuation Allowance
Business Acquisitions 54
Goodwill, Other Intangible Assets and Property and Equipment Valuations
Retirement and Postemployment Benefit Obligations
Foreign Currency Translation
OPERATIONS
The Brink’s Company offers secure transportation and route-based logistics management services for cash and valuables throughout the world. These services include:
•Cash-in-transit services - armored vehicle transportation of valuables
•ATM services - replenishing and maintaining customers’ automated teller machines; providing network infrastructure services
•Global services - secure international transportation of valuables
•Cash management services
◦Currency and coin counting and sorting; deposit preparation and reconciliations; other cash management services
◦Safe and safe control device installation and servicing (including our patented CompuSafe® service)
◦Vaulting services
◦Check imaging services
•Payment services - bill payment and collection services on behalf of utility companies and other billers at any of our Brink’s or Brink’s - operated payment locations in Brazil, Colombia, Panama and Mexico, and Brink’s Money™ general purpose reloadable prepaid cards and corporate debit cards in the U.S.
•Commercial security systems services - design and installation of security systems in designated markets in Europe
•Guarding services - protection of airports, offices, and certain other locations in Europe and Brazil with or without electronic surveillance, access control, fire prevention and highly trained patrolling personnel
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we implemented changes to our organizational and management structure primarily related to our acquisition of the majority of the cash operations of G4S that resulted in changes to our operating segments. Previously, our business was managed and reported in three operating segments: North America, South America and Rest of World. We now mange our business in four segments, and segment results are reported by these four segments. The four segments are as follows:
•North America - operations in the U.S. and Canada, including the Brink’s Global Services ("BGS") line of business,
•Latin America - operations in Latin American countries where we have an ownership interest, including the BGS line of business. This segment includes operations in Mexico, which was previously reported in the North America segment,
•Europe - operations in European countries that primarily provide services outside of the BGS line of business. This segment includes the BGS line of business within these country operations, and
•Rest of World - operations in European countries that primarily provide BGS services. This segment includes other lines of business within these country operations. This segment also includes operations in the Middle East, Africa and Asia as well as BGS activity in Latin American countries where we do not have an ownership interest.
Prior period information has been revised to reflect our current segment structure.
We believe that Brink’s has significant competitive advantages including:
•brand name recognition
•reputation for a high level of service and security
•risk management and logistics expertise
•global network and customer base
•proven operational excellence, and
•high-quality insurance coverage and financial strength
We focus our time and resources on service quality, protecting and strengthening our brand, and addressing our risks. Our marketing and sales efforts are enhanced by the “Brink’s” brand, so we seek to protect and build its value. Because our services focus on handling, transporting, protecting and managing valuables, we strive to understand and manage risk.
In order to earn an adequate return on capital, we focus on the effective and efficient use of resources in addition to our pricing discipline. We attempt to maximize the amount of business that flows through our branches, vehicles and systems in order to obtain the lowest costs possible without compromising safety, security or service.
Operating results may vary from period to period. Because revenues are generated from charges per service performed or based on the value of goods transported, they can be affected by both the level of economic activity and the volume of business for specific customers. We also periodically incur costs to change the scale of our operations when volumes increase or decrease. Incremental costs incurred usually relate to increasing or decreasing the number of employees and increasing or decreasing branches or administrative facilities. In addition, security costs can vary depending on performance, the cost of insurance coverage, and changes in crime rates (i.e., attacks and robberies).
Brink’s revenues and related operating profit are generally higher in the second half of the year, particularly in the fourth quarter, due to generally increased economic activity associated with the holiday season.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Analysis of Results
Consolidated Results
GAAP and Non-GAAP Financial Measures We provide an analysis of our operations below on both a generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and non-GAAP basis. The purpose of the non-GAAP information is to report our operating profit, income from continuing operations and earnings per share without certain income and expense items that do not reflect the regular earnings of our operations. The non-GAAP financial measures are intended to provide investors with a supplemental comparison of our operating results and trends for the periods presented. Our management believes these measures are also useful to investors as such measures allow investors to evaluate our performance using the same metrics that our management uses to evaluate past performance and prospects for future performance. We do not consider these items to be reflective of our core operating performance due to the variability of such items from period-to-period in terms of size, nature and significance. The non-GAAP adjustments used to reconcile our GAAP results are described in detail on pages 30-32 and are reconciled to comparable GAAP measures on pages 37-40.
Definition of Organic Growth Organic growth represents the change in revenues or operating profit between the current and prior period excluding the effect of acquisitions and dispositions and changes in currency exchange rates. See definitions on page 25.
(a)Amounts reported in this table are attributable to the shareholders of Brink’s and exclude earnings related to noncontrolling interests.
(b)Non-GAAP results are reconciled to the applicable GAAP results on pages 37-40.
GAAP Basis
Analysis of Consolidated Results: 2020 versus 2019
Consolidated Revenues Revenues increased $7.7 million primarily due to the favorable impact of acquisitions and dispositions ($520.2 million), partially offset by the unfavorable impact of currency exchange rates ($233.2 million) and organic decreases in North America ($123.8 million), Europe ($102.8 million), Latin America ($31.2 million), and Rest of World ($17.5 million). The unfavorable currency impact was driven by the Brazilian real, Argentine peso, and Mexican peso. Revenues decreased 8% on an organic basis due the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the second, third, and fourth quarter of 2020. See above for our definition of “organic.”
Consolidated Costs and Expenses Cost of revenues increased 2% to $2,877.3 million primarily due to the impact of acquisitions and higher costs related to restructuring actions, primarily in the second quarter of 2020, partially offset by organic decreases in labor and other operational costs, including cost saving actions taken in response to COVID-19, and changes in currency exchange rates. Selling, general and administrative costs decreased 3% to $584.5 million due to organic decreases in labor and other operational costs, including cost saving actions taken in response to COVID-19, changes in currency exchange rates, and lower charges incurred related to an internal loss in the U.S. global services operations, partially offset by the impact of acquisitions.
Consolidated Operating Profit Operating profit decreased $23.3 million due mainly to:
•unfavorable changes in currency exchange rates ($49.9 million) driven by the Argentine peso, Brazilian real, and Mexican peso, partially offset by lower costs related to the impact of highly inflationary accounting in Argentina,
•organic decreases in Europe ($31.5 million), North America ($13.6 million), and Latin America ($5.7 million), and
•higher charges incurred related to an increase in reorganization and restructuring charges ($37.8 million), included in “Other items not allocated to segments”,
partially offset by:
•the favorable impact of business acquisitions and dispositions ($64.5 million), excluding intangible amortization and acquisition-related charges,
•an organic increase in Rest of World ($21.2 million),
•lower corporate expenses on an organic basis ($17.2 million), and
•the following items included in "Other items not allocated to segments":
◦lower charges incurred, primarily bad debt expense, related to an internal loss in the U.S. global services operations ($14.0 million),
◦lower costs related to business acquisitions and dispositions ($3.0 million), including the impact of acquisition-related charges and intangible asset amortization in 2020.
Consolidated Income from Continuing Operations Attributable to Brink’s and Related Per Share Amounts Income from continuing operations attributable to Brink’s shareholders decreased $11.5 million to $16.8 million primarily due to the operating profit decrease mentioned above, higher interest expense ($5.9 million), and higher income attributable to noncontrolling interests ($1.7 million), partially offset by lower interest and other non-operating expense ($15.0 million) and lower income tax expense ($4.4 million). Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations was $0.33, down from $0.55 in 2019.
Non-GAAP Basis
Analysis of Consolidated Results: 2020 versus 2019
Non-GAAP Consolidated Revenues Non-GAAP revenues increased $11.2 million primarily due to the favorable impact of acquisitions ($519.7 million), partially offset by the unfavorable impact of currency exchange rates ($233.2 million) and organic decreases in North America ($123.8 million), Europe ($102.8 million), Latin America ($31.2 million), and Rest of World ($17.5 million). The unfavorable currency impact was driven by the Brazilian real, Argentine peso, and Mexican peso. Revenues decreased 7% on an organic basis due the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the second, third, and fourth quarter of 2020. See above for our definition of “organic.”
Non-GAAP Consolidated Operating Profit Non-GAAP operating profit decreased $10.3 million due mainly to:
•unfavorable changes in currency exchange rates ($62.4 million) driven by the Argentine peso, Brazilian real, and Mexican peso, and
•organic decreases in Europe ($31.5 million), North America ($13.6 million), and Latin America ($5.7 million),
partially offset by:
•the favorable impact of business acquisitions and dispositions ($64.5 million), excluding intangible amortization and acquisition-related charges,
•an organic increase in Rest of World ($21.2 million), and
•lower corporate expenses on an organic basis ($17.2 million)
Non-GAAP Consolidated Income from Continuing Operations Attributable to Brink’s and Related Per Share Amounts Non-GAAP income from continuing operations attributable to Brink’s shareholders decreased $8.2 million to $190.8 million due to the operating profit decrease mentioned above, higher interest expense ($9.8 million), higher non-controlling interest ($2.4 million), partially offset by lower interest and other non-operating expense ($13.4 million) and lower income tax expense ($0.9 million). Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations was $3.76, down from $3.89 in 2019.
Revenues and Operating Profit by Segment
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
(a)Non-GAAP amounts include the impact of prior year comparable period results for acquired and disposed businesses. GAAP results also include the impact of acquisition-related intangible amortization, restructuring and other charges, and disposition related gains/losses.
(b)The amounts in the “Currency” column consist of the effects of Argentina devaluations under highly inflationary accounting and the sum of monthly currency changes. Monthly currency changes represent the accumulation throughout the year of the impact on current period results of changes in foreign currency rates from the prior year period.
(c)Corporate expenses are not allocated to segment results. Corporate expenses include salaries and other costs to manage the global business and to perform activities required by public companies.
(d)See pages 30-32 for more information.
(e)Segment revenues equal our total reported non-GAAP revenues.
Analysis of Segment Results: 2020 versus 2019
North America
Revenues decreased 8% ($109.0 million) primarily due to a 9% organic decrease ($123.8 million) and the unfavorable impact of currency exchange rates ($1.1 million) related to the Canadian dollar, partially offset by the favorable impact of acquisitions ($15.9 million). Organic revenue decreased primarily from lower volumes due to the second, third, and fourth quarter impact of the COVID-19 pandemic throughout the segment. Operating profit decreased 12% ($12.4 million) driven by an organic decrease ($13.6 million), partially offset by the favorable impact of acquisitions ($1.1 million) and currency exchange rates ($0.1 million). The organic decrease was due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by labor and other operational cost saving actions, including those taken in response to COVID-19 and government COVID-19 assistance in Canada.
Latin America
Revenues decreased 19% ($247.9 million) primarily due to the unfavorable impact of currency exchange rates ($240.6 million) primarily from the Brazilian real, Argentine peso, and Mexican peso, and an organic decrease of 2% ($31.2 million), partially offset by the favorable impact of acquisitions and dispositions ($23.9 million). The organic decrease was due to lower volumes across the region due to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by organic growth in Argentina driven by inflation-based price increases. Operating profit was down 21% ($63.3 million) driven by unfavorable currency ($60.9 million) and an organic decrease of 2% ($5.7 million), offset by the favorable impact of acquisitions and dispositions ($3.3 million). The organic decrease was driven by Mexico and Chile, primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by organic growth in Argentina.
Europe
Revenues increased 37% ($204.2 million) due to the favorable impact of acquisitions and dispositions ($291.2 million) and currency exchange rates ($15.8 million), partially offset by a 19% organic decrease ($102.8 million). The organic decrease was primarily due to lower volumes throughout the region, especially in France, driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Operating profit increased 20% ($8.6 million) due to the favorable impact of acquisitions and dispositions ($37.7 million) and currency exchange rates ($2.4 million), partially offset by an organic decrease ($31.5 million). The organic decrease was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by labor and other operational cost saving actions, including those taken in response to COVID-19. Results were also helped by government COVID-19 assistance in several countries in the second, third, and fourth quarters, which offset the impact of revenue declines and delays in executing cost reduction actions.
Rest of World
Revenues increased 37% ($163.9 million) due to the favorable impact of acquisitions and dispositions ($188.7 million), partially offset by a 4% organic decrease ($17.5 million) and the unfavorable impact of currency exchange rates ($7.3 million). The organic decrease was primarily due to lower volumes throughout the region driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by higher global services revenue. Operating profit increased 55% ($41.4 million) due to the favorable impact of acquisitions and dispositions ($22.4 million) and an organic increase ($21.2 million), partially offset by the unfavorable impact of currency exchange rates ($2.2 million). The organic increase was primarily due to global services growth and the impact of labor and other operational cost saving actions, including those taken in response to COVID-19. Results were also helped by government COVID-19 assistance in several countries in the second, third, and fourth quarters, which offset the impact of revenue declines and delays in executing cost reduction actions.
Analysis of Results: 2019 versus 2018
Consolidated Results
(a)Amounts reported in this table are attributable to the shareholders of Brink’s and exclude earnings related to noncontrolling interests.
(b)Non-GAAP results are reconciled to the applicable GAAP results on pages 37-40.
Deconsolidation of Venezuela
Due to political and economic conditions in Venezuela, in the second quarter of 2018 we determined that we no longer met the accounting criteria for control over our Venezuelan operations. We expect these conditions to continue for the foreseeable future. Consequently, we began reporting the results of our investment in our Venezuelan subsidiaries using the cost method of accounting. We determined the fair value of our cost method investment in, and receivables from, our Venezuelan subsidiaries to be insignificant based on our expectations of dividend payments and settlements of such receivables in future periods. As a result, we deconsolidated our Venezuela subsidiaries and recognized a pretax loss of $126.7 million in the second quarter of 2018. This loss is excluded from our non-GAAP results.
GAAP Basis
Analysis of Consolidated Results: 2019 versus 2018
Consolidated Revenues Revenues increased $194.3 million as the favorable impact of acquisitions ($287.9 million) and organic growth in Latin America ($192.9 million), North America ($19.8 million), Rest of World ($6.6 million), and Europe ($2.3 million) were partially offset by the unfavorable impact of currency exchange rates ($267.8 million) and the deconsolidation of Venezuela operations ($51.4 million) in the second quarter of 2018. The unfavorable currency impact was driven by the Argentine peso, Brazilian real and the euro. Revenues increased 5% on an organic basis due mainly to higher average selling prices in Argentina (including the effects of inflation) and organic revenue growth in Mexico due to price increases and volume growth. See above for our definition of “organic.”
Consolidated Costs and Expenses Cost of revenues increased 5% to $2,832.1 million primarily due to the impact of acquisitions, including integration costs, and inflation-based organic increases in labor and other operational costs, partially offset by changes in currency exchange rates and the deconsolidation of Venezuela operations in the second quarter of 2018. Selling, general and administrative costs increased 19% to $604.9 million due primarily to the impact of acquisitions, including integration costs, corporate expenses, charges related to internal loss in the U.S. global services operations, and inflation-based organic increases in labor and other administrative costs, partially offset by changes in currency exchange rates.
Consolidated Operating Profit Operating profit decreased $37.9 million due mainly to:
•the following items included in "Other items not allocated to segments":
◦higher costs related to business acquisitions and dispositions ($47.6 million), primarily from the impact of acquisition-related charges and intangible asset amortization in 2019,
◦net charges incurred, primarily bad debt and third party costs, related to an internal loss in the U.S. global services operations ($20.9 million),
◦deconsolidation of Venezuela in the second quarter of 2018 ($12.5 million), and
◦higher costs related to reorganization and restructuring ($8.2 million)
•unfavorable changes in currency exchange rates ($72.6 million) driven by the Argentine peso and Brazilian real, slightly offset by the effect of Venezuela devaluations prior to deconsolidation, and
•higher corporate expenses ($29.1 million on an organic basis),
partially offset by:
•organic increases in Latin America ($101.4 million), North America ($16.1 million), Rest of World ($1.6 million), and Europe ($1.4 million), and
•the favorable operating impact of business acquisitions and dispositions ($34.7 million), excluding intangible asset amortization and acquisition-related charges.
Consolidated Income from Continuing Operations Attributable to Brink’s and Related Per Share Amounts Income from continuing operations attributable to Brink’s shareholders increased $61.6 million to $28.3 million primarily due to the second quarter of 2018 loss on deconsolidation of Venezuela operations ($126.7 million), lower income tax expense ($9.0 million), and lower income attributable to noncontrolling interests ($1.6 million), partially offset by the operating profit decrease mentioned above, higher interest expense ($23.9 million), and higher interest and other nonoperating expense ($13.9 million). Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations was $0.55, up from negative $0.65 in 2018.
Non-GAAP Basis
Analysis of Consolidated Results: 2019 versus 2018
Non-GAAP Consolidated Revenues Non-GAAP revenues increased $242.2 million as the favorable impact of acquisitions ($288.4 million) and organic growth in Latin America ($192.9 million), North America ($19.8 million), Rest of World ($6.6 million), and Europe ($2.3 million) were partially offset by the unfavorable impact of currency exchange rates ($267.8 million). The unfavorable currency impact was driven by the Argentine peso, Brazilian real and the euro. Non-GAAP revenues increased 6% on an organic basis due mainly to higher average selling prices in Argentina (including the effects of inflation) and organic revenue growth in Mexico from price increases and volume growth. See above for our definition of “organic.”
Non-GAAP Consolidated Operating Profit Non-GAAP operating profit increased $44.7 million due mainly to:
•organic increases in Latin America ($101.4 million), North America ($16.1 million), Rest of World ($1.6 million), and Europe ($1.4 million), and
•the favorable operating impact of business acquisitions and dispositions ($34.7 million),
partially offset by:
•unfavorable changes in currency exchange rates ($81.4 million) driven by the Argentine peso and Brazilian real, and
•higher corporate expenses ($29.1 million on an organic basis).
Non-GAAP Consolidated Income from Continuing Operations Attributable to Brink’s and Related Per Share Amounts Non-GAAP income from continuing operations attributable to Brink’s shareholders increased $19.6 million to $199.0 million due to the operating profit increase mentioned above, lower income tax expense ($3.7 million) and lower income attributable to noncontrolling interests ($2.5 million), partially offset by higher interest expense ($19.2 million) and higher interest and other nonoperating expense ($12.1 million). Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations was $3.89, up from $3.46 in 2018.
Revenues and Operating Profit by Segment: 2019 versus 2018
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
See page 25 for footnotes.
Analysis of Segment Results: 2019 versus 2018
North America
Revenues increased 24% ($269.4 million) primarily due to the favorable impact of acquisitions ($253.2 million), primarily from the Dunbar acquisition, and 2% organic growth ($19.8 million), slightly offset by the unfavorable impact of currency exchange rates ($3.6 million) from the Canadian dollar. Organic revenue growth increased primarily from price increases in the U.S. Operating profit increased $33.2 million primarily due to organic growth in the U.S. and the favorable impact of acquisitions ($17.2 million), primarily from the Dunbar acquisition. Organic profit growth in the U.S. was driven by price increases and productivity improvements related to breakthrough initiatives and Dunbar acquisition synergies.
Latin America
Revenues increased 3% ($38.2 million) due to 15% organic growth ($192.9 million) and the favorable impact of acquisitions ($69.7 million), primarily from the Rodoban acquisition, mostly offset by the unfavorable impact of currency exchange rates ($224.4 million) primarily from the Argentine peso and Brazilian real. The organic growth was driven by inflation-based price increases and volume growth in Argentina and volume growth and price increases in Mexico and Brazil. Operating profit was up $42.0 million due to organic growth ($101.4 million), and the favorable impact of acquisitions and dispositions ($16.1 million), primarily from the Rodoban acquisition, partially offset by unfavorable currency ($75.5 million) driven by the Argentine peso and Brazilian real. The organic profit increase was driven by organic revenue growth in Argentina and growth in Mexico and Brazil. Organic profit growth in Mexico was driven by higher volumes, price increases, and labor related productivity improvements. The growth in Brazil was driven primarily by $12 million in lower social taxes due to recovery of overpayments and a lower rate, along with volume growth and productivity improvements.
Europe
Revenues decreased 10% ($63.0 million) due to the unfavorable impact of acquisitions and dispositions ($35.1 million), primarily related to the disposition of the French airport security services company in the second quarter of 2018, and the unfavorable impact of currency exchange rates ($30.2 million), partially offset by an organic increase ($2.3 million). Operating profit decreased 1% ($0.4 million) due to the unfavorable impact of currency exchange rates ($2.3 million), mostly offset by organic growth ($1.4 million), primarily related to France, and the favorable impact of acquisitions and dispositions ($0.5 million).
Rest of World
Revenues decreased 1% ($2.4 million) due to the unfavorable impact of currency exchange rates ($9.6 million), mostly offset by an organic increase ($6.6 million) and the favorable impact of acquisitions and dispositions ($0.6 million). Operating profit increased 2% ($1.6 million) due to organic growth ($1.6 million) and the favorable impact of acquisitions and dispositions ($0.9 million), partially offset by unfavorable currency ($0.9 million). The organic increase was primarily related to Israel, partially offset by a decrease in Asia Pacific.
Income and Expense Not Allocated to Segments
Corporate Expenses
Corporate expenses include costs to manage the global business and to perform activities required of public companies, as well as currency transaction gains and losses.
Corporate expenses in 2020 were $15.4 million lower than the prior year primarily due to a reduction in bad debt expense resulting from the reconciliation of segment policies to U.S. GAAP, cost savings initiated as a result of the COVID crisis, including lower IT expenses, and lower stock and other incentive compensation expense. The bad debt expense decrease excludes the impact of the internal loss in our U.S. global services operations presented separately in Other Items Not Allocated to Segments in the table below. Corporate expenses include corporate headquarters costs, regional management costs, currency transaction gains and losses, costs related to global initiatives and adjustments to reconcile segment accounting policies to U.S. GAAP. The reconciliation of segment policies to U.S. GAAP represents adjustments to bad debt expense reported within the segments to bad debt expense required on a consolidated basis under U.S. GAAP.
Other Items Not Allocated to Segments
2020 versus 2019
The impact of other items not allocated to segments on operating profit was a larger loss ($167.8 million in 2020 versus $154.8 million in the prior year). The change was primarily due to higher charges from reorganization and restructuring activities in the current year, partially offset by a reduction in net charges in 2020 related to the internal loss in the U.S. global services operations, lower net costs related to acquisitions and dispositions activities and a decline in costs related to the impact of highly inflationary accounting in Argentina.
Venezuela operations Prior to the deconsolidation of our Venezuelan subsidiaries effective June 30, 2018, we excluded from our segment results all of our Venezuela operating results due to the Venezuelan government's restrictions that prevented us from repatriating funds. In light of these unique circumstances, our operations in Venezuela have been largely independent of the rest of our global operations. As a result, the Chief Executive Officer, the Company's Chief Operating Decision maker ("CODM"), assessed segment performance and made resource decisions by segment excluding Venezuela operating results. Additionally, management believed excluding Venezuela from segment results made it possible to more effectively evaluate the company’s performance between periods. Prior to the deconsolidation, Venezuela operating results included remeasurement gains and losses on monetary assets and liabilities related to currency devaluations. We recognized remeasurement gains of $2.2 million in 2018.
Factors considered by management in excluding Venezuela results included:
•Continued inability to repatriate cash to redeploy to other operations or dividend to shareholders
•Highly inflationary environment
•Fixed exchange rate policy
•Continued currency devaluations and
•Difficulty raising prices and controlling costs
Reorganization and Restructuring
2016 Restructuring
In the fourth quarter of 2016, management implemented restructuring actions across our global business operations and our corporate functions. As a result of these actions, we recognized $18.1 million in related 2016 costs and an additional $17.3 million in 2017 under this restructuring for costs related to severance, asset-related adjustments, a benefit program termination and lease terminations. We recognized an additional $13.0 million in 2018 under this restructuring for severance costs and asset-related adjustments. The actions under this program were substantially completed in 2018, with cumulative pretax charges of approximately $48 million. Severance actions from this restructuring reduced our global workforce by approximately 800 positions.
Other Restructurings
Management periodically implements restructuring actions in targeted sections of our business. As a result of these actions, we recognized net costs of $7.6 million in 2018 and $28.8 million in 2019, primarily severance costs and charges related to the modification of share-based compensations awards in 2019. We recognized $66.6 million net costs in operating profit and $0.6 million costs in interest and other nonoperating income (expense) in 2020, primarily severance costs. When completed, the current restructuring actions will reduce our workforce by 1,000 to 1,200 positions and result in in annualized cost savings of $22 million to $27 million. For the current restructuring actions, we expect to incur additional costs between $4 million and $6 million in future periods.
Due to the unique circumstances around these charges, they have not been allocated to segment results and are excluded from non-GAAP results. Charges related to the employees, assets, leases and contracts impacted by these restructuring actions were excluded from the segments and corporate expenses as shown in the table below.
Acquisitions and dispositions Part of our strategy is the pursuit of accretive business acquisitions. In 2020, we acquired multiple business operations from G4S at different times during the year. In 2019, we completed four business acquisitions in the U.S., Brazil and Colombia. In 2018, we completed one business acquisition in the U.S. and acquired a controlling interest in a business in Cambodia. We also completed the acquisition of the noncontrolling interest in our Colombian subsidiary. Certain acquisition and disposition items that are not considered part of the ongoing activities of the business and are special in nature are consistently excluded from non-GAAP results. These items are described below:
2020 Acquisitions and Dispositions Items
•Amortization expense for acquisition-related intangible assets was $35.1 million in 2020.
•We incurred $23.5 million in integration costs related primarily to Dunbar and G4S in 2020.
•Transaction costs related to business acquisitions were $19.3 million in 2020.
•Restructuring costs related to acquisitions were $4.7 million in 2020.
2019 Acquisitions and Dispositions Items
•We incurred $43.1 million in integration costs related to Dunbar, Rodoban, TVS and COMEF in 2019.
•Amortization expense for acquisition-related intangible assets was $27.8 million in 2019.
•Transaction costs related to business acquisitions were $7.9 million in 2019.
•Restructuring costs related to acquisitions, primarily Rodoban and Dunbar, were $5.6 million in 2019.
•In 2019, we recognized $2.2 million in net charges, primarily asset impairment and severance costs, related to the exit from our top-up prepaid mobile phone business in Brazil.
•Compensation expense related to the retention of key Dunbar employees was $1.5 million in 2019.
2018 Acquisitions and Dispositions Items
•Amortization expense for acquisition-related intangible assets was $17.7 million in 2018.
•Integration costs in 2018 related to acquisitions in France and the U.S. were $8.1 million.
•2018 transaction costs related to business acquisitions were $6.7 million.
•We incurred 2018 severance charges related to our acquisitions in Argentina, France, U.S. and Brazil of $5.0 million.
•Compensation expense related to the retention of key Dunbar employees was $4.1 million in 2018.
•We recognized a net gain in 2018 ($2.6 million, net of statutory employee benefit) on the sale of real estate in Mexico.
Argentina highly inflationary impact Beginning in the third quarter of 2018, we designated Argentina's economy as highly inflationary for accounting purposes. As a result, Argentine peso-denominated monetary assets and liabilities are now remeasured at each balance sheet date to the currency exchange rate then in effect, with currency remeasurement gains and losses recognized in earnings. In addition, nonmonetary assets retain a higher historical basis when the currency is devalued. The higher historical basis results in incremental expense being recognized when the nonmonetary assets are consumed. In the second half of 2018, we recognized $8.0 million in pretax charges related to highly inflationary accounting, including currency remeasurement losses of $6.2 million. In 2019, we recognized $14.5 million in pretax charges related to highly inflationary accounting, including currency remeasurement losses of $11.3 million. In 2020, we recognized $10.7 million in pretax charges related to highly inflationary accounting, including currency remeasurement losses of $7.7 million. These amounts are excluded from segment and non-GAAP results.
Internal loss A former non-management employee in our U.S. global services operations embezzled funds from Brink's in prior years. Except for a small deductible amount, the amount of the internal loss related to the embezzlement was covered by our insurance. In an effort to cover up the embezzlement, the former employee intentionally misstated the underlying accounts receivable subledger data. In 2019, we incurred $4.5 million in costs (primarily third party expenses) to reconstruct the accounts receivables subledger. In 2020, we incurred an additional $0.3 million in costs related to this activity.
In the third quarter of 2019, we were able to identify $4.0 million of revenues billed and collected in prior periods which had never been recorded in the general ledger. We also identified and recorded $0.3 million in bank fees, which had been incurred in prior periods. The rebuild of the subledger was completed during the third quarter of 2019. Based on the reconstructed subledger, we were able to analyze and quantify the uncollected receivables from prior periods. Although we plan to attempt to collect these receivables, we estimated an increase to bad debt expense of $13.7 million in the third quarter of 2019.
The estimate of the allowance for doubtful accounts was adjusted in the fourth quarter of 2019 for an additional $6.4 million and again in 2020 for an additional $6.6 million. This estimate will be adjusted in future periods, if needed, as assumptions related to the collectability of these accounts receivable change. As of December 31, 2020, we had recorded an allowance of $13.1 million on $14.2 million of accounts receivable, or 92%. We have defined accounts receivable impacted by the embezzlement as accounts receivable recorded as of and prior to the third quarter of 2019. Due to the unusual nature of this internal loss and the related errors in the subledger data, along with the fact that management has excluded these amounts when evaluating internal performance, we have excluded these net charges from segment and non-GAAP results.
Reporting compliance Certain compliance costs (primarily third party expenses) are excluded from segment and non-GAAP results. These costs relate to the implementation and January 1, 2019 adoption of the new lease accounting standard ($0.5 million in 2020, $1.8 million in 2019 and $2.7 million in 2018). We also incurred $0.3 million in 2019 and $1.8 million in 2018 in costs related to mitigation of material weaknesses. We did not incur any such costs in 2020.
Other Operating Income and Expense
Amounts below represent consolidated other operating income and expense.
2020 versus 2019
We reported other operating expense of $15.6 million in 2020 versus other operating expense of $9.4 million in the prior year. The change was primarily due to lower gains on the sales of property and other assets and higher impairment losses in 2020 partially offset by lower net losses on foreign currency items in 2020 as compared to 2019. The foreign currency items above do not include business acquisition-related currency items which are reported in Interest and Other Nonoperating Income (Expense).
Nonoperating Income and Expense
Interest Expense
Interest expense was higher in 2020 primarily due to higher borrowing levels due to business acquisitions. See Note 15 for further information.
Loss on deconsolidation of Venezuela operations
See Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements for more information about the loss on deconsolidation of our Venezuelan operations.
Interest and Other Nonoperating Income (Expense)
(a)The gain in 2020 is primarily related to the market value increase of our investment in MoneyGram International, Inc.
(b)Amounts in 2020 represent currency transaction losses on contingent consideration payable related to G4S business acquisitions. Prior to the July 1, 2018 highly inflationary designation for accounting purposes, currency transaction losses incurred by Brink's Argentina related to its U.S. dollar-denominated payables to the sellers of Maco Transporatadora and Maco Litoral.
(c)Represents loss on foreign currency forward contracts related to acquisition of business operations from G4S.
(d)Related to an unfavorable court ruling in 2019 on a non-income tax claim in Colombia. The court ruled that Brink's must pay interest accruing from 2009 to the current date. The principal amount of the claim was less than $1 million and was recognized in selling, general and administrative expenses in 2019.
(e)Certain of our Latin American subsidiaries incur non-income taxes related to the billing of intercompany charges. These intercompany charges do not impact Latin America segment results and are eliminated in our consolidation.
(f)Charges incurred for providing financial support to Brink's Venezuelan subsidiaries after the June 30, 2018 deconsolidation. We do not expect any future funding of the Venezuela business, as long as current U.S. sanctions remain in effect.
(g)Gain on termination of a mining lease obligation related to former coal operations. We have no remaining mining leases.
(h)Gains on the sale of our former French airport security services subsidiary in the second quarter of 2018 (adjusted downward by $0.4 million in the fourth quarter of 2020) and on our former French security services subsidiary in the first quarter of 2020 (adjusted downward by $0.2 million in the fourth quarter of 2020).
Interest and other nonoperating income (expense) was higher in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to higher retirement benefit costs in 2019, mainly due to settlement charges in the U.S. frozen pension plan.
Income Taxes
Summary Rate Reconciliation - GAAP
(a)In 2019, we recognized a benefit of $7.3 million related to a previously recognized $23.5 million current tax expense that accelerated U.S. taxable income in 2015.
Summary Rate Reconciliation - Non-GAAP(a)
(a)See pages 37-40 for a reconciliation of non-GAAP results to GAAP.
Overview
Our effective tax rate has varied in the past three years from the statutory U.S. federal rate due to various factors, including
•changes in judgment about the need for valuation allowances
•changes in the geographical mix of earnings
•changes in laws in the U.S., France, Mexico, and Argentina
•U.S. tax on accelerated taxable income
•timing of benefit recognition for uncertain tax positions
•state income taxes
•tax benefit for distributions of share-based payments
We establish or reverse valuation allowances for deferred tax assets depending on all available information including historical and expected future operating performance of our subsidiaries. Changes in judgment about the future realization of deferred tax assets can result in significant adjustments to the valuation allowances. Based on our historical and future expected taxable earnings, we believe it is more-likely-than-not that we will realize the benefit of the deferred tax assets, net of valuation allowances.
Continuing Operations
2020 Compared to U.S. Statutory Rate
The effective income tax rate on continuing operations in 2020 was greater than the 21% U.S. statutory tax rate primarily due to the geographical mix of earnings, book losses for which no tax benefit can be recorded, nondeductible expenses in Mexico, taxes on cross border payments and the characterization of a French business tax as an income tax, partially offset by the significant tax benefits related to the distribution of share-based payments.
2019 Compared to U.S. Statutory Rate
The effective income tax rate on continuing operations in 2019 was greater than the 21% U.S. statutory tax rate primarily due to the geographical mix of earnings, book losses for which no tax benefit can be recorded, nondeductible expenses in Mexico, taxes on cross border payments and the characterization of a French business tax as an income tax, partially offset by the significant tax benefits related to the distribution of share-based payments and a U.S. tax benefit recorded on deferred deductions.
Noncontrolling Interests
Compared to 2019, the increase in net income attributable to noncontrolling interests to $5.9 million in 2020 is primarily due to the G4S acquisitions that closed in the second and third quarters of 2020. Compared to 2018, the decrease in net income attributable to noncontrolling interests to $4.2 million in 2019 was primarily due to the deconsolidation of our Venezuelan subsidiaries effective June 30, 2018, and the acquisition of the Colombian noncontrolling interests in the fourth quarter of 2018
See Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements for more information about the deconsolidation of our Venezuelan subsidiaries.
Non-GAAP Results Reconciled to GAAP
Non-GAAP results described in this filing are financial measures that are not required by or presented in accordance with GAAP. The purpose of the Non-GAAP results is to report financial information from the primary operations of our business by excluding the effects of certain income and expenses that do not reflect the ordinary earnings of our operations. The specific items excluded have not been allocated to segments, are described in detail on pages 30-32, and are reconciled to comparable GAAP measures below. The full-year Non-GAAP tax rate in each year excludes certain pretax and income tax amounts. Amounts reported for prior periods have been updated in this report to present information consistently for all periods presented.
The Non-GAAP financial measures are intended to provide investors with a supplemental comparison of our operating results and trends for the periods presented. Our management believes these measures are also useful to investors as such measures allow investors to evaluate our performance using the same metrics that our management uses to evaluate past performance and prospects for future performance. We do not consider these items to be reflective of our operating performance as they result from events and circumstances that are not a part of our core business. Additionally, non-GAAP results are utilized as performance measures in certain management incentive compensation plans.
Non-GAAP results should not be considered as an alternative to revenue, income or earnings per share amounts determined in accordance with GAAP and should be read in conjunction with their GAAP counterparts.
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
(a)From continuing operations.
(b)See “Other Items Not Allocated To Segments” on pages 30-32 for details. We do not consider these items to be reflective of our operating performance as they result from events and circumstances that are not a part of our core business.
(c)Our U.S. retirement plans are frozen and costs related to these plans are excluded from non-GAAP results. Certain non-U.S. operations also have retirement plans. Settlement charges related to these non-U.S. plans are also excluded from non-GAAP results.
(d)Represents the estimated impact of tax legislation enacted into law in the fourth quarter of 2017. This primarily relates to the U.S. tax reform expense from the remeasurement of our net deferred tax assets. The 2018 amount represents a benefit associated with reversing a portion of the 2017 estimated impact as a result of guidance issued by U.S. authorities.
(e)The non-GAAP tax rate excludes the 2019 foreign tax benefits that resulted from the transaction that accelerated U.S. tax in 2015.
(f)Gain on termination of a mining lease obligation related to former coal operations. We have no remaining mining leases.
(g)Effective June 30, 2018, we deconsolidated our investment in Venezuelan subsidiaries and recognized a pretax charge of $126.7 million.
(h)Because we reported a loss from continuing operations on a GAAP basis in 2018, GAAP EPS was calculated using basic shares. However, as we reported income from continuing operations on a non-GAAP basis in 2018, non-GAAP EPS was calculated using diluted shares.
(i)Amounts in 2020 and 2019 primarily relate to interest incurred on a cross currency swap hedging foreign currency risk on the intercompany financing of the Rodoban acquisition. The 2018 amount represents interest accretion on the installment payments to the sellers of our Maco Transportadora and Maco Litoral acquisitions.
(j)In addition to the items discussed in “Other Items Not Allocated To Segments” on pages 30-32, includes a $4.5 million gain on the sale of a French security services business in 2020, a cumulative $10.8 million pretax gain on the sale of our French airport security business in 2018, acquisition-related pretax currency transaction losses of $3.6 million in 2020 and $15.5 million in 2018, and acquisition-related pretax losses on foreign currency forward contracts of $7.0 million in 2020.
(k)Post-deconsolidation funding of ongoing costs related to our Venezuelan operations was $0.9 million in 2019 ($0.6 million in the second half of 2018) and was expensed as incurred and reported in interest and other nonoperating income (expense). We do not expect any future funding of the Venezuela business, as long as current U.S. sanctions remain in effect.
Non-GAAP reconciled to GAAP
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
See page 37 for footnote explanations.
Non-GAAP reconciled to GAAP
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
See page 37 for footnote explanations.
Non-GAAP reconciled to GAAP
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
See page 37 for footnote explanations.
Foreign Operations
We currently serve customers in more than 100 countries, including 52 countries where we operate subsidiaries.
We are subject to risks customarily associated with doing business in foreign countries, including labor and economic conditions, the imposition of international sanctions, including by the U.S. government, political instability, controls on repatriation of earnings and capital, nationalization, expropriation and other forms of restrictive action by local governments. Changes in the political or economic environments in the countries in which we operate could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. The future effects, if any, of these risks are unknown. In April 2019, the U.S. government sanctioned the Venezuela central bank and, as a result, we have ceased support of our Venezuela business.
Our international operations conduct a majority of their business in local currencies. Because our financial results are reported in U.S. dollars, they are affected by changes in the value of various local currencies in relation to the U.S. dollar. Recent strengthening of the U.S. dollar relative to certain currencies has reduced our reported dollar revenues and operating profit, which may continue in 2021. See Application of Critical Accounting Policies-Foreign Currency Translation on pages 60-61 for a description of our accounting methods and assumptions used to include our Argentina operations in our consolidated financial statements, and a description of the accounting for subsidiaries operating in highly inflationary economies.
At December 31, 2020, Argentina's economy remains highly inflationary for accounting purposes. At December 31, 2020, we had net monetary assets denominated in Argentine pesos of $31.3 million (including cash of $24.4 million) and nonmonetary net assets of $146.2 million (including $99.8 million of goodwill). At December 31, 2020, we had minimal equity securities denominated in Argentine pesos.
During September 2019, the Argentine government announced currency controls on both companies and individuals. Under the exchange procedures implemented by the central bank, approval is required for many transactions, including dividend repatriation abroad.
During the third quarter of 2020 and during the fourth quarter of 2019, we elected to use other market mechanisms to convert Argentine pesos into U.S. dollars. Conversions under these other market mechanisms generally settle at rates that are less favorable than the rates at which we remeasure the financial statements of Brink’s Argentina. As a result, we recognized $10.4 million in 2020 and $4.7 million in 2019 of such conversion losses when we converted Argentine pesos into U.S. dollars at rates that were approximately 100% and 25% less favorable than the rates at which we remeasured the financial statements of Brink’s Argentina. These conversion losses are classified in the consolidated statements of operations as other operating income (expense).
Although the Argentine government has implemented currency controls, Brink’s management continues to provide guidance and strategic oversight, including budgeting and forecasting for Brink’s Argentina. We continue to control our Argentina business for purposes of consolidation of our financial statements and continue to monitor the situation in Argentina.
Changes in exchange rates may also affect transactions which are denominated in currencies other than the functional currency of a given foreign entity. From time to time, we use short term foreign currency forward and swap contracts to hedge transactional risks associated with foreign currencies, as discussed in