ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Selected Financial Data and our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that are subject to risks and uncertainties. See “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks, and assumptions associated with those statements. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in or implied by forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Form 10-K, particularly in the section titled “Risk Factors.”
In addition, the following discussion and analysis compares our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019. For a discussion of the financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, see “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 that was filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on February 28, 2020.
Overview
Blucora, Inc. (the “Company,” “Blucora,” “we,” “our,” or “us”) is a leading provider of integrated tax-focused wealth management services and software, assisting consumers, small business owners, tax professionals, financial professionals, and certified public accounting (“CPA”) firms in achieving better long-term outcomes via holistic, tax-advantaged solutions. Our mission is to empower people to improve their financial wellness through data and technology-driven solutions. We conduct our operations through two primary businesses: (1) the Wealth Management business and (2) the Tax Preparation business. Our common stock is listed on the NASDAQ Global Select Market under the symbol “BCOR.”
Wealth Management
The Wealth Management business consists of the operations of Avantax Wealth Management and Avantax Planning Partners (collectively, the “Wealth Management business” or the “Wealth Management segment”).
Avantax Wealth Management provides tax-focused wealth management solutions for financial professionals, tax professionals, CPA firms, and their clients. Avantax Wealth Management offers its services through its registered broker-dealer, registered investment advisor (“RIA”), and insurance agency subsidiaries and is the largest U.S. tax-focused independent broker-dealer. Avantax Wealth Management works with a nationwide network of financial professionals that operate as independent contractors. Avantax Wealth Management provides these financial professionals with an integrated platform of technical, marketing, practice, compliance, and product support tools to assist in making each financial professional a comprehensive financial service center for his or her clients. Our ongoing investments in technology and data analytics are designed to drive meaningful growth in assets over time. Avantax Wealth Management formerly operated under the HD Vest and 1st Global brands prior to the rebranding of these businesses to Avantax Wealth Management in 2019 (the “2019 Rebranding”).
On July 1, 2020, we acquired all of the issued and outstanding common stock of Honkamp Krueger Financial Services, Inc. (“HKFS,” and such acquisition, the “HKFS Acquisition”). HKFS operates as a captive, or employee-based, RIA and wealth management business that partners with CPA firms in order to provide their consumer and small business clients with holistic financial planning and advisory services, as well as retirement plan solutions. The operations of HKFS are included in our operating results as part of the Wealth Management segment from the date of the HKFS Acquisition. For additional information, see “Business Developments-HKFS Acquisition” below.
On January 4, 2021, we announced the rebranding of HKFS to Avantax Planning Partners (the “2021 Rebranding”). The 2021 Rebranding was designed to create tighter brand alignment, bringing the Wealth Management business under one common and recognizable brand.
As of December 31, 2020, the Wealth Management business worked with a nationwide network of 3,770 financial professionals and supported $83.0 billion of total client assets, including $35.6 billion of advisory assets.
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 43
Tax Preparation
The Tax Preparation business consists of the operations of TaxAct, Inc. (“TaxAct,” the “Tax Preparation business,” or the “Tax Preparation segment”) and provides digital tax preparation solutions for consumers, small business owners, and tax professionals through its website www.TaxAct.com and its mobile applications.
Business Developments
COVID-19 Pandemic
Beginning in March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic had a significant negative impact on the U.S. and global economy and caused substantial disruption in the U.S. and global securities markets, and as a result, negatively impacted both our Wealth Management and Tax Preparation businesses.
In our Wealth Management business, the economic and financial market disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted the value of some of our clients’ assets during the first quarter of 2020, which caused a corresponding decline in the amount of revenue that we generated from these client assets. Further, we have experienced a decline in transaction-based commission revenue from lower trading volumes, as well as significantly reduced cash sweep revenue due to changes in prevailing interest rates. Positive financial market movement in the second, third, and fourth quarters of 2020 increased advisory and brokerage asset balances, with higher client asset balances benefiting advisory fees and trailing commissions. Overall, we expect that revenues in our Wealth Management business will remain susceptible to being adversely affected in future periods in which pandemic-influenced economic and market factors remain present.
In our Tax Preparation segment, our revenue and operating income generation is highly seasonal, with a significant portion of our annual revenue typically earned in the first four months of our fiscal year. During the third and fourth quarters, the Tax Preparation segment typically reports losses because revenue from the segment during this period is minimal while core operating expenses continue. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) extended the filing and payment deadline for tax year 2019 federal tax returns to July 15, 2020. This extension resulted in the shifting of a significant portion of Tax Preparation segment revenue that would typically have been expected to be earned in the first and second quarters of 2020 to the third quarter of 2020. In addition, sales and marketing expenses were elevated in 2020 due to incremental investment in March 2020 to address weak performance through the first two months of the tax season, as well as increased marketing required due to the extended tax season. Additionally, the IRS was selected by the U.S Congress as the vehicle for distribution of the EIP1 payments, which caused significant disruption to the 2020 tax season. As a result of the extension of the 2020 tax season and the EIP1 disruption, our results of operations for our Tax Preparation segment were negatively impacted in 2020 compared to prior years. In December 2020, the U.S. Congress authorized EIP2. As acknowledged by the IRS, in January 2021, the IRS directed millions of EIP2 payments, including EIP2 payments payable to our customers, to incorrect bank accounts. In order to allow time to correct this error, the IRS delayed the start of the 2021 tax season. The U.S. Congress is currently considering EIP3. Should the U.S. Congress authorize EIP3 during the 2021 tax season, and should the IRS again be selected as the vehicle for distribution of EIP3, it could disrupt and/or delay the tax filing deadline for the 2021 tax season and could cause customer confusion and/or diversion. It is currently unknown if the IRS will need to extend the tax filing deadline in 2021, however, the IRS has revoked its earlier commitment to end the 2021 tax season on time. An extension of the tax filing deadline in 2021 could result in customer and revenue disruptions and increased expenses in 2021.
For additional information on the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations, see “Results of Operations” below. For more information on the risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic, see Part I, Item 1A under the subheading, “The current COVID-19 pandemic could have a Material Adverse Effect.”
HKFS Acquisition
On July 1, 2020, we closed the HKFS Acquisition for an upfront cash purchase price of $104.4 million, which was paid with a portion of the proceeds from the $175.0 million increase in the Term Loan (as defined and discussed in “Liquidity and Capital Resources-Indebtedness”). The purchase price is subject to customary adjustment and two potential post-closing earn-out payments (the “HKFS Contingent Consideration”) by us, as well as a customary indemnity escrow.
The amount of the HKFS Contingent Consideration is determined based on advisory asset levels and the achievement of certain performance goals (i) for the period beginning on July 1, 2020 and ending on July 1, 2021 and (ii) for the period beginning on July 1, 2021 and ending on July 1, 2022. Pursuant to the Stock Purchase
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 44
Agreement, dated as of January 6, 2020, by and among the Company, HKFS, the selling stockholders named therein (the “Sellers”), and JRD Seller Representative, LLC, as the Sellers’ representative (as amended, the “Purchase Agreement”), the maximum aggregate amount that we would be required to pay for each earn-out period is $30.0 million, provided that any unearned amounts during the first earn-out period may also be earned during the second earn-out period. If the asset values on the applicable measurement date fall below certain specified thresholds, we would not be required to make any earn-out payment to the Sellers for such period.
We believe the complementary nature of the HKFS Acquisition has expanded our established leadership in tax-aware investing and enhanced our ability to better service clients and enable better outcomes for our Wealth Management business through the following primary drivers:
•increasing our total addressable market by swiftly entering the large, adjacent captive RIA space;
•expanding our product offerings, enabling us to serve an expanded set of CPA firms and tax professionals, as well as enabling us to offer end-to-end retirement plan services for small business clients; and
•providing multiple avenues for enhancing future growth opportunities by improving asset retention, increasing prospect conversion, and offering turn-key retirement plan services to the full Avantax Wealth Management financial professional and client base, all on top of a highly scalable HKFS platform.
For additional information, see “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 3.”
1st Global Acquisition
On May 6, 2019, we closed the acquisition of all of the issued and outstanding common stock of 1st Global, Inc. and 1st Global Insurance Services, Inc. (together, “1st Global”), a tax-focused wealth management company, for a cash purchase price of $180.0 million (the “1st Global Acquisition”). The 1st Global Acquisition was strategically important as it expanded our presence as the leading tax-focused independent broker-dealer while also providing the scale to compete more broadly in the wealth management market. The operations of 1st Global are included in our operating results as part of the Wealth Management segment from the date of the 1st Global Acquisition.
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 45
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Summary
____________________________
(1)Calculation is not meaningful.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, net income decreased $390.9 million primarily due to the following factors:
•Wealth Management segment operating income increased $3.9 million primarily due to a $38.2 million increase in revenue, partially offset by a $34.3 million increase in operating expenses. Wealth Management operating results benefited from an increase in advisory revenue as a result of the 1st Global Acquisition and the HKFS Acquisition, partially offset by lower cash sweep revenue and lower commission revenue.
•Tax Preparation segment operating income decreased $46.6 million primarily due to a $45.4 million increase in operating expenses. The increase in operating expenses was primarily due to increased marketing spend as a result of incremental investment required in March 2020 due to weak performance through the first two months of the tax season, as well as increased marketing required due to the extended tax season.
•Corporate-level expenses increased $226.4 million primarily due to goodwill impairment of $270.6 million recognized in the first quarter of 2020. The increase in corporate-level expenses was partially offset by a $50.9 million intangible asset impairment recognized for the year ended December 31, 2019.
•Other loss, net, increased $14.4 million primarily due to increased interest expense and non-capitalized debt issuance expense.
•The Company recorded income tax expense of $42.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was driven by an increase in the valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets. This compared to an income tax benefit of $65.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was driven by a partial release of the valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets.
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 46
SEGMENT REVENUE & OPERATING INCOME
The revenue and operating income amounts in this section are presented on a basis consistent with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”) and include certain reconciling items attributable to our segments. We have two reportable segments: (1) the Wealth Management segment and (2) the Tax Preparation segment. Segment information is presented on a basis consistent with our current internal management financial reporting. We do not allocate certain general and administrative costs (including personnel and overhead costs), stock-based compensation, depreciation, amortization of acquired intangible assets, acquisition and integration costs, executive transition costs, headquarters relocation costs, or impairment of goodwill and an intangible asset to the reportable segments. Such amounts are reflected under the heading “Corporate-level activity.” In addition, we do not allocate other loss, net, or income taxes to the reportable segments.
Wealth Management
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, Wealth Management operating income increased $3.9 million due to a $38.2 million increase in revenue partially offset by a $34.3 million increase in operating expenses.
•Wealth Management revenue increased $38.2 million primarily due to a $62.4 million increase in advisory revenue and a $6.2 million increase in client fees and financial professional fees as a result of the 1st Global Acquisition and the HKFS Acquisition. These increases were partially offset by a $20.8 million decrease in cash sweep revenue, a $5.8 million decrease in commission revenue, and a $4.2 million decrease in revenue generated from financial product manufacturer sponsorship programs.
•Wealth Management operating expenses increased $34.3 million primarily due to an increase in cost of revenue, mainly as a result of the 1st Global Acquisition and the HKFS Acquisition.
Sources of revenue
Wealth Management revenue is derived from multiple sources. We track sources of revenue, primary drivers of each revenue source, and recurring revenue. In addition, we focus on several business and key financial metrics in evaluating the success of our business relationships, our resulting financial position and operating performance. A summary of our sources of revenue and business and financial metrics is as follows:
____________________________
(1)Our “financial professionals” were formerly referred to as “advisors.”
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 47
Recurring revenue consists of advisory fees, trailing commissions, fees from cash sweep programs, and certain transaction and fee revenue, all as described further under the headings “Advisory revenue,” “Commission revenue,” “Asset-based revenue,” and “Transaction and fee revenue,” respectively. Certain recurring revenues are associated with asset balances and fluctuate depending on market values and current interest rates. Accordingly, our recurring revenue can be negatively impacted by adverse external market conditions. However, we believe recurring revenue is meaningful despite these fluctuations because it is not dependent upon transaction volumes or other activity-based revenues, which are more difficult to predict, particularly in declining or volatile markets.
Business metrics
____________________________
(1)Our “financial professionals” were formerly referred to as “advisors.”
(2)The number of independent financial professionals includes licensed financial professionals that work with Avantax Wealth Management and operate as independent contractors, as well as licensed referring representatives at CPA firms that partner with Avantax Planning Partners.
(3)The number of in-house financial professionals includes licensed financial planning consultants, all of which are employees of Avantax Planning Partners.
(4)Calculation based on advisory and commission revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Client Assets. Total client assets includes assets that we hold directly or indirectly on behalf of clients under a safekeeping or custody arrangement or for which we provide administrative services for clients. To the extent that we provide more than one service for a client’s assets, the value of the asset is only counted once in the total amount of total client assets. Total client assets include advisory assets, non-advisory brokerage accounts, annuities, and mutual fund positions held directly with fund companies. These assets are not reported on the consolidated balance sheets.
Advisory assets includes external client assets for which we provide investment advisory and management services, typically as a fiduciary under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940. Our compensation for providing such services is typically a fee based on the value of the advisory assets for each advisory client. These assets are not reported on the consolidated balance sheets.
Brokerage assets represent total clients assets other than advisory assets.
Total client assets increased $12.3 billion at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 primarily due to $9.6 billion of favorable market change and client reinvestment levels and $4.5 billion in client assets acquired in the HKFS Acquisition. Partially offsetting this increase were net client outflows of $1.8 billion, which primarily occurred during the pandemic-influenced market disruption in the second quarter of 2020. In addition, net client outflows of $1.8 billion included $0.4 billion of outflows due to the departure of two in-house financial professionals.
At this time, we cannot predict with certainty the extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and future financial market fluctuations on our client assets. However, the continued volatility in the U.S. and global economy and uncertainty in economic and financial markets due to the pandemic may cause declines in the amount of our
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 48
total client assets. For more information on the risks associated with our Wealth Management business, see Part I, Item 1A under the subheading, “The current COVID-19 pandemic could have a Material Adverse Effect.”
Financial professionals. The Wealth Management business worked with a nationwide network of 3,770 financial professionals as of December 31, 2020. Avantax Wealth Management offers its tax-focused wealth management solutions through its network of financial professionals that operate as independent contractors. Avantax Planning Partners operates as a captive, or employee-based, RIA and wealth management business and utilizes a team of in-house financial professionals who partner with CPA firms in order to provide their consumer and small business clients with holistic planning and financial advisory services.
The number of our financial professionals decreased by 5% at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, with the decrease primarily due to expected attrition following the integration of HD Vest and 1st Global, as well as the impact of financial professionals leaving the wealth management industry. The large majority of this attrition related to lower-producing financial professionals. The decrease in the number of financial professionals was partially offset by our recruitment of independent financial professionals, as well as the addition of financial professionals as a result of the HKFS Acquisition, which (as of the HKFS Acquisition date) included the addition of 19 in-house financial professionals and 131 licensed referring representatives at CPA firms that partner with Avantax Planning Partners.
Advisory revenue. Advisory revenue includes fees charged to clients in advisory accounts for which we are the RIA. These fees are based on the value of assets within these advisory accounts. For advisory revenues generated by Avantax Wealth Management, advisory fees are typically billed quarterly, in advance, and the related advisory revenues are deferred and recognized ratably over the period in which our performance obligations have been completed. For advisory revenues generated by Avantax Planning Partners, advisory fees are typically billed quarterly, in arrears, and the related advisory revenues are accrued and recognized ratably over the period in which our performance obligations were completed.
Advisory asset balances were as follows:
____________________________
(1)Represents individual client and retirement advisory assets for which Avantax Wealth Management serves as the RIA.
(2)Represents individual client advisory assets for which Avantax Planning Partners serves as the RIA.
(3)Represents advisory assets for which Avantax Planning Partners provides retirement plan services and serves as the RIA.
(4)The advisory assets associated with our in-house professionals were acquired in connection with the HKFS Acquisition.
The activity within our advisory assets was as follows:
____________________________
(1)Inflows from acquisitions for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the HKFS Acquisition. Inflows from acquisitions for the year ended December 31, 2019 related to the 1st Global Acquisition.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, advisory assets increased $8.0 billion primarily due to $4.2 billion in advisory assets acquired in the HKFS Acquisition and $3.7 billion of favorable market change and client reinvestment levels. Advisory assets also benefited from a net increase in new advisory assets, although this increase was tempered by net outflows that occurred during the pandemic-influenced market disruption in the
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 49
second quarter of 2020, as well as $0.4 billion of outflows that primarily occurred after the departure of two in-house financial professionals.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, advisory revenue increased by $62.4 million primarily due to advisory assets acquired in the 1st Global Acquisition and HKFS Acquisition. Partially offsetting this increase in advisory revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, advisory revenue was negatively affected by suppressed advisory asset levels in the first quarter of 2020 that resulted from the financial market disruption and the COVID-19 pandemic. Advisory asset levels subsequently recovered but remain susceptible to future financial market disruptions. In addition, the average advisory fee rate decreased due to the lower advisory fee structures of 1st Global and HKFS.
Commission revenue. The Wealth Management segment generates two types of commissions: (1) transaction-based commissions and (2) trailing commissions. Transaction-based commissions, which occur when clients trade securities or purchase investment products, represent gross commissions generated by our financial professionals. The level of transaction-based commissions can vary from period-to-period based on the overall economic environment, number of trading days in the reporting period, market volatility, interest rate fluctuations, and investment activity of our financial professionals’ clients. We earn trailing commissions (a commission or fee that is paid periodically over time) on certain mutual funds and variable annuities held by clients. Trailing commissions are recurring in nature and are based on the market value of investment holdings in trail-eligible assets.
Our commission revenue, by product category and by type of commission revenue, was as follows:
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, transaction-based commission revenue decreased $7.8 million primarily due to decreased trade volumes and low alternative investment product sales, which resulted from the coronavirus pandemic and related financial market disruption. Partially offsetting this decrease, trailing commission revenue increased $2.0 million primarily due to incremental trailing commission revenue from 1st Global. Trailing commissions revenue and transaction-based commission revenue remain susceptible to being adversely affected in future periods in which pandemic-influenced economic and market factors remain present.
Asset-based revenue. Asset-based revenue primarily includes fees from financial product manufacturer sponsorship programs, cash sweep programs, asset-based retirement plan service fees, and other asset-based revenues.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, asset-based revenue decreased $24.5 million, primarily due to a $20.8 million decrease in cash sweep revenue as a result of lower interest rates. In addition, revenue generated from financial product manufacturer sponsorship programs decreased by $4.2 million.
In March 2020, the Federal Reserve lowered its target range for the federal funds rate to 0.00-0.25%. As our cash sweep revenue is based on a rate derived from the federal funds rate, we expect continued lower cash sweep revenue in future periods in which the federal funds rate is at reduced levels.
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 50
Transaction and fee revenue. Transaction and fee revenue primarily includes support fees charged to financial professionals, fees charged for executing certain transactions in client accounts, and other fees related to services provided and other account charges as generally outlined in agreements with financial professionals, clients, financial institutions, and retirement plan sponsors.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, transaction and fee revenue increased $6.2 million primarily due to an increase in client fees and financial professional fees as a result of the 1st Global Acquisition, in addition to incremental transaction and fee revenue as a result of the HKFS Acquisition.
Tax Preparation
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, Tax Preparation operating income decreased $46.6 million due to a $45.4 million increase in operating expenses, as well as a $1.2 million decrease in revenue.
•Tax Preparation revenue decreased $1.2 million primarily due to a $2.8 million decrease in consumer revenue, partially offset by a $1.6 million increase in professional revenue.
•Tax Preparation operating expenses increased $45.4 million primarily due to increased marketing spend as a result of incremental investment in March 2020 to address weak performance through the first two months of the tax season, as well as increased marketing required due to the extended tax season.
Sources of revenue
Tax Preparation revenue is derived primarily from the sale of tax preparation digital services, ancillary services, packaged tax preparation software, and arrangements that may include a combination of these items. Ancillary services primarily include refund payment transfer and audit defense.
We classify Tax Preparation revenue into two different categories: consumer revenue and professional revenue. Consumer revenue represents Tax Preparation revenue derived from products sold to customers and businesses primarily for the preparation of individual or business tax returns. Professional revenue represents Tax Preparation revenue derived from products sold to tax return preparers who utilize our offerings to service end-user customers.
Revenue by category was as follows:
Business metrics
We measure the performance of our Tax Preparation business using three sets of non-financial metrics, which we consider to be important indicators of the performance of our Tax Preparation business and are especially relevant through the end of a completed tax season. These non-financial metrics include key performance indicators for our total Tax Preparation business, in addition to the consumer and professional tax preparation portions of the Tax Preparation business:
•We measure our total tax preparation customers using the total number of accepted federal tax e-files completed by both our consumer tax preparation customers and our professional tax preparer customers.
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 51
•We measure our consumer tax preparation customers using the number of accepted federal tax e-files made through our software and digital services.
•We measure our professional tax preparer customers using three metrics: (1) the number of accepted federal tax e-files made through our software, (2) the number of units sold, and (3) the number of e-files per unit sold.
Total, consumer, and professional metrics were as follows:
____________________________
(1)We participate in the Free File Alliance that is part of an IRS partnership that provides free electronic tax filing services to taxpayers meeting certain income-based guidelines. Free File Alliance e-files are included within consumer e-files above.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, total e-files increased primarily due to a 6% increase in professional e-files, partially offset by a 2% decrease in consumer e-files.
Corporate-Level Activity
Certain corporate-level activity, including certain general and administrative costs (such as personnel and overhead costs), stock-based compensation, acquisition and integration costs, executive transition costs, headquarters relocation costs, depreciation, amortization of acquired intangible assets, and impairment of goodwill and an intangible asset, is not allocated to our segments.
Corporate-level activity by category was as follows:
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, corporate-level activity increased $226.4 million primarily due to the following factors:
•For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a goodwill impairment charge of $270.6 million related to our Wealth Management reporting unit in the first quarter of 2020. For additional information, see “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 5.” For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized an impairment charge of $50.9 million related to the HD Vest trade name intangible asset following the 2019 Rebranding of the Wealth Management business in the third quarter of 2019.
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 52
•Executive transition costs of $10.7 million were recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the departure of certain Company executives.
Partially offsetting this increase in corporate-level expenses:
•Amortization of acquired intangible assets decreased $7.6 million primarily due to TaxAct customer relationship intangible assets that completed their useful lives and ceased amortizing in early 2020, partially offset by an increase in amortization due to intangible assets acquired in the 1st Global Acquisition and the HKFS Acquisition.
•Stock-based compensation decreased $6.2 million primarily due to stock award forfeitures resulting from executive departures in the first quarter of 2020 and the reversal of stock-based compensation expense for performance-based awards that are not expected to vest.
•Acquisition and integration costs increased $5.3 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, acquisition and integration expenses included $19.7 million related to the HKFS Acquisition and $11.4 million related to the 1st Global Acquisition. For the year ended December 31, 2019, acquisition and integration expense included $22.7 million related to the 1st Global Acquisition and $3.1 million related to the HKFS Acquisition.
OPERATING EXPENSES
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists of costs related to our Wealth Management and Tax Preparation businesses, which include commissions and advisory fees paid to independent financial professionals, payments made to CPA firms under fee sharing arrangements, third-party costs, and costs associated with the technical support team and the operation of our data centers. Data center costs include personnel expenses, the cost of temporary help and contractors, professional services fees, software support and maintenance, bandwidth and hosting costs, and depreciation (including depreciation related to TaxAct software development costs). Cost of revenue does not include compensation paid to in-house financial professionals in our Wealth Management business. As the in-house financial professionals are employees of Avantax Planning Partners, their compensation is reflected in “Sales and marketing” expense.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, cost of revenue increased $35.5 million primarily due to the following factors:
•a $33.9 million increase in Wealth Management services cost of revenue, primarily due to an increase in commissions paid to financial professionals added as a result of the 1st Global Acquisition; and
•a $1.6 million increase in Tax Preparation services cost of revenue, primarily due to increased depreciation related to additional capitalized software costs for TaxAct.
In future periods, we expect increased Tax Preparation cost of revenue due to increased depreciation related to additional capitalized software costs.
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 53
Engineering and Technology
Engineering and technology expenses are associated with the research, development, support, and ongoing enhancements of our offerings, which include personnel expenses, the cost of temporary help and contractors, software support and maintenance, bandwidth and hosting, and professional services fees. Engineering and technology expenses do not include the costs of computer hardware and software that are capitalized, depreciated over their useful lives, and recognized on the consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss) as either “cost of revenue” or “depreciation.” For more information, see the “Cost of Revenue” and “Depreciation and Amortization of Acquired Intangible Assets” sections contained within this discussion of “Operating Expenses.”
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, engineering and technology expenses decreased $3.7 million, primarily due to reduced expenses in our Wealth Management business, which were partially offset by increased headcount and consulting fees in our Tax Preparation business.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of marketing expenses associated with our Tax Preparation business (including expenses related to marketing agencies and media companies) and our Wealth Management business, personnel expenses, compensation paid to Avantax Planning Partners in-house financial professionals, the cost of temporary help and contractors, and back office processing support expenses for our Wealth Management business.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, sales and marketing expenses increased $51.4 million primarily due to increased advertising costs in our Tax Preparation business during the extended tax season, as well as incremental sales and marketing costs resulting from the 1st Global Acquisition and HKFS Acquisition.
Assuming a return to a typical season in our Tax Preparation business (other than the delayed start date to tax season), we expect sales and marketing costs in our Tax Preparation business for 2021 to be lower than 2020 levels.
General and Administrative
General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses primarily consist of expenses associated with personnel expenses, the cost of temporary help and contractors, professional services fees, general business development and management expenses, occupancy and general office expenses, business taxes, and insurance expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, G&A expenses increased $3.6 million, primarily due to $10.7 million of executive transition costs and $1.9 million of headquarters relocation costs, partially offset by reduced stock-based compensation expense due to $8.5 million in stock award forfeitures resulting from executive departures in 2020 and the reversal of stock-based compensation expense for performance-based awards that are not expected to vest. The executive transition costs primarily related to the departure of certain Company executives primarily in the first quarter of 2020.
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 54
Acquisition and Integration
Acquisition and integration expenses primarily relate to transaction and integration costs for the 1st Global Acquisition and HKFS Acquisition and consist of employee-related expenses, professional services fees, and other expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, acquisition and integration expenses included $19.7 million related to the HKFS Acquisition and $11.4 million related to the 1st Global Acquisition. Acquisition and integration expenses for the HKFS Acquisition in 2020 included an $8.3 million loss related to the fair value change of the HKFS Contingent Consideration liability. Acquisition and integration expenses for the 1st Global Acquisition in 2020 included a $4.1 million right-of-use asset impairment expense related to our former headquarters building lease (acquired in the 1st Global Acquisition). For the year ended December 31, 2019, acquisition and integration expense included $22.7 million related to the 1st Global Acquisition and $3.1 million related to the HKFS Acquisition.
Depreciation and Amortization of Acquired Intangible Assets
Depreciation of property and equipment includes depreciation of computer equipment and software, office equipment and furniture, and leasehold improvements. Amortization of acquired intangible assets primarily includes the amortization of client, financial professional, and sponsor relationships, which are amortized over their estimated lives.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, depreciation and amortization expense decreased $7.6 million primarily due to TaxAct customer relationship intangible assets that completed their useful lives and ceased amortizing in early 2020, partially offset by an increase in amortization due to intangibles acquired in the 1st Global Acquisition and the HKFS Acquisition, an increase in depreciation resulting from additional depreciable assets obtained in the 1st Global Acquisition and HKFS Acquisition, and additional depreciation from property and equipment put into service at our new headquarters in July 2020.
Impairment of Goodwill and an Intangible Asset
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized goodwill impairment of $270.6 million related to our Wealth Management reporting unit in the first quarter of 2020. For additional information, see “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 5.” For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized impairment of $50.9 million related to the HD Vest trade name intangible asset following the 2019 Rebranding of the Wealth Management business in the third quarter of 2019.
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 55
OTHER LOSS, NET
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, other loss, net, increased $14.4 million primarily due to the following factors:
•Total interest expense increased $6.3 million due to higher outstanding debt balances as a result of the $175.0 million increase in the Term Loan in the third quarter of 2020 and the $125.0 million increase in the Term Loan in the second quarter of 2019. In addition, the increase in the Term Loan in the third quarter of 2020 resulted in the recognition of $3.7 million of non-capitalized debt issuance expenses.
•For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized a $3.3 million gain on the sale of SimpleTax Software Inc. (“SimpleTax”), a provider of digital tax preparation services for individuals in Canada.
INCOME TAXES
For 2020, we recorded income tax expense of $42.3 million. Our effective income tax rate differed from the 21% statutory rate in 2020 primarily due to a $56.8 million expense related to the impairment of goodwill (which is not deductible for tax purposes), $23.9 million tax expense related to the increase in the valuation allowances, and $21.1 million in write off of expired federal net operating loss.
At December 31, 2020, we had deferred tax assets recorded for gross temporary differences representing future tax deductions of $489.0 million, primarily comprised of $249.2 million of federal net operating loss carryforwards and $108.3 million of federal capital loss carryforwards. We currently estimate that approximately $206.7 million of federal net operating loss carryforwards will expire, if unutilized, in 2021 through 2024, and $108.3 million of federal capital loss carryforwards will expire, if unutilized, in 2021 through 2023. We recorded a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets related to the federal net operating and capital loss carryforwards that are anticipated to expire unutilized. The ultimate realization of our deferred tax assets depends on our ability to generate future taxable income. Our actual future taxable income may differ from our projected taxable income as a result of differences in pre-tax income, as well as future originating book-tax differences, including excess tax benefits (windfalls) for stock compensation, which, due to inherent uncertainty, we do not forecast. In the future, if we determine more or less of the recognized net deferred tax assets is more likely than not to be realized, we will record a charge or benefit to the income statement to account for the further change in valuation allowance.
For 2019, we recorded income tax benefit of $65.1 million. Our effective income tax rate differed from the 21% statutory rate in 2019 primarily due to a $56.9 million tax benefit related to the partial release of valuation allowances and $4.1 million in excess tax benefits (windfalls) for stock compensation.
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 56
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
Adjusted EBITDA
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) attributable to Blucora, Inc., determined in accordance with GAAP, excluding the effects of stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization of acquired intangible assets, other loss, net, acquisition and integration costs, impairment of goodwill and an intangible asset, executive transition costs, headquarters relocation costs, and income tax (benefit) expense. Acquisition and integration costs primarily relate to the 1st Global Acquisition and the HKFS Acquisition. Impairment of goodwill relates to the impairment of our Wealth Management reporting unit goodwill that was recognized in the first quarter of 2020. Impairment of an intangible asset relates to the impairment of the HD Vest trade name intangible asset following the 2019 Rebranding of the Wealth Management business in the third quarter of 2019. Executive transition costs relate to the departure of certain Company executives primarily in the first quarter of 2020. Headquarters relocation costs relate to the process of moving from our original Dallas office and Irving office to our new headquarters.
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides meaningful supplemental information regarding our performance. We use this non-GAAP financial measure for internal management and compensation purposes, when publicly providing guidance on possible future results, and as a means to evaluate period-to-period comparisons. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is a common measure used by investors and analysts to evaluate our performance, that it provides a more complete understanding of the results of operations and trends affecting our business when viewed together with GAAP results, and that management and investors benefit from referring to this non-GAAP financial measure. Items excluded from Adjusted EBITDA are significant and necessary components to the operations of our business and, therefore, Adjusted EBITDA should be considered as a supplement to, and not as a substitute for or superior to, GAAP net income (loss). Other companies may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently and, therefore, our Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.
A reconciliation of our Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss) attributable to Blucora, Inc., which we believe to be the most comparable GAAP measure, is presented below:
Non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP net income per share
We define non-GAAP net income (loss) as net income (loss) attributable to Blucora, Inc., determined in accordance with GAAP, excluding the effects of stock-based compensation, amortization of acquired intangible assets (including acquired technology), impairment of goodwill and an intangible asset, gain on the sale of a business, acquisition and integration costs, executive transition costs, headquarters relocation costs, non-capitalized debt issuance expenses, the related cash tax impact of those adjustments, and non-cash income tax (benefit) expense. We exclude the non-cash portion of income taxes because of our ability to offset a substantial portion of our cash tax liabilities by using deferred tax assets, which primarily consist of U.S. federal net operating losses. The majority of these net operating losses will expire, if unutilized, between 2021 and 2024. Gain on the sale of a business relates to the disposition of SimpleTax in the third quarter of 2019 and the subsequent working capital adjustment in the third quarter of 2020. Non-capitalized debt issuance expense relates to the expense recognized as a result of the Term Loan increase in the third quarter of 2020. For more information on our Term Loan, see “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 6.”
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 57
We believe that non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP net income per share provide meaningful supplemental information to management, investors, and analysts regarding our performance and the valuation of our business by excluding items in the statement of operations that we do not consider part of our ongoing operations or that have not been, or are not expected to be, settled in cash. Additionally, we believe that non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP net income per share are common measures used by investors and analysts to evaluate our performance and the valuation of our business. Non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP net income per share should be evaluated in light of our financial results prepared in accordance with GAAP and should be considered as a supplement to, and not as a substitute for or superior to, GAAP net income (loss) and GAAP net income (loss) per share. Other companies may calculate these non-GAAP measures differently, and, therefore, our non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP net income per share may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.
A reconciliation of our non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP net income per share to net income (loss) attributable to Blucora, Inc. and net income (loss) per share attributable to Blucora, Inc., respectively, which we believe to be the most comparable GAAP measures, is presented below:
____________________________
(1)Any difference in the “per diluted share” amounts between this table and the consolidated statements of comprehensive income is due to using different weighted average shares outstanding in the event that there is GAAP net loss but non-GAAP net income and vice versa.
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 58
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Our principal source of liquidity is our cash and cash equivalents. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $150.1 million. Our Avantax Wealth Management broker-dealer subsidiary operates in a highly regulated industry and is subject to various regulatory capital requirements. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate certain mandatory and possible additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have substantial monetary and non-monetary impacts on Avantax Wealth Management’s operations. As of December 31, 2020, Avantax Wealth Management met all capital adequacy requirements to which it was subject.
We generally invest our excess cash in money market funds that are made up of securities issued by agencies of the U.S government. We may invest, from time-to-time, in other vehicles, such as debt instruments issued by the U.S. federal government and its agencies, international governments, municipalities, and publicly held corporations, as well as commercial paper and insured time deposits with commercial banks. Specific holdings can vary from period to period depending upon our cash requirements. Our financial instrument investments held at December 31, 2020 had minimal default risk and short-term maturities.
Historically, we have financed our operations primarily from cash provided by operating activities and access to credit markets. Our historical uses of cash have been funding our operations, capital expenditures, business combinations that enhance our strategic position, and share repurchases under share repurchase programs. We plan to finance our operating, working capital, regulatory capital requirements at our broker-dealer subsidiary, and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months largely through cash and cash equivalents. However, the underlying levels of revenues and expenses that we project may not prove to be accurate, and, from time to time, we may make a determination to draw on the Revolver (as defined below) or increase the principal amount of the Term Loan to meet our capital requirements, subject to customary terms and conditions.
Since our results of operations are sensitive to various factors, including, among others, the level of competition we face, regulatory and legal impacts, and political and economic conditions, such factors could adversely affect our liquidity and capital resources. In addition, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have experienced and may continue to experience near- to mid-term volatility in our results of operations that could further increase our liquidity needs. Due to this volatility, we have taken several measures to ensure proper liquidity levels. We are maintaining flexibility in our cash flows by applying a heightened sense of focus in monitoring and managing our cash needs. In the first quarter of 2020, we accessed our Revolver for temporary liquidity needs and subsequently repaid such borrowings in full. In addition, we increased the principal outstanding under our Term Loan to fund the HKFS Acquisition and provide additional working capital flexibility. Overall, we believe these measures provide us with the capital flexibility to satisfy our obligations, fund our operations, and invest in our businesses.
For further discussion of the risks to our business related to liquidity, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors” under the heading “Existing cash and cash equivalents and cash generated from operations may not be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for servicing debt, working capital, and capital expenditures.”
We may use our cash and cash equivalents in the future to invest in our current businesses, for repayment of debt, for acquiring companies or assets, for share repurchases, for returning capital to stockholders, or for other utilizations that we deem to be in the best interests of stockholders.
Indebtedness
In May 2017, we entered into a credit agreement (as the same has been amended, the “Credit Agreement”) with a syndicate of lenders that provides for a term loan facility (the “Term Loan”) and a revolving line of credit (including a letter of credit sub-facility) (the “Revolver”) for working capital, capital expenditures, and general business purposes (as amended, the “Senior Secured Credit Facility”). The Revolver and the Term Loan mature on May 22, 2022 and May 22, 2024, respectively.
On July 1, 2020, we increased our Term Loan by $175.0 million. Approximately $104.4 million of the proceeds from the increase to the Term Loan were used to fund the purchase price of the HKFS Acquisition, as well as to pay related fees and expenses. We intend to use the remainder of the proceeds from the increase to the Term Loan for general corporate purposes. The Company is required to make principal amortization payments on the Term Loan quarterly on the last business day of each March, June, September, and December, beginning on September 30,
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 59
2020, in an amount equal to $0.5 million (subject to reduction for prepayments), with the remaining principal amount of the Term Loan due on the maturity date of May 22, 2024.
At December 31, 2020, we had $563.2 million principal amount outstanding under the Term Loan and no amounts outstanding under the Revolver. Based on aggregate loan commitments as of December 31, 2020, approximately $65.0 million was available for future borrowing under the Senior Secured Credit Facility, subject to customary terms and conditions.
For additional information on the Term Loan, Revolver, and the Credit Agreement, see, “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 6.”
Share Repurchase Plan
On March 19, 2019, we announced that our board of directors authorized a stock repurchase plan pursuant to which we may repurchase up to $100.0 million of our common stock. Pursuant to the plan, share repurchases may be made through a variety of methods, including open market or privately negotiated transactions. The timing and number of shares repurchased will depend on a variety of factors, including price, general business and market conditions, and alternative investment opportunities. Our repurchase program does not obligate us to repurchase any specific number of shares, may be suspended or discontinued at any time, and does not have a specified expiration date.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not repurchase any shares of our common stock under the stock repurchase plan. As of December 31, 2020, there was approximately $71.7 million in remaining capacity under the stock repurchase plan. In assessing our capital allocation priorities, we do not expect to make additional share repurchases in the near term.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our contractual obligations and commitments are as follows for years ending December 31:
____________________________
(1)Operating lease obligations include obligations due to short-term leases. In accordance with the short-term lease practical expedient in Accounting Standards Codification 842, Leases, we do not record a lease liability for short-term leases.
(2)Our purchase commitments primarily consist of outsourced IT and marketing services, commitments to our portfolio management tool vendor, commitments to our clearing firm provider, and commitments for financial professional support programs.
The contractual obligations and commitments table presented above does not reflect unrecognized tax benefits of approximately $7.5 million, the timing of which is uncertain. For additional discussion on unrecognized tax benefits, see “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 15.”
As part of HKFS Acquisition, the purchase price paid by us is subject to two potential post-closing earn-out payments. The amount of the HKFS Contingent Consideration is determined based on advisory asset levels and the achievement of certain performance goals (i) for the period beginning on July 1, 2020 and ending on July 1, 2021 and (ii) for the period beginning on July 1, 2021 and ending on July 1, 2022. Pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, the maximum aggregate amount that we would be required to pay for each earn-out period is $30.0 million, provided that any unearned amounts during the first earn-out period may also be earned during the second earn-out
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 60
period. If the asset values on the applicable measurement date fall below certain specified thresholds, we would not be required to make any earn-out payment to the Sellers for such period.
The estimated fair value (as calculated in accordance with GAAP) of the HKFS Contingent Consideration liability was $35.9 million as of December 31, 2020. While this amount was calculated in accordance with the fair value guidance contained in ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements, there are a number of assumptions and estimates factored into these fair values (including a risk-adjusted discount rate), and actual earn-out payments could differ from these estimated fair values.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Cash Flows
Our cash flows were comprised of the following:
Net cash from operating activities
Net cash from the operating activities consists of net income (loss), offset by certain non-cash adjustments, and changes in our working capital. Operating cash flows and changes in working capital were as follows:
Net cash provided by operating activities for 2020 included $41.3 million of operating cash flows before changes in operating assets and liabilities and $2.8 million of changes in operating assets and liabilities. For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, the $53.9 million decrease in operating cash flows before changes in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to the following factors:
•Operating income from our Tax Preparation business decreased $46.6 million; and
•Executive transition costs of $10.7 million were recognized due to the departure of certain Company executives.
The changes in operating assets and liabilities of $5.2 million were primarily due to working capital adjustments from the 1st Global Acquisition in 2019.
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 61
Net cash from investing activities
Net cash used by investing activities consists of business acquisitions, net of cash acquired, purchases of property and equipment, proceeds from the sale of a business, and the acquisition of a customer relationship. Investing cash flows were as follows:
Net cash used by investing activities was $140.7 million and $169.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $28.9 million decrease in cash used by investing activities was primarily due to cash outlays for the HKFS Acquisition in July 2020 as compared to the 1st Global Acquisition in May 2019. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in cash outlays for office equipment and leasehold improvements related to the new headquarters office building, as well as additional capitalized software costs. Net cash from investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 also included $7.5 million in net proceeds received from the sale of SimpleTax.
Net cash from financing activities
Net cash from the financing activities primarily consists of transactions related to the issuance of debt and stock. Our financing activities tend to fluctuate from period-to-period based upon our financing needs. Financing cash flows were as follows:
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of $226.3 million of additional borrowings under the Senior Credit Facility (which included a $175.0 million increase to our Term Loan in July 2020 in order to fund the HKFS Acquisition), partially offset by $66.5 million of repayments on existing indebtedness.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily consisted of $131.5 million of additional borrowings under the Senior Credit Facility to finance the 1st Global Acquisition and $6.6 million of combined proceeds from the issuance of common stock related to stock option exercises and the employee stock purchase plan. These cash inflows were partially offset by cash outflows of $28.4 million for share repurchases, $24.9 million to settle redeemable noncontrolling interests related to the acquisition of HD Vest in 2015, and $5.7 million in tax payments from shares withheld for equity awards.
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 62
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and the disclosures included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, and disclosure of contingencies. In some cases, we could have reasonably used different accounting policies and estimates.
The SEC has defined a company’s most critical accounting policies as the ones that are the most important to the portrayal of the company’s financial condition and results of operations and which require the company to make its most difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate the estimates used. We base our estimates on historical experience, current conditions, and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances and, based on information available to us at that time, we make judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources as well as identify and assess our accounting treatment with respect to commitments and contingencies. Actual results may differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions, judgments, or conditions. We believe the following critical accounting policies involve the most significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements, and we continually update and assess the facts and circumstances regarding all of these critical accounting matters and other significant accounting matters affecting estimates in our financial statements. These critical accounting estimates are also described in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 2.”
Wealth Management revenue recognition
Wealth management revenue primarily consists of advisory revenue, commission revenue, asset-based revenue, and transaction and fee revenue. Wealth management revenue is earned from customers primarily located in the United States.
Revenue is recognized upon the transfer of services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those services. Payments received by us in advance of the performance of service are deferred and recognized as revenue when we have satisfied our performance obligation.
Advisory revenue includes fees charged to clients in advisory accounts for which we are the RIA. These fees are based on the value of assets within these advisory accounts. For advisory revenues generated by Avantax Wealth Management, advisory fees are typically billed quarterly, in advance, and the related advisory revenues are deferred and recognized ratably over the period in which our performance obligations have been completed. For advisory revenues generated by Avantax Planning Partners, advisory fees are typically billed quarterly, in arrears, and the related advisory revenues are accrued and recognized over the period in which our performance obligations were completed.
Commissions represent amounts generated by clients’ purchases and sales of securities and investment products. We serve as the registered broker-dealer or insurance agent for those trades. We generate two types of commissions: (1) transaction-based commissions and (2) trailing commissions. Transaction-based commissions are generated on a per-transaction basis and are recognized as revenue on the trade date, which is when our performance obligations have been substantially completed. Trailing commissions are earned by us based on our ongoing account support to clients. Trailing commissions are based on a percentage of the current market value of clients’ investment holdings in trail-eligible assets and recognized over the period during which our services are performed. Since trailing commission revenue is generally paid in arrears, we estimate it based on a number of factors, including stock market index levels and the amount of trailing commission revenues received in prior periods. These estimates are primarily based on historical information, and there is not significant judgment involved.
A substantial portion of advisory revenue and commission revenue is ultimately paid to our financial professionals. In Avantax Wealth Management, advisory fee payments to financial professionals typically occur at the beginning of the quarter, in advance, and therefore do not result in an advisory fee payable amount at quarter end. In Avantax Planning Partners, advisory fee payments (which are primarily composed of payments to CPA firms under fee sharing arrangements) are typically made quarterly, in arrears, and we record an estimate for the advisory fee payable based on the historical payout ratios and financial market movement for the period. For transaction-based commissions, we record an estimate for commissions payable based upon the payout rate of the financial professional generating the accrued commission revenue. For trailing commissions, we record an estimate for
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 63
trailing commissions payable based upon historical payout ratios. Such amounts are recorded as “Commissions and advisory fees payable” on the consolidated balance sheets and “Wealth management services cost of revenue” on the consolidated statements of comprehensive income.
Asset-based revenue primarily includes fees from financial product manufacturer sponsorship programs, cash sweep programs, and other asset-based revenues, primarily including margin revenues and asset-based retirement plan service fees, and is recognized ratably over the period in which services are provided.
Transaction and fee revenue primarily includes (1) support fees charged to financial professionals, which are recognized over time as advisory services are provided, (2) fees charged for executing certain transactions in client accounts, which are recognized on a trade-date basis, and (3) other fees related to services provided and other account charges as generally outlined in agreements with financial professionals, clients, and financial institutions, which are recognized as services are performed or as earned, as applicable.
Tax Preparation revenue recognition
We generate revenue from the sale of tax preparation digital services, packaged tax preparation software, ancillary services, and multiple element arrangements that may include a combination of these items. Tax Preparation revenue is earned from customers primarily located in the United States.
Digital revenues include revenues associated with our digital software products sold to customers and businesses primarily for the preparation of individual or business tax returns, and digital revenues are generally recognized when customers and businesses complete and file returns. Digital revenues are recognized net of an allowance for the portion of the returns filed using our refund payment transfer services (as explained below) that we estimate will not be accepted and funded by IRS.
Packaged tax preparation software revenues are generated from the sale of our downloadable software products and are recognized when legal title transfers, which is when customers download the software.
Ancillary service revenues primarily include fees we charge for refund payment transfer services, audit defense services, and referral and marketing arrangements with third party partners. Refund payment transfer services allow the cost of TaxAct software products to be deducted from a taxpayer’s refund instead of being paid at the time of filing. The fees the customer pays for refund payment transfer services and audit defense services are recognized as revenue at the time of filing. Revenue for our referral and marketing arrangements with third party partners is recognized at a point in time or over time based on the nature of the performance obligation under each arrangement.
Certain of our Tax Preparation software packages marketed towards professional tax preparers contain multiple elements, including a software element and an unlimited e-filing capability element. For these software packages that contain multiple elements, we allocate the total consideration of the package to the two elements. We then recognize revenue for the software element upon download or shipment and recognize revenue for the unlimited filing element over time based on an estimated filing timeline. The impact of multiple element arrangements is not material and only impacts the timing of revenue recognition over the tax filing season, which is typically concentrated within the first two quarters of each year.
Income taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets, including net operating loss carryforwards, and liabilities are determined based on temporary differences between the book and tax bases of assets and liabilities. We periodically evaluate the likelihood of the realization of deferred tax assets and reduce the carrying amount of the deferred tax assets by a valuation allowance to the extent we believe it is more likely than not that a portion will not be realized. We consider many factors when assessing the likelihood of future realization of the deferred tax assets, including expectations of future taxable income, recent cumulative earnings experience by taxing jurisdiction, and other relevant factors. There is a wide range of possible judgments relating to the valuation of our deferred tax assets.
We record liabilities to address uncertain tax positions that have been taken in previously filed tax returns or that are expected to be taken in a future tax return. The determination for required liabilities is based upon an analysis of each individual tax position, taking into consideration whether it is more likely than not that the tax position, based on technical merits, will be sustained upon examination. The tax benefit to be recognized in the financial statements from such a position is measured as the largest amount of benefit that has a greater than 50%
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 64
cumulative likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the taxing authority. The difference between the amount recognized and the total tax position is recorded as a liability. The ultimate resolution of these tax positions may be greater or less than the liabilities recorded.
Business combinations
We account for business combinations, including the 1st Global Acquisition and the HKFS Acquisition, using the acquisition method.
Under the acquisition method, the purchase price of the acquisition is allocated to the acquired tangible and identifiable intangible assets and assumed liabilities based on their estimated fair values at the time of the acquisition. This allocation involves a number of assumptions, estimates, and judgments that could materially affect the timing or amounts recognized in our financial statements. The most subjective areas of the acquisition accounting method include determining the fair value of the following:
•intangible assets, including the valuation methodology, estimates of future cash flows, discount rates, growth rates, and attrition rates (if applicable), as well as the estimated useful life of intangible assets;
•contingent consideration, including the valuation methodology, estimates of future advisory asset levels, discount rates, growth rates, and volatility levels; and
•goodwill, as measured as the excess of consideration transferred over the acquisition date fair value of the assets acquired, including the amount assigned to identifiable intangible assets, and the liabilities assumed.
Our assumptions and estimates are based upon comparable market data and information obtained from the management of the acquired entities.
Impairment of goodwill
Goodwill represents the cost of an acquisition less the fair value of the net identifiable assets of the acquired business. We evaluate goodwill for impairment annually, as of November 30, or more frequently when events or circumstances indicate it is more likely than not that the fair value of one or more of our reporting units is less than its carrying amount. To determine whether it is necessary to perform a goodwill impairment test, we first assess qualitative factors to evaluate whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. We may elect to perform a goodwill impairment test without completing a qualitative assessment.
Beginning in March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic had a significant negative impact on the U.S. and global economy and caused substantial disruption in the U.S. and global securities markets, and as a result, negatively impacted certain key Wealth Management business drivers, such as client asset levels and interest rates. These macroeconomic and Company-specific factors, in totality, served as a triggering event that resulted in the testing of the goodwill of the Wealth Management reporting unit and the Tax Preparation reporting unit for potential impairment.
As part of the goodwill impairment test, we compared the estimated fair values of the Wealth Management and Tax Preparation reporting units to their respective carrying values. Estimated fair value was calculated using Level 3 inputs and utilized a blended valuation method that factored in the income approach and the market approach. The income approach estimated fair value by using the present value of future discounted cash flows. Significant estimates used in the discounted cash flow model included our forecasted cash flows, our long-term rates of growth, and our weighted average cost of capital. The weighted average cost of capital factors in the relevant risk associated with business-specific characteristics and the uncertainty related to the ability to achieve our projected cash flows. The market approach estimated fair value by taking income-based valuation multiples for a set of comparable companies and applying the valuation multiple to each reporting unit’s income.
For the Wealth Management reporting unit, the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeded its fair value by $270.6 million. Therefore, we recorded an impairment of goodwill of $270.6 million in the first quarter of 2020. For the Tax Preparation reporting unit, the carrying value of the reporting unit was significantly below its fair value, and therefore, no impairment of goodwill was deemed necessary.
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 65
No goodwill impairment triggering events were identified for the remainder of the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition, we performed our annual goodwill impairment evaluation as of November 30, 2020 and concluded that there were no indicators of impairment. The Wealth Management reporting unit is considered to be at risk for a future impairment of its goodwill in the event of a further decline in general economic, market, or business conditions, or any significant unfavorable changes in our forecasted revenue, expenses, cash flows, weighted average cost of capital, and/or market valuation multiples. We will continue to monitor for events and circumstances that could negatively impact the key assumptions in determining the fair value of the Wealth Management reporting unit.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 2” for more information on recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements.
Blucora, Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K 66