ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our audited financial statements and the accompanying notes to the financial statements and other disclosures included in this report (including the “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” at the beginning of this report and the “Risk Factors” section in Part I, Item 1A of this report).
Overview
We are a commercial-stage biotechnology company that discovers novel, oral, small-molecule medicines. We focus on oral treatments for rare diseases in which significant unmet medical needs exist and an enzyme plays the key role in the biological pathway of the disease. We integrate the disciplines of biology, crystallography, medicinal chemistry, and computer modeling to discover and develop small molecule pharmaceuticals through the process known as structure-guided drug design. In addition to these discovery and development efforts, our business strategy includes the efficient commercialization of these drugs in the U.S. and certain other regions upon regulatory approval. By focusing on rare disease markets, we believe that we can more effectively control the costs of, and our strategic allocation of financial resources toward, post-approval commercialization.
Our revenues are difficult to predict and depend on several factors, including those discussed in the “Risk Factors” section in Part I, Item 1A of this report. For example, our revenues depend, in part, on regulatory approval decisions for our products and product candidates, the effectiveness of our and our collaborative partners’ commercialization efforts, market acceptance of our products, particularly ORLADEYO, the resources dedicated to our products by us and our collaborative partners, and ongoing discussions with government agencies regarding contract awards for development and procurement, as well as entering into, or modifying, licensing agreements for our product candidates. Furthermore, revenues related to our collaborative development activities are dependent upon the progress toward and the achievement of developmental milestones by us or our collaborative partners.
Our operating expenses are also difficult to predict and depend on several factors, including research and development expenses (and whether these expenses are reimbursable under government contracts), drug manufacturing, and clinical research activities, the ongoing requirements of our development programs, the availability of capital and direction from regulatory agencies, which are difficult to predict, and the factors discussed in the “Risk Factors” section in Part I, Item 1A of this report. Management may be able to control the timing and level of research and development and selling, general and administrative expenses, but many of these expenditures will occur irrespective of our actions due to contractually committed activities and/or payments.
As a result of these factors, we believe that period-to-period comparisons are not necessarily meaningful and you should not rely on them as an indication of future performance. Due to all of the foregoing factors, it is possible that our operating results will be below the expectations of market analysts and investors. In such event, the prevailing market price of our common stock could be materially adversely affected.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The accompanying discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements and the related disclosures, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We evaluate our estimates, judgments and the policies underlying these estimates on a periodic basis, as situations change, and regularly discuss financial events, policies, and issues with members of our audit committee and our independent registered public accounting firm. In particular, we routinely evaluate our estimates and policies regarding revenue recognition, administration, inventory and manufacturing, taxes, stock-based compensation, research and development, consulting and other expenses and any associated liabilities. Our estimates are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The results of our estimates form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. See “Critical Accounting Policies” at the end of this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” for a description of accounting policies that we believe are the most critical to aid you in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results and that affect the more significant judgments and estimates that we use in the preparation of our financial statements.
Recent Corporate Highlights
COVID-19
The outbreak of COVID-19 has severely impacted global economic activity and caused significant volatility in financial markets. To date, our financial condition, results of operations, and liquidity have not been materially impacted by the direct effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, as discussed under “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business-Risks Related to COVID-19” in Part I, Item 1A of this report, the acceleration of COVID-19 slowed startup of the inadequate responder cohorts in our complement oral Factor D inhibitor program. The COVID-19 pandemic is constantly evolving, and its full impact to our business is uncertain. We are continuing to monitor developments with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic and to make adjustments as needed to assist in protecting the safety of our employees and communities while continuing our business activities. Our remote working arrangements are ongoing where possible, and we continue to restrict business-related travel. To date, implementation of these measures has not required material expenditures or significantly impacted our ability to operate our business or our internal control over financial reporting and disclosure controls and procedures. We are continuing to monitor the potential impacts of COVID-19 on our operations and those of our partners, suppliers, customers, and regulators.
ORLADEYO (berotralstat)
ORLADEYO is an oral, once-daily therapy discovered and developed by BioCryst for the prevention of HAE attacks. ORLADEYO, in both 110 mg and 150 mg capsule dosage forms, was approved by the FDA in December 2020 for prophylaxis to prevent attacks of HAE in adults and pediatric patients 12 years and older. On December 16, 2020, we announced that ORLADEYO is now available for shipment to patients with a prescription in the U.S. and that our exclusive specialty pharmacy provider for ORLADEYO in the U.S. began shipping to patients. We completed the build-out of our U.S. commercial infrastructure in 2020 to support the launch of ORLADEYO in the U.S. and are currently building our commercial infrastructure to support European launches.
ORLADEYO, in the 150 mg capsule dosage form, also received marketing and manufacturing approval from the MHLW in Japan in January 2021 for prophylactic treatment of HAE in adults and pediatric patients 12 years and older. Torii, our collaborative partner, will launch ORLADEYO in Japan following the successful completion of our pricing negotiations with the Japanese National Health Insurance System.
On March 30, 2020, we announced that the EMA had validated our MAA submission for approval of ORLADEYO for the prevention of HAE attacks. With this validation, the EMA began its formal review of the MAA under the centralized procedure for all member states of the EU, Norway, Iceland, and Liechtenstein. On February 25, 2021, we announced that the CHMP has adopted a positive opinion recommending the approval of ORLADEYO for routine prevention of recurrent attacks of HAE in adult and adolescent patients aged 12 years and older. The EC will review the CHMP recommendation, and a final approval decision from the EC on the MAA for ORLADEYO is expected in the second quarter of 2021.
On October 30, 2020, we announced that the MHRA has granted ORLADEYO a positive scientific opinion through the EAMS. Under the EAMS, HAE patients in the U.K. aged 12 years and older can gain access to ORLADEYO for the routine prevention of recurrent attacks of HAE before the drug is granted marketing authorization. We plan to file for a U.K. marketing authorization with the MHRA following our receipt of a positive opinion from the CHMP. This is expected to result in a U.K. marketing authorization shortly after a final decision by the EC.
We completed the build-out of our U.S. commercial infrastructure in 2020 to support the launch of ORLADEYO in the U.S. and are currently building our commercial infrastructure to support European launches. Based on proprietary analyses of HAE prevalence and market research studies with HAE patients, physicians, and payors in the U.S. and Europe, we anticipate the commercial market for ORLADEYO has the potential to reach a global peak of more than $500 million in annual sales. These expectations are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties that may cause our actual results, performance, or achievements to be materially different. There can be no assurance that our commercialization methods and strategies will succeed, or that the market for ORLADEYO will develop in line with our current expectations. See “Risk Factors-Risks Relating to Our Business-Risks Relating to Drug Development and Commercialization-There can be no assurance that our commercialization efforts, methods, and strategies for our products or technologies will succeed, and our future revenue generation is uncertain” in Part I, Item 1A of this report for further discussion of these risks.
Complement-Mediated Diseases
Discovered by BioCryst, BCX9930 is a novel, oral, potent, and selective small molecule inhibitor of Factor D currently in early clinical development for the treatment of complement-mediated diseases. Based on the safety and PoC data generated to date in PNH patients, we are working closely with key opinion leaders in hematology and nephrology to map the development strategy across a broad set of indications. Our goal is to develop BCX9930 as a monotherapy for complement-mediated diseases.
On February 25, 2021, we announced that we have completed enrollment of our ongoing dose ranging trial in treatment-naïve (no prior treatment with C5 inhibitors) PNH patients and PNH patients with an inadequate response to C5 inhibitors. We plan to present data from the 16 enrolled PNH patients (10 treatment naïve and 6 inadequate C5 responders) at our upcoming R&D day on March 22, 2021.
On September 30, 2020, we announced new data from treatment-naïve PNH patients receiving doses through 400 mg twice-daily of oral BCX9930 as monotherapy in the ongoing part 3 PoC dose-ranging trial. Oral BCX9930 was shown to drive rapid and dose-dependent reductions in key biomarkers, including LDH, and increasing hemoglobin levels in all PNH patients in the trial. Increases in hemoglobin levels were maintained without transfusions. BCX9930 was safe and well tolerated at all doses in the trial. No drug-related serious adverse events had been reported. One subject was discontinued due to an unrelated serious adverse event.
On August 31, 2020, we announced that the FDA granted orphan drug designation for BCX9930 for the treatment of PNH. Orphan drug designation qualifies BCX9930 for various development incentives, including tax credits for certain clinical costs, a waiver of the new drug application fee, and a designated period of market exclusivity following approval. On August 3, 2020, we announced that the FDA granted fast track designation for BCX9930 in PNH.
FOP
The goal of our ALK2 inhibitor is to discover and develop orally administered kinase inhibitor drug candidates that are able to slow or prevent HO. On December 21, 2020, we announced that in a phase 1 clinical trial, BCX9250, our lead compound, was safe and well tolerated at all doses studied, with linear and dose-proportional exposure supporting once-daily dosing. The randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled dose-ranging trial evaluated safety, tolerability, and PK of SAD and MAD of BCX9250 in healthy subjects. The SAD study was designed to randomize four cohorts of eight subjects each to receive oral BCX9250 (n=6) or placebo (n=2) at dose levels of 5 mg, 10 mg, 15 mg, and 25 mg. Subjects in the 15 mg cohort also received a second single dose to evaluate food effect on absorption of BCX9250. The MAD study was designed to randomize 4 cohorts of 12 subjects each to receive oral BCX9250 (n=10) or placebo (n=2) at dose levels of 5 mg, 10 mg, 15 mg, and 20 mg once-daily for 7 days. Drug exposure increased with dose in an approximately linear and dose-proportional manner. Drug levels after a high fat meal were similar to those after dosing on an empty stomach. Drug exposure at 20 mg once-daily in the MAD was similar to that achieved with doses that suppressed HO in a nonclinical model of activity of orally dosed BCX9250. In both the SAD and the MAD studies, oral BCX9250 was safe and well tolerated, with no serious adverse events, no study discontinuations due to adverse events, no grade 3 or 4 adverse events, and no clinically significant changes in vital signs, electrocardiograms, or safety laboratory parameters. No safety signals were seen.
Peramivir Injection (RAPIVAB, ALPIVAB, RAPICACTA, PERAMIFLU)
On March 4, 2020, the ICC Tribunal delivered a Partial Arbitration Award in the arbitration matter between the Company and SUL with respect to the SUL Agreement. In the Partial Arbitration Award, the ICC Tribunal found that, during the term, SUL materially breached and abandoned its core duties to us under the Diligent Efforts (as defined in the SUL Agreement) requirements of the SUL Agreement as applicable in the U.S. The ICC Tribunal granted a declaratory judgment in favor of us terminating the SUL Agreement and restoring all rights to peramivir to us. We agreed with SUL on a transition process for the product, with a full transition of commercialization of the product in the U.S. and Australia returned to us as of August 1, 2020 and November 1, 2020, respectively. The ICC Tribunal also awarded us attorneys’ fees and expenses incurred in securing the declaratory judgment as well as the costs incurred by us in the arbitration. Finally, the ICC Tribunal found that SUL breached the SUL Agreement by failing to pay a milestone payment due to us within 30 days of the approval of peramivir for adult use in the EU and awarded us $5.0 million (plus interest) for this claim. The ICC Tribunal retained jurisdiction for further proceedings relating to the award of attorneys’ fees and for any dispute relating to the return to us of all rights to peramivir in the Territory.
On September 3, 2020, we announced that HHS has exercised its option to purchase an additional 10,000 doses of our antiviral influenza therapy, RAPIVAB (peramivir injection), for $6.9 million. As a result, we expect to deliver at least one shipment of 10,000 doses in 2021. The order is part of a $34.7 million contract awarded to us in 2018 for the procurement of up to 50,000 doses of RAPIVAB over a five-year period for the Strategic National Stockpile.
Galidesivir (formerly BCX4430)
In April 2020, we agreed with NIAID/HHS to add a group of COVID-19 patients to an ongoing clinical trial in Yellow Fever. On April 9, 2020, we announced that we had opened a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial in Brazil to assess the safety, clinical impact, and antiviral effects of galidesivir in patients with COVID-19. NIAID/HHS awarded us a new $43.9 million contract for the manufacture and evaluation of the safety, efficacy, and tolerability of galidesivir in August 2020, and it also added $2.9 million to its existing contract with us to support the development of galidesivir. NIAID/HHS made an initial award of $6.3 million under the new contract.
On December 22, 2020, we announced that data from part 1 of the clinical trial in Brazil showed that galidesivir was safe and generally well tolerated in patients infected with SARS-Cov-2, the virus that causes COVID-19. The trial was not designed or sized to demonstrate clinical efficacy, and no clinical efficacy benefit with galidesivir treatment compared to placebo treatment was observed in the trial. Based on our ongoing discussions with NIAID/HHS, we expect NIAID/HHS to continue its support for the development of galidesivir with a focus on biodefense threats, such as Marburg virus disease, and to discontinue the pursuit of a COVID-19 indication for galidesivir.
Financing Transactions
Royalty Monetization. On December 7, 2020, we entered into the Royalty Purchase Agreement with RPI, pursuant to which we sold to RPI the right to receive certain royalty payments from the Company for a purchase price of $125 million in cash (the “Royalty Sale”). Under the Royalty Purchase Agreement, RPI is entitled to receive tiered, sales-based royalties on net product sales of ORLADEYO in the Key Territories. In addition, RPI is entitled to receive a tiered revenue share on amounts generally received by us on account of ORLADEYO sublicense revenue or net sales by licensees outside of the Key Territories. No payment will be due to RPI for any achievement milestone which may be payable under the existing out-license for ORLADEYO. Under the Royalty Purchase Agreement, RPI will also be entitled to receive 1.0% of global net sales, if any, of BCX9930. See “Note 3-Royalty Monetizations-ORLADEYO Royalty Monetization” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report for additional information about our obligations under the Royalty Purchase Agreement.
Credit Agreement. On December 7, 2020, we entered into a $200.0 million Credit Agreement with Athyrium Opportunities III Co-Invest 1 LP (“Athyrium” and such agreement, the “Credit Agreement”), as lender and as administrative agent for the lenders. BioCryst Ireland Limited, BioCryst US Sales Co., LLC, and BioCryst UK Limited, each of which is a wholly-owned subsidiary of ours, are guarantors to the Credit Agreement. The Credit Agreement provides for an initial term loan in the principal amount of $125.0 million (the “Term A Loan”), which was received by us on December 7, 2020 and is classified as “Secured term loan” on our balance sheet as of December 31, 2020. We used a portion of the proceeds from the Term A Loan to repay the approximate $43.3 million of outstanding indebtedness, including accrued interest, under our secured credit facility with MidCap Financial Trust (“MidCap”), which terminated in December 2020 upon such repayment. We intend to use the remaining proceeds to support the launch of ORLADEYO in the United States and Europe and to advance the development of BCX9930 into clinical trials in multiple complement-mediated diseases, and for other general corporate purposes.
The Credit Agreement also provides for two additional term loans, at our option, in the respective principal amounts of $25.0 million (the “Term B Loan”) and $50.0 million (the “Term C Loan”). The Term B Loan and the Term C Loan may be drawn upon if, among other conditions, we reach defined revenue milestones and, with respect to a draw on the Term C Loan, the Term B Loan has been funded prior to or contemporaneously with the Term C Loan. The maturity date of the Credit Agreement is December 7, 2025. See “Note 4-Credit Agreement” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report for additional information about our obligations under the Credit Agreement.
Results of Operations
The discussion below presents a summary of our results of operations for fiscal years 2020 and 2019. See Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on March 13, 2020, for a summary of our results of operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to 2019
Total revenues in 2020 were $17.8 million, compared to $48.8 million in 2019. The decrease in revenue was primarily due to the recognition of $20.1 million of revenue related to a one-time $22.0 million upfront milestone payment we received in 2019 upon execution of the Torii Agreement, with the remaining amount of $1.9 million recognized in 2020. Additionally, we recognized $13.9 million of RAPIVAB product sales under our HHS contract in 2019. We did not have any RAPIVAB product sales under our HHS contract in 2020.
Revenues in 2020 included $3.3 million of product revenue, the majority of which was from peramivir inventory sales to our commercial partners, $3.2 million of royalty revenue from Shionogi, Green Cross and SUL associated with sales of peramivir in Japan, Taiwan, Korea and the United States, $1.9 million of deferred revenue amortization related to the Torii Agreement and $9.2 million of reimbursement of collaborative expenses from NIAID/HHS and BARDA/HHS related to the development of galidesivir. Revenues in 2019 included $6.1 million of royalty revenue from SUL, Shionogi and Green Cross associated with sales of peramivir in the United States, Japan and Korea, $4.9 million of reimbursement of collaborative expenses from NIAID/HHS and BARDA/HHS under U.S. Government development contracts, $3.7 million of peramivir product revenue from inventory sales to our commercial partners, $13.9 million of RAPIVAB product revenue from inventory sales to BARDA/HHS under our Government procurement contract and $20.1 million related to the Torii Agreement upfront milestone payment.
Research and development expenses (“R&D expenses”) increased to $123.0 million in 2020 from $107.1 million in 2019. The increase in 2020 R&D expenses, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to increased spending on our complement-mediated diseases and galidesivir programs, as well as an increase in other research, preclinical and development activities, partially offset by a reduction in spend on the ORLADEYO program, which launched commercially in the U.S. during December 2020.
The following table summarizes our R&D expenses for the periods indicated (amounts are in thousands):
R&D expenses include all direct and indirect expenses and are allocated to specific programs at the point of development of a lead product candidate. Direct expenses are charged directly to the program to which they relate, and indirect expenses are allocated based upon internal direct labor hours dedicated to each respective program. Direct expenses consist of compensation for R&D personnel and costs of outside parties to conduct laboratory studies, develop manufacturing processes, manufacture the product candidates, conduct and manage clinical trials, as well as other costs related to our clinical and preclinical studies. Indirect R&D expenses consist of lab supplies and services, facility expenses, depreciation of development equipment and other overhead of our research and development efforts. R&D expenses vary according to the number of programs in clinical development and the stage of development of our clinical programs. Later stage clinical programs tend to cost more than earlier stage programs due to the longer length of time of the clinical trials and the higher number of patients enrolled in these clinical trials.
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses increased to $67.9 million in 2020 compared to $37.1 million in 2019. The increase of $30.8 million was primarily due to increased spending on commercial activities, including building a sales organization, as well as increases in medical affairs activities to support the U.S. commercial launch of ORLADEYO in 2020.
Interest and other income was $9.4 million in 2020, compared to $1.9 million in 2019. The increase was primarily due to recognition of other income related to our arbitration proceedings.
Interest expense is related to the non-recourse PhaRMA Notes issued in March 2011, borrowings under our secured credit facility with MidCap, the Royalty Sale, and the $125.0 million Term A Loan under our new Credit Agreement with Athyrium. The Royalty Purchase Agreement requires us to recognize a liability (the “Royalty Financing Obligation”) for the future sale of royalties under the agreement. This liability is amortized using the effective interest rate method, resulting in the recognition of non-cash interest expense over the estimated term of the Royalty Purchase Agreement. Interest expense increased to $14.5 million in 2020, compared to $11.9 million in 2019, primarily due to the amortization of interest associated with the royalty financing obligation, which resulted in $2.1 million of non-cash interest expense, and interest expense of $0.9 million associated with the Term A Loan borrowing under the Credit Agreement. In December 2020, we repaid the outstanding indebtedness under our secured credit facility with MidCap.
Loss on debt extinguishment is comprised of the write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs and original issue discount of $1.2 million and a prepayment fee of $0.8 million associated with the repayment of the outstanding indebtedness under our secured credit facility with MidCap.
We realized a currency exchange gain of $0.7 million in 2020, compared to a $0.9 million currency exchange gain in 2019 related to the exercise of a U.S. dollar/Japanese yen currency option under the Currency Hedge Agreement. A mark-to-market loss of $0.6 million was recognized in 2020, compared to a mark-to-market loss of $0.4 million recognized in 2019, related to the Currency Hedge Agreement, resulting from changes in the U.S. dollar/Japanese yen exchange rate during the year. The final tranche of the options under the Currency Hedge Agreement expired in November 2020. Additionally, we realized currency exchange losses in 2020 of $1.0 million as a result of expanded international operating activities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our operations have principally been funded through public offerings and private placements of equity securities; cash from collaborative and other research and development agreements, including U.S. Government contracts for RAPIVAB and galidesivir; to a lesser extent, the PhaRMA Notes financing and our secured credit facility with MidCap, which terminated in December 2020 when we repaid the outstanding indebtedness under the facility with a portion of the net proceeds from the Term A Loan under the Credit Agreement; and more recently, the Credit Agreement and the Royalty Sale. To date, we have been awarded a BARDA/HHS RAPIVAB development contract totaling $234.8 million, which expired on June 30, 2014, a NIAID/HHS galidesivir development contract totaling $45.9 million, which is ongoing, a second NIAID/HHS galidesivir development contract totaling $43.9 million, which is ongoing, and a BARDA/HHS galidesivir development contract totaling $39.1 million, which is also ongoing. The total amount of NIAID/HHS and BARDA/HHS galidesivir funding obligated under awarded options is $52.2 million and $20.6 million, respectively. In addition to the above, we have previously received funding from other sources, including other collaborative and other research and development agreements, government grants, equipment lease financing, facility leases, research grants, and interest income on our investments.
On June 1, 2020, we issued 22,044,447 shares of common stock to the public at a purchase price of $4.50 per share and pre-funded warrants to purchase 3,511,111 shares of common stock at a purchase of $4.49 per pre-funded warrant, for total net proceeds to us of $108.1 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses payable by us. The pre-funded warrants are exercisable in accordance with the terms in the warrant agreement and have an exercise price of $0.01 per share, which is subject to adjustment in the event of certain stock dividends and distributions, stock splits, stock combinations, reclassifications, or similar events affecting our common stock and also upon any distributions of assets to our stockholders.
On December 7, 2020, we entered into the Royalty Purchase Agreement with RPI, pursuant to which we sold to RPI the right to receive certain royalty payments from us on account of ORLADEYO and BCX9930 for a purchase price of $125.0 million in cash. We also entered into the Credit Agreement with Athyrium on December 7, 2020, pursuant to which we received a $125.0 million Term A Loan. We used a portion of the net proceeds from the Term A Loan to repay the approximate $43.3 million of outstanding indebtedness, including accrued interest, under our secured credit facility with MidCap. We intend to use the remaining proceeds to support the launch of ORLADEYO in the U.S. and Europe and to advance the development of BCX9930 into clinical trials in multiple complement-mediated diseases, and for other general corporate purposes. The Credit Agreement also provides for two additional term loans, at our option, in the respective principal amounts of $25.0 million for the Term B Loan and $50.0 million for the Term C Loan. The Term B Loan and the Term C Loan may be drawn upon if, among other conditions, we reach defined revenue milestones and, with respect to a draw on the Term C Loan, the Term B Loan has been funded prior to or contemporaneously with the Term C Loan. The maturity date of the Credit Agreement is December 7, 2025. See “Note 3-Royalty Monetizations-ORLADEYO Royalty Monetization” and “Note 4-Credit Agreement” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report for additional information about the Royalty Sale and the Credit Agreement, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020, we had net working capital of $218.1 million, an increase of approximately $146.1 million from $72.0 million at December 31, 2019. The increase in working capital was primarily due to cash provided from the Royalty Sale and the Credit Agreement in December 2020, as well as the June 2020 public offering of our common stock and pre-funded warrants to purchase our common stock, partially offset by our normal operating expenses associated with the development of our product candidates and expenses incurred in anticipation of our launch and commercialization of ORLADEYO. Our principal sources of liquidity at December 31, 2020 were approximately $272.1 million in cash and cash equivalents and approximately $28.2 million in investments considered available-for-sale.
We intend to contain costs and cash flow requirements by closely managing our third-party costs and headcount, leasing scientific equipment and facilities, contracting with other parties to conduct certain research and development projects, and using consultants. We expect to incur additional expenses, potentially resulting in significant losses, as we continue to pursue our research and development activities and commercialize ORLADEYO. We may incur additional expenses related to the filing, prosecution, maintenance, defense, and enforcement of patent and other intellectual property claims and additional regulatory costs as our clinical programs advance through later stages of development. The objective of our investment policy is to ensure the safety and preservation of invested funds, as well as maintaining liquidity sufficient to meet cash flow requirements. We place our excess cash with high credit quality financial institutions, commercial companies, and government agencies in order to limit the amount of our credit exposure. We have not realized any significant losses on our investments.
We plan to finance our needs principally from the following:
●
lease, royalty, or loan financing and future public or private equity or debt financing;
●
our existing capital resources and interest earned on that capital;
● revenues from product sales;
●
payments under existing, and executing new, contracts with the U.S. Government; and
●
payments under current or future collaborative and licensing agreements with corporate partners.
As our commercialization activities and research and development programs continue to advance, our costs will increase. Our current and planned clinical trials, plus the related development, manufacturing, regulatory approval process requirements, and additional personnel resources and testing required for the continuing development of our product candidates and the commercialization of our products will consume significant capital resources and will increase our expenses. Our expenses, revenues and cash utilization rate could vary significantly depending on many factors, including our ability to raise additional capital, the development progress of our collaborative agreements for our product candidates, the amount and timing of funding we receive from existing U.S. Government contracts for galidesivir, the amount of funding or assistance, if any, we receive from new U.S. Government contracts or other new partnerships with third parties for the development and/or commercialization of our products and product candidates, the progress and results of our current and proposed clinical trials for our most advanced product candidates, the progress made in the manufacturing of our lead product candidates, commercialization and market acceptance of our products, and the overall progression of our other programs. The impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on one or more of the foregoing factors could negatively affect our expenses, revenues, and cash utilization rate.
Based on our expectations for revenue, operating expenses and our option to access an additional $75 million under the Credit Agreement, we believe our financial resources will be sufficient to fund our operations into 2023. However, we have sustained operating losses for the majority of our corporate history and expect that our 2021 expenses will exceed our 2021 revenues. We expect to continue to incur operating losses and negative cash flows until revenues reach a level sufficient to support ongoing operations. Our liquidity needs will be largely determined by the success of operations in regard to the successful commercialization of our products and the future progression of our product candidates. We also may consider other plans to fund future operations, including: (1) securing or increasing U.S. Government funding of our programs, including obtaining procurement contracts; (2) out-licensing rights to certain of our products or product candidates, pursuant to which the we would receive cash milestones; (3) raising additional capital through equity or debt financings or from other sources, including royalty or other monetization transactions; (4) obtaining additional product candidate regulatory approvals, which would generate revenue, milestones and cash flow; (5) reducing spending on one or more research and development programs, including by discontinuing development; and/or (6) restructuring operations to change our overhead structure. We may issue securities, including common stock, preferred stock, depositary shares, purchase contracts, warrants, debt securities, and units, through private placement transactions or registered public offerings. Our future liquidity needs, and ability to address those needs, will largely be determined by the success of our products and product candidates; the timing, scope, and magnitude of our commercial expenses; and key development and regulatory events and our decisions in the future.
Our long-term capital requirements and the adequacy of our available funds will depend upon many factors, including:
●
market acceptance of approved products and successful commercialization by either us or our partners;
●
our ability to perform under our government contracts and to receive reimbursement and stockpiling procurement contracts;
●
the magnitude of work under our government contracts;
●
the progress and magnitude of our research, drug discovery and development programs;
●
changes in existing collaborative relationships or government contracts;
●
our ability to establish additional collaborative relationships with academic institutions, biotechnology or pharmaceutical companies and governmental agencies or other third parties;
●
the extent to which our partners, including governmental agencies, will share in the costs associated with the development of our programs or run the development programs themselves;
●
our ability to negotiate favorable development and marketing strategic alliances for certain products and product candidates;
●
any decision to build or expand internal development and commercial capabilities;
●
the scope and results of preclinical studies and clinical trials to identify and develop product candidates;
●
our ability to engage sites and enroll subjects in our clinical trials;
●
the scope of manufacturing of our products to support our commercial operations and of our product candidates to support our preclinical research and clinical trials;
●
increases in personnel and related costs to support the development and commercialization of our products and product candidates;
●
the scope of manufacturing of our drug substance and product candidates required for future NDA filings;
●
competitive and technological advances;
●
the time and costs involved in obtaining regulatory approvals;
●
post-approval commitments for ORLADEYO, RAPIVAB, and other products that receive regulatory approval; and
●
the costs involved in all aspects of intellectual property strategy and protection, including the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending, and enforcing patent claims.
We expect that we will be required to raise additional capital to complete the development and commercialization of our current products and product candidates, and we may seek to raise capital in the future. Additional funding, whether through additional sales of equity or debt securities, collaborative or other arrangements with corporate partners or from other sources, including governmental agencies in general and existing government contracts specifically, may not be available when needed or on terms acceptable to us. The issuance of preferred or common stock or convertible securities, with terms and prices significantly more favorable than those of the currently outstanding common stock, could have the effect of diluting or adversely affecting the holdings or rights of our existing stockholders. In addition, collaborative arrangements may require us to transfer certain material rights to such corporate partners. Insufficient funds may require us to delay, scale back or eliminate certain of our research and development programs. Our future working capital requirements, including the need for additional working capital, will be largely determined by the advancement of our portfolio of product candidates and commercialization of ORLADEYO, as well as rate of reimbursement by U.S. Government agencies of our galidesivir expenses and any future decisions regarding the future of the RAPIVAB and galidesivir programs, including those relating to stockpiling procurement. More specifically, our working capital requirements will be dependent on the number, magnitude, scope and timing of our development programs; regulatory approval of our product candidates; obtaining funding from collaborative partners; the cost, timing and outcome of regulatory reviews, regulatory investigations, and changes in regulatory requirements; the costs of obtaining patent protection for our product candidates; the timing and terms of business development activities; the rate of technological advances relevant to our operations; the efficiency of manufacturing processes developed on our behalf by third parties; the timing, scope and magnitude of commercial spending, and the level of required administrative support for our daily operations.
The restrictive covenants contained in the Credit Agreement with Athyrium could cause us to be unable to pursue business opportunities that we or our stockholders may consider beneficial without the lender’s permission or without repaying all obligations outstanding under the Credit Agreement. These covenants limit our ability to, among other things, grant certain types of liens on our assets; make certain investments; incur or assume certain debt, including accessing additional tranches of debt under the Credit Agreement; engage in certain mergers, acquisitions, and similar transactions; dispose of assets; license certain property; distribute dividends; make certain restricted payments; change the nature of our business; engage in transactions with affiliates and insiders; prepay other indebtedness; or engage in sale and leaseback transactions. A breach of any of these covenants could result in an event of default under the Credit Agreement. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the covenants under the Credit Agreement.
Financial Outlook for 2021
In the launch period for ORLADEYO, the Company is not providing specific revenue or operating guidance. Based on our expectations for revenue, operating expenses, and our option to access an additional $75 million from our existing credit facility, we believe our current cash runway takes us into 2023.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we are not involved in any unconsolidated entities or off-balance sheet arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
In the table below, we set forth our enforceable and legally binding obligations and future commitments and obligations related to all contracts that we are likely to continue regardless of the fact that they are cancelable as of December 31, 2020. Some of the amounts we include in this table are based on management’s estimates and assumptions about these obligations, including their duration, the possibility of renewal, anticipated actions by third parties, and other factors. Because these estimates and assumptions are necessarily subjective, the obligations we will actually pay in future periods may vary from those reflected in the table.
(1)
Purchase obligations include commitments related to clinical development, manufacturing and research operations and other purchase commitments.
(2)
The PhaRMA Notes had a final legal maturity date of December 1, 2020, at which time the outstanding principal, together with accrued and unpaid interest, was due in full. As of December 31, 2020, the PhaRMA Notes remain outstanding and in default and the Company will continue to record the liability and accrued interest owed until the Company is determined to no longer be the financial obligor.
The above amounts exclude future potential payments under our Royalty Purchase Agreement with RPI, pursuant to which we are required to make certain royalty payments to RPI based on net product sales of ORLADEYO and BCX9930, as well as on certain ORLADEYO sublicense revenue. Due to the nature of this arrangement, the future potential payments related to the attainment of additional regulatory approvals and sales-based milestones over a period of several years are inherently uncertain, and accordingly, no amounts have been presented for these future potential payments.
In addition to the above, we have committed to make potential future “sublicense” payments to third parties as part of in-licensing and development programs. Payments under these agreements generally become due and payable only upon achievement of certain developmental, regulatory and/or commercial milestones. Because the achievement of these milestones is neither probable nor reasonably estimable, such contingencies have not been recorded on our balance sheet.
Critical Accounting Policies
We have established various accounting policies that govern the application of U.S. GAAP, which were utilized in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Certain accounting policies involve significant judgments and assumptions by management that have a material impact on the carrying value of certain assets and liabilities. Management considers such accounting policies to be critical accounting policies. The judgments and assumptions used by management are based on historical experience and other factors, which are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Because of the nature of the judgments and assumptions made by management, actual results could differ from these judgments and estimates, which could have a material impact on the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the results of operations.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in “Note 1-Significant Accounting Policies and Concentrations of Risk” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid you in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results and affect the more significant judgments and estimates that we use in the preparation of our financial statements.
Inventory
Our inventories consist of peramivir finished goods and work in process, which are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value using the first-in, first-out (i.e., FIFO) method. Cost includes materials, labor, overhead, shipping and handling costs. Our inventories are subject to expiration dating. We regularly evaluate the carrying value of our inventories and provide valuation reserves for any estimated obsolete, short-dated or unmarketable inventories. In addition, we may experience spoilage of our raw materials and supplies. Our determination that a valuation reserve might be required, in addition to the quantification of such reserve, requires us to utilize significant judgment. In connection with the FDA approval of RAPIVAB and other regulatory approvals, we began capitalizing costs associated with the production of peramivir inventories.
Accrued Expenses
We enter into contractual agreements with third-party vendors who provide research and development, manufacturing, and other services in the ordinary course of business. Some of these contracts are subject to milestone-based invoicing and services are completed over an extended period of time. We record liabilities under these contractual commitments when an obligation has been incurred. This accrual process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on the facts and circumstances known to us. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued expenses include:
●
fees paid to CROs in connection with preclinical and toxicology studies and clinical trials;
●
fees paid to investigative sites in connection with clinical trials;
●
fees paid to contract manufacturers in connection with the production of our raw materials, drug substance, drug products, and product candidates; and
●
professional fees.
We base our expenses related to clinical trials on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we will adjust the accrual accordingly. If we do not identify costs that we have begun to incur or if we underestimate or overestimate the level of these costs, our actual expenses could differ from our estimates.
Revenue Recognition
We adopted the provisions of ASC 606 as of January 1, 2018 using the modified retrospective method as applied to contracts that were not completed as of that date. As a result, financial information for reporting periods beginning after January 1, 2018 are presented under ASC 606, while comparative financial information has not been adjusted and continues to be reported in accordance with our historical accounting policy for revenue recognition prior to the adoption of ASC 606.
Collaborative and Other Research and Development Arrangements and Royalties
We recognize revenue when we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring promised goods or services to a customer. Revenue is measured at the transaction price that is based on the amount of consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for transferring the promised goods or services to the customer. The transaction price includes estimates of variable consideration to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue recognized will not occur.
We have collaboration and license agreements with a number of third parties as well as research and development agreements with certain government entities. Our primary sources of revenue are license, service, royalty and product sale revenues from these collaborative and other research and development arrangements.
Revenue from license fees, royalty payments, milestone payments, and research and development fees are recognized as revenue when the earnings process is complete and we have no further continuing performance obligations or we have completed the performance obligations under the terms of the agreement.
Arrangements that involve the delivery of more than one performance obligation are initially evaluated as to whether the intellectual property licenses granted by us represent distinct performance obligations. If they are determined to be distinct, the value of the intellectual property licenses would be recognized up-front while the research and development service fees would be recognized as the performance obligations are satisfied. Variable consideration is assessed at each reporting period as to whether it is not subject to significant future reversal and, therefore, should be included in the transaction price at the inception of the contract. If a contract includes a fixed or minimum amount of research and development support, this also would be included in the transaction price. Changes to collaborations, such as the extensions of the research term or increasing the number of targets or technology covered under an existing agreement, are assessed for whether they represent a modification or should be accounted for as a new contract. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, revenue is allocated to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. Standalone selling prices are based on observable prices at which we separately sell the products or services. If a standalone selling price is not directly observable, then we estimate the standalone selling price considering market conditions and entity-specific factors. Analyzing the arrangement to identify performance obligations requires the use of judgment, and each may be an obligation to deliver services, a right or license to use an asset, or another performance obligation.
Milestone payments are recognized as licensing revenue upon the achievement of specified milestones if (i) the milestone is substantive in nature and the achievement of the milestone was not probable at the inception of the agreement; and (ii) we have a right to payment. Any milestone payments received prior to satisfying these revenue recognition criteria are recorded as deferred revenue.
Reimbursements received for direct out-of-pocket expenses related to research and development costs are recorded as revenue in the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Loss rather than as a reduction in expenses. Under our contracts with BARDA/HHS and NIAID/HHS, revenue is recognized as reimbursable direct and indirect costs are incurred.
Under certain of our license agreements, we receive royalty payments based upon our licensees’ net sales of covered products. Royalties are recognized at the later of when (i) the subsequent sale or usage occurs, or (ii) the performance obligation to which some or all of the sales-based or usage-based royalty has been satisfied.
Product Sales
Our principal sources of product sales are sales of peramivir to our licensing partners and sales of RAPIVAB to HHS under our procurement contract. In December 2020, we launched ORLADEYO and began recording product revenue. We recognize revenue for sales when the customer obtains control of the product, which generally occurs upon delivery.
Contract Balances
The timing of revenue recognition, billings and cash collections results in billed accounts receivable, unbilled receivables (contract assets) and deferred revenue and billings in excess of revenue recognized (contract liabilities) on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Contract assets. Our long-term contracts are billed as work progresses in accordance with the contract terms and conditions, either at periodic intervals or upon achievement of certain milestones. Often this results in billing occurring subsequent to revenue recognition, resulting in contract assets. Contract assets are generally classified as current assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Contract liabilities. We often receive cash payments from customers in advance of our performance, resulting in contract liabilities. These contract liabilities are classified as either current or long-term in the Consolidated Balance Sheets based on the timing of when we expect to recognize the revenue.
Contract Costs
We may incur direct and indirect costs associated with obtaining a contract. Incremental contract costs that we expect to recover are capitalized and amortized over the expected term of the contract. Non-incremental contract costs and costs that we expect to recover are expensed as incurred.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development costs are charged to expense when incurred. Advance payments for goods or services that will be used or rendered for future research and development activities are deferred and capitalized. Such amounts are recognized as expense when the related goods are delivered or the related services are performed. Research and development expenses include, among other items, personnel costs, including salaries and benefits, manufacturing costs, clinical, regulatory, and toxicology services performed by CROs, materials and supplies, and overhead allocations consisting of various administrative and facilities related costs. Most of our manufacturing and clinical and preclinical studies are performed by third-party CROs. Costs for studies performed by CROs are accrued by us over the service periods specified in the contracts and estimates are adjusted, if required, based upon our on-going review of the level of services actually performed.
Additionally, we have license agreements with third parties, such as AECOM, IRL, and UAB, which require fees related to sublicense agreements or maintenance fees. We expense sublicense payments as incurred unless they are related to revenues that have been deferred, in which case the expenses are deferred and recognized over the related revenue recognition period. We expense maintenance payments as incurred.
Deferred collaboration expenses represent sub-license payments paid to our academic partners upon receipt of consideration from various commercial partners, and other consideration to our academic partners for modification to existing license agreements. These deferred expenses would not have been incurred without receipt of such payments or modifications from our commercial partners and are being expensed in proportion to the related revenue being recognized. We believe that this accounting treatment appropriately matches expenses with the associated revenue.
We group our R&D expenses into two major categories: direct external expenses and indirect expenses. Direct expenses consist of compensation for R&D personnel and costs of outside parties to conduct laboratory studies, develop manufacturing processes and manufacture the product candidate, conduct and manage clinical trials, as well as other costs related to our clinical and preclinical studies. These costs are accumulated and tracked by active program. Indirect expenses consist of lab supplies and services, facility expenses, depreciation of development equipment and other overhead of our research and development efforts. These costs apply to work on non-active product candidates and our discovery research efforts.
Stock-Based Compensation
All share-based payments, including grants of stock option awards and restricted stock unit awards, are recognized in our Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Loss based on their fair values. Stock-based compensation cost is estimated at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award. Determining the appropriate fair value model and the related assumptions for the model requires judgment, including estimating the life of an award, the stock price volatility, and the expected term. We utilize the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to value our awards and recognize compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the vesting periods. The estimation of share-based payment awards that will ultimately vest requires judgment, and to the extent actual results or updated estimates differ from our current estimates, such amounts will be recorded as a cumulative adjustment in the period estimates are revised. In addition, we have outstanding performance-based stock options for which no compensation expense is recognized until “performance” has occurred. Significant management judgment is also required in determining estimates of future stock price volatility and forfeitures to be used in the valuation of the options. Actual results, and future changes in estimates, may differ substantially from our current estimates.
Interest Expense and Royalty Financing Obligation
The royalty financing obligation is eligible to be repaid based on royalties from net sales of ORLADEYO. Interest expense is accrued using the effective interest rate method over the estimated period the related liability will be paid. This requires us to estimate the total amount of future royalty payments to be generated from product sales over the life of the agreement. We impute interest on the carrying value of the royalty financing obligation and record interest expense using an imputed effective interest rate. We will reassess the expected royalty payments each reporting period and account for any changes through an adjustment to the effective interest rate on a prospective basis. The assumptions used in determining the expected repayment term of the debt and amortization period of the issuance costs requires that we make estimates that could impact the carrying value of the liability, as well as the period over which associated issuance costs will be amortized. A significant increase or decrease in forecasted net sales could materially impact the liability balance, interest expense and the time period for repayment.
Foreign Currency Hedge
In connection with our issuance of the PhaRMA Notes, we entered into a foreign Currency Hedge Agreement to hedge certain risks associated with changes in the value of the Japanese yen relative to the U.S. dollar. Under the Currency Hedge Agreement, we have the right to purchase dollars and sell yen at a rate of 100 yen per dollar. The final tranche of the options under the Currency Hedge Agreement expired in November of 2020.
The Currency Hedge Agreement did not qualify for hedge accounting treatment and therefore mark-to-market adjustments were recognized in our Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Loss. Mark-to-market adjustments were determined by quoted prices in markets that are not actively traded and for which significant inputs are observable directly or indirectly, representing Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy as defined by generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”).
Tax
We account for uncertain tax positions in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Significant management judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance recorded against net deferred tax assets. We have recorded a valuation allowance against all potential tax assets, due to uncertainties in our ability to utilize deferred tax assets, primarily consisting of certain net operating losses carried forward, before they expire. The valuation allowance is based on estimates of taxable income in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate and the period over which our deferred tax assets will be recoverable.
Impact of Inflation
We do not believe that our operating results have been materially impacted by inflation during the past three years. However, we cannot be assured that our operating results will not be adversely affected by inflation in the future. We will continually seek to mitigate the adverse effects of inflation on the services that we use through improved operating efficiencies and cost containment initiatives.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
“Note 1-Significant Accounting Policies and Concentrations of Risk” to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report discusses accounting pronouncements recently issued or proposed but not yet required to be adopted.