Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
(1) Caution Regarding Forward-Looking Information
Certain statements contained in this annual filing, including, without limitation, statements containing the words “believes”, “anticipates”, “expects” and words of similar import, constitute forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause the actual results, performance or achievements of the Company, or industry results, to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements.
Such factors include, among others, the following: international, national and local general economic and market conditions: demographic changes; the ability of the Company to sustain, manage or forecast its growth; the ability of the Company to successfully make and integrate acquisitions; existing government regulations and changes in, or the failure to comply with, government regulations; adverse publicity; competition; fluctuations and difficulty in forecasting operating results; changes in business strategy or development plans; business disruptions; the ability to attract and retain qualified personnel; and other factors referenced in this and previous filings.
Given these uncertainties, readers of this Form 10-K and investors are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements. The Company disclaims any obligation to update any such factors or to publicly announce the result of any revisions to any of the forward-looking statements contained herein to reflect future events or developments.
(2) General
The Company’s History
BioAdaptives, Inc., (“BioAdaptives,” the “Company,” or “we” or “us”) was incorporated in the State of Delaware on April 19, 2013, as APEX 8 Inc. From inception through October 21, 2013, the Company was in the developmental stage and conducted virtually no business operations, other than organizational activities and preparation of a registration statement on Form 10-12g (the “Registration Statement”), which was filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission on May 3, 2013. On June 11, 2013, the SEC staff informed the Company that it had no further comments on this filing.
On June 21, 2013, the Company’s sole officer, director and shareholder, Richard Chiang, sold 10,000,000 shares of the Company’s common stock, constituting 100% of its issued and outstanding shares, to Ferris Holding Inc., a Nevada corporation (“FHI”), for a purchase price of $40,000. Effective the same date, Mr. Chiang or the Company appointed Barry K. Epling, who was the sole shareholder of FHI, as Chairman of the Board of Directors, and Gerald A. Epling as its President, Chief Executive Officer, Secretary, Chief Financial Officer and a director; Mr. Chiang then resigned. On September 25, 2013, the Company changed its name to BioAdaptives, Inc.
Shortly afterwards, on October 21, 2013, the Company entered into a series of material transactions, acquiring assets, intellectual property and license rights covering the design and manufacture of certain nutraceutical products, and licenses from FHI and BioSwan, Inc. a Nevada corporation that was a wholly owned subsidiary of Hemp, Inc., another Nevada corporation. As part of these transactions, which are discussed more fully in its October 21, 2013, Form 8-K, the Company issued 2,000,000 shares of common stock to BioSwan.
The BioSwan shares were transferred to Hemp as a dividend on October 25, 2013. The Company then filed a Form S-1 registration statement with the SEC, registering an offering of 2,005,000 shares for distribution by Hemp as a dividend to its shareholders (the additional 5,000 shares permitted rounding-up avoid issuance of fractional shares). On January 10, 2014, the SEC notified the Company that the registration statement was effective and on July 9, 2014, the Company’s shares commenced trading in the Over-the-Counter market under the trading symbol BDPT.
The Company commenced executing its business plan, seeking to develop supply chain, manufacturing and retail distribution to exploit the BioSwan assets. On May 20, 2014, the Company’s PCAOB auditor, Kenne Ruan, P.C., resigned and it appointed Anton & Chia LLP. Thereafter, it went through several management changes: On July 14, 2014, Gerald A. Epling, resigned as an officer and director and the Company appointed Barry K. Epling as President, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer and Secretary. On February 6, 2015, Barry K. Epling resigned as an officer of the Company but remained as its sole director. On that same day, the Company appointed Christopher G. Hall, as its President, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer and Secretary. On May 23, 2o15, the Company also changed its PCAOB auditor, dismissing Anton & Chia, LLP and retaining Malone & Bailey, LLP.
On March 31, 2017, the Company filed a Form 15-15D with the SEC, terminating its status as an SEC-reporting company; it was current in its Continuous Disclosure obligations at that time. The Company continued to provide financial and other reports to shareholders and the public by means of the Alternative Reporting System operated by OTC Markets Group, Inc. Its shares continued to trade in the OTC market; it also continued to execute its business plan.
On October 2, 2017, the Board of Directors appointed Kim Southworth and Edward E Jacobs, Jr MD as directors and Barry K. Epling resigned as Chairman. FHI donated 9,628.568 shares of the Company’s common stock to the Breath of Life Foundation, a Section 501(c)(3) non-profit organization. At that time, these shares constituted 51.84% of the Company’s issued and outstanding shares. Subsequently, Breath of Life granted the Company’s Board of Directors an irrevocable proxy to vote them. With these actions, Barry K. Epling terminated his relationship with the Company as officer or director. On that same day, Christopher G. Hall resigned as an officer of the Company (he remains on the Advisory Board); Southworth was appointed Chief Executive Officer; and Edward E Jacobs was appointed Chief Financial officer, Secretary and Scientific Director of the Company.
On May 15, 2018, the Board of Directors appointed James E Rouse as a director; the Company also appointed him as President. On July 6, 2018, Ms. Southworth resigned from the Company and Dr. Jacobs was appointed Chief Executive Officer in addition to his existing responsibilities. On September 10, 2018, Rouse resigned as an officer and director of the Company although a company he controls provided consulting services until September 25, 2018.
On May 10, 2019, the Company filed a Form 10-12g with the SEC, re-entering the Continuous Disclosure program and registering its common stock under Section 12(g) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. On August 1, 2019, the SEC staff informed the Company that it had no further comments on this filing.
On September 11, 2019, the Company appointed Robert Ellis as President and Ron Lambrecht as Chief Financial Officer.
On February 6, 2020, the Board of Directors exercised its authority under the Delaware General Corporations Law to establish its Series A Preferred Stock. The Series A has enhanced voting and conversion privileges and can be used by the Company to settle recorded debt or exchange for new product rights or techniques. On this same day, the Board of Directors authorized an increase in the Company’s authorized common stock from 100,000,000 to 200,000,000; holders of a majority of the Company’s common shares consented to the increase.
The Company’s Business
BioAdaptives investigates, markets and distributes natural plant- and algal-based products that improve health and wellness for humans and animals, with an emphasis on pain relief and anti-aging properties. The Company’s current products include dietary supplements using natural ingredients and proprietary methods of optimizing the availability of nutrients in foods and beverages. The human products are designed to aid memory, cognition and focus; assist in sleep and fatigue reduction; provide pain relief and healing; and improve overall emotional and physical wellness. The science behind our human products has proven to be effective for performance enhancement and pain relief for horses and dogs as well as providing improvements in appearance.
Our current product line includes PrimiCell®, PrimiLung™ and PluriPain® for humans and Canine Regen® and Equine Regen® for dogs and horses. We market Equine All-in-One™ under a marketing agreement with Livestock Impact, Inc.
All of our current products are licensed from and manufactured by third-parties under agreements that either provide for royalty payments or permit us to buy at wholesale or distributor rates and mark-up our profits and marketing expenses. We are currently a branding and marketing company but continue to investigate potential products. We have suspended development of NutraLoadTM products, the AgronifierTM process, and products based on the BioSwan and Clean Path licenses. We plan to rely upon direct and indirect sales of the Pluri and Primi lines and Regen and All In One animal products for revenues, although neither has produced any significant revenue since our inception. We believe the Equine All-in-One product has great potential and intend to market it to trainers through our relationship with Livestock Impact, Inc. and Bruce Colclasure. We can make no assurances that we will find commercial success in any of our products. We are a new company and thus have very limited experience in sales expectations and forecasting.
(3) Results of Operations
The Company has recognized revenues for years ended December 31, 2019, and December 31, 2020, of $9,934.00 and $16,327, respectively.
In conjunction with the Company’s business plan, as discussed in Item I of this document, the Company has expended considerable effort and financial resources to the implementation of its business plan. The Company has incurred operating expenses requiring cash payments of approximately $260.421, which was principally funded through convertible debt as disclosed in the accompanying financial statement footnotes and advances from shareholders.
Earnings (Loss) per share for the respective years ended December 31,2019 and December 31, 2020, were $(0.01) and (0.04), respectively, based on the weighted-average shares issued and outstanding at the end of each respective period.
We anticipate that future expenditure levels will remain relatively consistent until such time that the Company fully implements its current business plan, at which time the Company’s expenses and working capital requirements may increase significantly. The Company does not expect to generate any meaningful revenue or incur operating expenses for purposes other than fulfilling the obligations of a reporting company under the Exchange Act unless and until such time that the Company begins meaningful operations.
(4) Plan of Business
Subject to financing and various regulatory approvals, the Company intends to 1) market its existing products as described herein; 2) continue conducting research and investigation activities to identify new products or markets and improve its existing products and marketing; and 3) seek strategic or complimentary acquisitions in its current market space or, if indicated, others. There is no guarantee that the Company will be able to successfully implement this business plan or that if implemented, said plan will be successful.
(5) Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively, the Company had working capital of approximately $(0) and $(0); inclusive of all related party accounts receivable, accrued expenses and line-of-credit notes payable.
It is the belief of management that our current finance partners and shareholders will be able provide sufficient working capital necessary to support and preserve the integrity of the corporate entity. However, there is no legal obligation for either management or significant stockholders to provide additional future funding. Further, the Company is at the mercy of future economic trends and business operations for the Company’s majority stockholder to have the resources available to support the Company. Should this pledge to provide continuing financing not be fulfilled, the Company has not identified any alternative sources. Consequently, there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
The Company’s need for working capital may change dramatically as a result of any future business transaction.
There can be no assurance that the Company will identify or enter into any business transaction in the future. Further, there can be no assurance that the Company would be successful in consummating any acquisition on favorable terms or that it will be able to profitably manage the business, product, technology or company it acquires.
The Company has no current plans, proposals, arrangements or understandings with respect to the sale or issuance of additional securities prior to the location of a potential business transaction. Accordingly, there can be no assurance that sufficient funds will be available to the Company to allow it to cover the expenses related to such activities.
Regardless of whether the Company’s cash assets prove to be inadequate to meet the Company’s operational needs, the Company might seek to compensate providers of services by issuances of stock in lieu of cash.
(6) Critical Accounting Policies
Our financial statements and related public financial information are based on the application of accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). GAAP requires the use of estimates; assumptions, judgments and subjective interpretations of accounting principles that have an impact on the assets, liabilities, revenue and expense amounts reported. These estimates can also affect supplemental information contained in our external disclosures including information regarding contingencies, risk and financial condition. We believe our use of estimates and underlying accounting assumptions adhere to GAAP and are consistently and conservatively applied. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We continue to monitor significant estimates made during the preparation of our financial statements.
Our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 2 of our financial statements. While all these significant accounting policies impact our financial condition and results of operations, we view certain of these policies as critical. Policies determined to be critical are those policies that have the most significant impact on our financial statements and require management to use a greater degree of judgment and estimates. Actual results may differ from those estimates. Our management believes that given current facts and circumstances, it is unlikely that applying any other reasonable judgments or estimate methodologies would cause effect on our results of operations, financial position or liquidity for the periods presented in this report.