ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s historical results of operations and liquidity and capital resources should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements of the Company and notes thereto appearing elsewhere herein. The following discussion and analysis also contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors. See “Forward Looking Statements” that precedes Item 1 above.
Overview
The Company was incorporated in November 1988, under the laws of Delaware as GPS Acquisition Corp. for the purpose of acquiring the business of Blonder-Tongue Laboratories, Inc., a New Jersey corporation, which was founded in 1950 by Ben H. Tongue and Isaac S. Blonder to design, manufacture and supply a line of electronics and systems equipment principally for the private cable industry. Following the acquisition, the Company changed its name to Blonder Tongue Laboratories, Inc. The Company completed the initial public offering of its shares of Common Stock in December 1995.
Today, the Company is a technology-development and manufacturing company that delivers a wide range of products and services to the telecommunications, cable entertainment and media industry. For 70 years, Blonder Tongue/Drake products have been deployed in a long list of locations, including lodging/hospitality, multi-dwelling units/apartments, broadcast studios/networks, universities/schools, healthcare/hospitals, fitness centers, government facilities/offices, prisons, airports, sports stadiums/arenas, entertainment venues/casinos, retail stores, and small-medium businesses. These applications are variously described as commercial, institutional and/or enterprise environments and will be referred to herein collectively as “CIE”. The customers we serve include business entities installing private video and data networks in these environments, whether they are the largest cable television operators, telco or satellite providers, integrators, architects, engineers or the next generation of Internet Protocol Television (“IPTV”) streaming video providers. The technology requirements of these markets change rapidly, and the Company’s research and development team is continually delivering high performance-lower cost solutions to meet customers’ needs.
The Company’s strategy is focused on providing a wide range of products to meet the needs of the CIE environments described above, including lodging/hospitality, multi-dwelling units/apartments, broadcast studios/networks, universities/schools, healthcare/hospitals, fitness centers, government facilities/offices, prisons, airports, sports stadiums/arenas, entertainment venues/casinos, retail stores, and small-medium businesses, and to provide offerings that are optimized for an operator’s existing infrastructure, as well as the operator’s future strategy. A key component of this growth strategy is to provide products that deliver the latest technologies (such as IPTV and digital 4K, UHD, HD and SD video content) and have a high performance-to-cost ratio.
In 2019, the Company initiated a consumer premise equipment (“CPE”) sales initiative. The products sold in 2019 comprise primarily Android-based IPTV set top boxes to the Tier 2 and Tier 3 cable and telecommunications service providers. This strategic initiative is designed to secure an in-home position with the Company’s product offerings, more intimate, direct relationships with a wide range of service providers, and increased sales of the Company’s CIE products by the BT Premier Distributors to those same service providers. In its first year, the CPE Product initiative achieved sales to over 45 different telco, municipal fiber and cable operators and accounted for approximately 20% of the Company’s 2019 revenues. During 2020, the CPE Product initiative achieved sales to different telco, municipal fiber and cable operators and accounted for approximately 25% of the Company’s revenues.
Like many businesses throughout the United States and the world, we have been affected by the COVID-19 outbreak. Because there are daily developments regarding the outbreak, we are continually assessing the current and anticipated future effects on our business, including how these developments are impacting or may impact our customers, employees and business partners. In our core CIE business, we have experienced a noticeable decline in sales, as many of our customers have significantly reduced their business operations. In our CPE business we have experienced a more substantial reduction in sales, again as a result of our customers’ significant decrease in their business activities. With uncertainties surrounding the extent to which the COVID-19 outbreak will affect the economy generally, and our customers and business partners in particular, it is impossible for us to predict when conditions will improve to the point that we can reasonably forecast when our sales might return to historical levels. However, we are currently taking steps to significantly reduce our expenses, including adjustments in our staffing (in the form of furloughs) and reductions in manufacturing activities, which we believe will improve our ability to continue our operations at current levels and meet our obligations to our customers.
The Company’s manufacturing is allocated primarily between its facility in Old Bridge, New Jersey (“Old Bridge Facility”) and key contract manufacturing located in the People’s Republic of China (“PRC”) as well as South Korea, Taiwan and Ohio. The Company currently manufactures most of its digital products, including the NXG product line and latest encoder, transcoder and EdgeQAM collections at the Old Bridge Facility. Since 2007 the Company has transitioned and continues to manufacture certain high volume, labor intensive products, including many of the Company’s analog and other products, in the PRC, pursuant to manufacturing agreements that govern the production of products that may from time to time be the subject of purchase orders submitted by (and in the discretion of) the Company. Although the Company does not currently anticipate the transfer of any additional products to the PRC or other countries for manufacture, the Company may do so if business and market conditions make it advantageous to do so. Manufacturing products both at the Company’s Old Bridge Facility as well as in the PRC, South Korea, Taiwan and Ohio enables the Company to realize cost reductions while maintaining a competitive position and time-to-market advantage.
The Company may, from time to time, provide manufacturing, research and development and product support services for other companies’ products. In 2015, the Company entered into an agreement with VBrick Systems, Inc. (“VBrick”) to provide procurement, manufacturing, warehousing and fulfillment support to VBrick for a line of high-end encoder products and sub-assemblies. Sales to VBrick of encoder products were approximately $145,000 and $602,000 in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Sales to VBrick for sub-assemblies were not material in 2020 or 2019.
Results of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with year ended December 31, 2019, discussion is included below.
The following table sets forth, for the fiscal periods indicated, certain consolidated statement of earnings data as a percentage of net sales.
Compared with 2019
Net Sales. Net sales decreased $3,463,000 or 17.5% to $16,379,000 in 2020 from $19,842,000 in 2019. The decrease is primarily attributable to a decrease in sales of digital video headend products, DOCSIS data products, contract manufacturing products, HFC distribution products and analog video headend products offset, in part, by an increase in sales of transcoder products. Sales of digital video headend products were $3,607,000 and $6,714,000, sales of DOCSIS data products were $2,227,000 and $2,817,000, sales of contract-manufactured products were $145,000 and $602,000, sales of HFC distribution products were $2,133,000 and $2,509,000, sales of analog video headend products were $1,232,000 and $1,532,000 and sales of transcoder products were $1,543,000 and $71,000 in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cost of Goods Sold. Cost of goods sold decreased to $13,361,000 in 2020 from $16,411,000 in 2019 and decreased as a percentage of sales to 81.6% from 82.7%. The dollar decrease is primarily attributable to lower sales. The decrease as a percentage of sales is primarily attributable to reduced overhead costs.
Selling Expenses. Selling expenses decreased to $2,458,000 in 2020 from $3,002,000 in 2019 and decreased as a percentage of sales to 15.0% for 2020 from 15.1% for 2019. This $544,000 decrease is primarily attributable to a decrease in salaries and fringe benefits of $368,000, due to reduced headcount, a decrease in department supplies of $116,000 due to a reduction in products lent to customers for evaluation purposes, and a decrease in advertising and trade show expenses of $172,000 due to reduced attendance at trade shows in light of the pandemic, offset by an increase in occupancy costs of $314,000 under the Old Bridge Facility lease, due to a full year versus ten months in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease as a percentage of sales is primarily attributable to the overall decrease.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses increased to $5,150,000 in 2020 from $5,004,000 in 2019 and increased as a percentage of sales to 31.4% for 2020 from 25.2% in 2019. This $146,000 increase was primarily the result of an increase in professional fees of $370,000, an increase in bad debt expense of $248,000, an increase in computer expense of $334,000, and an increase in occupancy costs of $104,000 under the Old Bridge Facility lease, offset by a decrease in consulting fees of $191,000, a decrease in salaries and fringe benefits of $476,000 due to a combination of salary and headcount reductions and a decrease in travel and entertainment of $170,000, attributable to the pandemic. The increase as a percentage of sales is attributable to the overall increase as well as a decrease in net sales.
Research and Development Expense. Research and development expenses decreased to $2,524,000 in 2020 from $3,066,000 in 2019 and decreased as a percentage of sales to 15.4% in 2020 from 15.5% in 2019. This $542,000 decrease is primarily attributable to a decrease in consulting fees of $251,000 and a decrease in salaries and fringe benefits of $128,000 due to a reduction in head count. The decrease as a percentage of sales is attributable to the overall decrease offset by the decrease in net sales.
Gain on building sale. Gain on building sale was zero in 2020 a decrease from $7,175,000 in 2019, due to the sale-leaseback of the Old Bridge Facility in 2019.
Operating loss. Operating loss of $7,144,000 for 2020 represents an increase from the operating loss of $466,000 in 2019. Operating loss as a percentage of sales decreased to 43.4% in 2020 from 2.3% in 2019 for the reasons discussed above.
Interest expense net. Interest expense, net increased to $345,000 in 2020 from $261,000 in 2019. The increase is primarily the result of higher average borrowings, including $77,000 of PIK interest related to the Subordinated Loan Facility described below in Liquidity and Capital Resources.
Income Taxes. The provision for income taxes was $15,000 in 2020 and $15,000 in 2019. The Company records a full valuation allowance for net deferred tax assets that are no longer considered to be realizable. The significant negative evidence supporting the full valuation allowance includes a loss for the current year, a cumulative pre-tax loss for the three years ended December 31, 2020, the inability to carryback the net operating losses, limited future reversals of existing temporary differences and the limited availability of tax planning strategies. The Company expects to continue to provide a full valuation allowance until, or unless, it can sustain a level of profitability that demonstrates its ability to utilize these assets.
Inflation and Seasonality
Inflation and seasonality have not had a material impact on the results of operations of the Company. Fourth quarter sales in 2020 as compared to other quarters were slightly impacted by fewer production days. The Company expects sales each year in the fourth quarter to be impacted by fewer production days.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s working capital was $570,000 and $3,805,000 at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The Company’s net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $3,212,000, primarily due to the net loss of $7,474,000 and a decrease in accounts payable, accrued expenses and accrued compensation of $2,333,000, offset by a decrease in inventories of $4,421,000, compared to net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $6,538,000, primarily due to non-cash gain on building sale of $7,175,000 and an increase in inventories of $1,761,000 offset by an increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and accrued compensation of $2,297,000
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $191,000, which was attributable primarily to capital expenditures of $165,000 and the acquisition of licenses of $26,000. Cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $9,474,000, which was attributable primarily to proceeds on the building sale of $9,765,000 and proceeds on the sale of vehicles of $25,000 offset by capital expenditures of $263,000 and the acquisition of licenses of $53,000.
Cash provided by financing activities was $2,900,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, comprised primarily of borrowings of long term debt of $1,769,000, borrowings from the Subordinated Loan Facility of $900,000, net proceeds from the private placement of common stock of $812,000 and proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $13,000, offset by net repayments on the line of credit of $560,000 and repayments of debt of $34,000. Cash used in financing activities was $2,923,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, comprised primarily of repayments of debt of $3,032,000 and repayments of the former line of credit of $2,603,000, offset by net borrowings on the line of credit of $2,705,000 and proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $7,000.
For a full description of the Company’s senior secured indebtedness under the MidCap Facility and its effect upon the Company’s consolidated financial position and results of operations, see Note 5 - Debt of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Company’s primary sources of liquidity have been its existing cash balances, cash generated from operations, amounts available under the MidCap Facility, the proceeds received from a PPP Loan, amounts available under the Subordinated Loan Facility and cash generated from the private placement of common stock. There is no further availability under the current terms of the Subordinated Loan Facility. On a going-forward basis, the Company expects its primary sources of liquidity will be its existing cash balances, cash generated from operations and amounts available under the MidCap Facility. The Company also may seek to raise additional capital through the issuance of shares of common stock or other securities convertible into, or exercisable for, shares of common stock, although the Company cannot provide any assurances that this type of additional financing will be available on reasonable terms, or at all. The Company had approximately $609,000 and approximately $716,000 availability for borrowing under the MidCap Facility, as of December 31, 2020 and March 24, 2021, respectively.
As discussed in Item 2 - Properties, on February 1, 2019, the Company completed the sale of the Old Bridge Facility to Jake Brown Road, LLC (the “Buyer”). In addition, in connection with the completion of the sale, the Company and the Buyer (as landlord) entered into a lease (the “Lease”), pursuant to which the Company will continue to occupy, and continue to conduct its manufacturing, engineering, sales and administrative functions in the Old Bridge Facility.
The Lease has an initial term of five years and allows the Company to extend the term for an additional five years following the initial term. The Company is obligated to pay base rent of approximately $837,000 for the first year of the Lease, with the amount of the base rent adjusted for each subsequent year to equal 102.5% of the preceding year’s base rent. Without regard to any reduction in the Company’s lease expense derived from its sublease to a third party of the Sublease Space (defined below), for the first year of the Lease, the base rent of approximately $837,000.00 would offset, in part, the anticipated annualized saving of interest and depreciation expense of approximately $469,000 and the cash debt service of approximately $562,000. The Lease further provides for a security deposit in an amount equal to eight months of base rent, which may be reduced to three months of base rent upon certain benchmarks being met. It was determined in the first quarter 2020 that the applicable benchmark relevant to the six-month period ended August 1, 2019 was met and as a result the landlord released a portion of the security deposit equal to one month’s base rent to the Company, leaving an aggregate security deposit held by the landlord, in an amount equal to seven months of base rent. Subsequently, the Company determined in the third quarter 2020 that the applicable benchmark relevant to the six-month period ended August 1, 2020 was met and as a result, the Company notified the landlord in writing that it would offset rent otherwise due on August 1, 2020 against the reimbursement of a portion of the security deposit equal to one month’s base rent, leaving an aggregate security deposit held by the landlord, in an amount equal to six months of base rent. The landlord expressed its disagreement with the Company’s interpretation of the lease and requested the provision of financial information to support the Company’s contention or in the alternative payment of the offset amount. Subsequently, no further action or communications regarding the offset were made by the landlord and the Company thereafter, beginning with September 2020, resumed timely payments of its rental obligations under the Lease. In early 2021, the Company undertook an analysis of the common area maintenance charges being assessed under the Lease in an effort to reconcile those payments with the specific terms of the Lease. The Lease provides that this reconciliation is to be accomplished by the landlord annually, however this has not occurred. The Company’s analysis indicates that it may have been overcharged for common area maintenance expenses since the inception of the Lease and submitted supporting data to the landlord, requesting that the landlord review the submission against its records. That analysis remains underway. The Company has also requested that the landlord release from escrow and return to the Company, the unexpended balance of the Repair Escrow. The landlord and the Company anticipated resolving the reconciliation of the common area maintenance charges and Repair Escrow release request during the month of February and with the prior oral approval of the landlord, the Company refrained from paying February rent, expecting that the reconciliation would be completed prior to the end of that month. To date, the landlord has not as yet responded to the Company’s earlier submission of supporting data with regard to the common area maintenance charges or Repair Escrow. Inasmuch as the disputed amounts, in the opinion of the Company, exceed three months’ rent and common area maintenance expenses, the Company has refrained from the payment of base rent and common area maintenance charges for the months of February and March, it being the expectation of the parties that these amounts will be credited against the amount finally determined to be reimbursed to the Company. In the event that the parties have not completed the reconciliation of the common area maintenance charges and Repair Escrow prior to the due date of April rent, such rent will also be credited against the amount finally determined to be reimbursed to the Company. The Company has not received any notice from the landlord to the effect that the Company is in violation of the Lease and anticipates an amicable resolution of this dispute during the second quarter 2021.
The landlord may, once during the lease term or any renewal thereof, require the Company to relocate to another facility made available by the landlord that meets the Company’s specifications for a replacement facility within a defined geographical area, by providing notice which confirms that all of the Company’s specifications for a replacement facility will be met, that all costs relating to such relocation will be paid by the landlord, and that security for the repayment of those relocation costs has been established. The Company will also be provided a six month overlap period (the “Overlap Period”) during which the Company may operate in the Old Bridge Facility with rent therein being abated, but with rent being paid at the replacement facility, to mitigate interruptions of the Company’s on-going business while the move occurs. If the Company declines to be relocated to the facility proposed by the landlord, the Lease will terminate 18 months from the date of the landlord’s notice, but the Company will continue to be entitled to receive the same benefits in terms of reimbursement of its relocation costs and an Overlap Period during which no rent will be due at the Old Bridge Facility, while the Company moves its operations to an alternative facility that it has identified.
On December 31, 2019, the Company entered into a two-year sublease to a third party for 32,500 square feet of the Old Bridge Facility (the “Sublease Space”) which commenced on March 1, 2020, the rental proceeds from which inure to the benefit of the Company. The sublease also provides for a one-year renewal option. The sublease provides rental income approximately $284,000 in the first year and approximately $293,000 in the second year of the sublease.
Beginning in the middle of 2019, the Company experienced a significant decline in its net sales of core or legacy products, which while not recovering to historical norms, stabilized during the early part of the first quarter of 2020. Beginning in February 2020, however, as the prospects of an ever-worsening outbreak of COVID-19 took hold, the Company began to experience adverse impacts to revenues across all of its product lines. The Company does not anticipate that sales will recover to historical norms during 2021, although the Company is optimistic that as the roll out of vaccines continues and the impact of the pandemic begins to lessen, improvements in the market may occur. In light of these developments and as detailed below, the Company has taken significant steps during the past year, implemented in several phases, in order to manage operations through what has been a period of diminished sales levels.
As part of its efforts to improve liquidity and provide operating capital, on April 7, 2020, the Company entered into a certain Consent and Amendment to Loan Agreement and Loan Documents with Midcap (the “MidCap First Amendment”), which amended the MidCap Facility to, among other things, remove the existing $400,000 availability block, subject to the same being re-imposed at the rate of approximately $7,000 per month commencing June 1, 2020. The operative provisions relating to the removal of the availability block under the MidCap First Amendment became effective on April 8, 2020, following the consummation by the Company of the transactions contemplated by the Subordinated Loan Facility (defined below).
On April 8, 2020, the Company, as borrower, together with Livewire Ventures, LLC (wholly owned by the Company’s Chief Executive Officer, Edward R. Grauch), MidAtlantic IRA, LLC FBO Steven L. Shea IRA (an IRA account for the benefit of the Company’s Chairman of the Board, Steven Shea), Carol M. Pallé and Robert J. Pallé, Anthony J. Bruno, and Stephen K. Necessary, as lenders (collectively, the “Initial Lenders”) and Robert J. Pallé, as Agent for the Lenders (in such capacity, the “Agent”) entered into a certain Senior Subordinated Convertible Loan and Security Agreement (the “Subordinated Loan Agreement”), pursuant to which the lenders from time to time party thereto may provide up to $1,500,000 of loans to the Company (the “Subordinated Loan Facility”). Interest accrues on the outstanding amounts advanced under the Subordinated Loan Facility at the rate of 12% per annum, compounded and payable monthly, in-kind, by the automatic increase of the principal amount of the loan on each monthly interest payment date, by the amount of the accrued interest payable at that time (“PIK Interest”); provided, however, that at the option of the Company, it may pay interest in cash on any interest payment date, in lieu of PIK Interest.
On April 8, 2020, the Initial Lenders agreed to provide the Company with a Tranche A term loan facility of $800,000, of which $600,000 was advanced to the Company on April 8, 2020, $100,000 was advanced to the Company on April 17, 2020 and $100,000 was advanced to the Company on January 12, 2021. The Initial Lenders participating in the Tranche A term loan facility have the option of converting the principal balance of the loan held by each of them, in whole (unless otherwise agreed by the Company), into shares of the Company’s common stock, at a conversion price equal to the volume weighted average price of the Common Stock as reported by the NYSE American, during the five trading days preceding April 8, 2020 (the “Tranche A Conversion Price”) which was calculated at $0.593. The conversion right was subject to stockholder approval as required by the rules of the NYSE American, and was obtained on June 11, 2020 at the Company’s annual meeting of stockholders.
On April 24, 2020, the Company, the Initial Lenders and Ronald V. Alterio (the Company’s Senior Vice President-Engineering, Chief Technology Officer) and certain additional unaffiliated investors (the “Additional Lenders,” and, together with the Initial Lenders, the “Lenders”) entered into the First Amendment to Senior Subordinated Convertible Loan and Security Agreement and Joinder (the “Amendment”). The Amendment provides for the funding of $200,000 of additional loans as a Tranche B term loan under the Subordinated Loan Facility established under the Subordinated Loan Agreement, with such loans being provided by the Additional Lenders. The Amendment also sets the conversion price of $0.55 (the “Tranche B Conversion Price”) with respect to the right of the Additional Lenders to convert the accreted principal balance of the loans held by each of them into shares of the Company’s common stock. The terms and conditions of the conversion rights applicable to the Initial Lenders and the Additional Lenders are otherwise identical in all material respects, including the terms restricting conversion to an aggregate amount of shares of common stock that would not result in the Company’s non-compliance with NYSE American rules requiring stockholder approval of issuances or potential issuances of shares in excess of the percentage limits specified therein or in an amount that may be deemed to constitute a change of control under such rules. These restrictions terminated as the requisite stockholder approval was obtained on June 11, 2020 at the Company’s annual meeting of stockholders.
On April 10, 2020, the Company received loan proceeds of approximately $1,769,000 (“PPP Loan”) under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). The PPP, established as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), provided for loans to qualifying businesses for amounts up to 2.5 times the average monthly payroll expenses of the qualifying business. The PPP Loan and accrued interest are forgivable after twenty-four weeks (the “Covered Period”) as long as the borrower uses the loan proceeds for eligible purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities, and maintains its payroll levels. The amount of loan forgiveness would be reduced if the borrower terminated employees or reduced salaries during the eight-week period.
The PPP Loan is evidenced by a promissory note, dated as of April 5, 2020 (the “Note”), between the Company, as Borrower, and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as Lender (the “Lender”). The interest rate on the Note is 0.98% per annum, with interest accruing on the unpaid principal balance computed on the basis of the actual number of days elapsed in a year of 360 days. No payments of principal or interest are due during the ten-month period beginning after the Covered Period (the “Deferral Period”).
On October 29, 2020, the unaffiliated Additional Investors as described in Note 6, submitted irrevocable notices of conversion under the Tranche B Term Loan. As a result, approximately $175,000 of original principal and $11,000 of PIK interest outstanding under the Tranche B Term Loan were converted into 338,272 shares of Company common stock in full satisfaction of the underlying indebtedness.
On December 14, 2020, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with certain accredited investors (the “Purchasers”) for the sale and issuance by the Company to the Purchasers of (i) an aggregate of 1,429,000 shares (the “Shares”) of the Company’s common stock and (ii) warrants (the “Purchaser Warrants”) to purchase an aggregate of up to 714,000 shares of common stock (the “Purchaser Warrant Shares”), for aggregate gross proceeds to the Company of $1,000, before deducting placement agent fees and offering expenses payable by the Company. The Company also agreed to issue to the placement agents and certain persons affiliated with the placement agents, as additional compensation, (a) fully-vested warrants (the “Placement Agent Warrants”) to purchase an aggregate of up to 100,000 shares (the “Placement Agent Warrant Shares”) of common stock and (b) contingent warrants (the “Placement Agent Contingent Warrants”) to purchase an aggregate of up to an additional 50,000 shares (the “Placement Agent Contingent Warrant Shares”) of common stock. The transaction closed on December 15, 2020.
The Purchase Agreement also includes terms that give the Purchasers certain price protections, providing for adjustments of the number of shares of common stock held by them in the event of certain future dilutive securities issuances by the Company for a period not to exceed 18 months following the closing of the private placement, or such earlier date on which all of the Purchaser Warrants have been exercised. In addition, the Purchase Agreement provides the Purchasers with a right to participate in certain future Company financings, up to 30% of the amount of such financings, for a period of 24 months following the closing of the private placement. The Purchase Agreement also required the Company to register the resale of the Shares and the Purchaser Warrant Shares pursuant to the terms of a Registration Rights Agreement between the Company and the Purchasers, dated as of December 14, 2020, as further described below. The Company filed a registration statement with the SEC on January 14, 2021 to register the resale of the Shares and the Purchaser Warrant Shares, which registration statement was declared effective by the SEC on January 21, 2021.
The Purchaser Warrants have an exercise price of $1.25 per share, are exercisable beginning on December 15, 2020, and have a term of three years. The exercise price and the number of shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of each Purchaser Warrant is subject to appropriate adjustments in the event of certain stock dividends and distributions, stock splits, stock combinations, reclassifications or similar events affecting the common stock. The fair value of the Purchaser Warrants is $643,000.
In certain circumstances, upon the occurrence of a fundamental transaction, a holder of Purchaser Warrants is entitled to receive, upon any subsequent exercise of the Purchaser Warrant, for each Purchaser Warrant Share that would have been issuable upon such exercise of the Purchaser Warrant immediately prior to the fundamental transaction, at the option of the holder, the number of shares of common stock of the successor or acquiring corporation or of the Company, if it is the surviving corporation, and any additional consideration receivable as a result of the fundamental transaction by a holder of the number of shares of common stock of the Company for which the Purchaser Warrant is exercisable immediately prior to the fundamental transaction. If holders of the Company’s common stock are given any choice as to the securities, cash or property to be received in a fundamental transaction, then the Holder shall be given the choice as to the additional consideration it receives upon any exercise of the Purchaser Warrant following the fundamental transaction.
The Placement Agent Warrants have an exercise price of $0.70 per share, a term of five years from December 14, 2020, and became exercisable upon the Company obtaining the stockholder approval described above. The exercise price and the number of shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of each Placement Agent Warrant is subject to appropriate adjustments in the event of certain stock dividends and distributions, stock splits, stock combinations, reclassifications or similar events affecting the common stock. The Placement Agent Warrants also provide the holders with certain “piggyback” registration rights, permitting the holders to request that the Company include the Placement Agent Warrant Shares for sale in certain registration statements filed by the Company. The fair value of the Placement Agent Warrants is $121,000.
The Placement Agent Contingent Warrants have an exercise price of $1.25 per share, a term of five years from December 14, 2020, and become exercisable if, and to the extent, holders of the Purchaser Warrants exercise such Purchaser Warrants. In no event, however, will the Placement Agent Contingent Warrants become exercisable unless and until Stockholder Approval has been obtained. The exercise price and the number of shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of each Placement Agent Contingent Warrant is subject to appropriate adjustments in the event of certain stock dividends and distributions, stock splits, stock combinations, reclassifications or similar events affecting the common stock. The Placement Agent Contingent Warrants also provide the holders with certain “piggyback” registration rights, permitting the holders to request that the Company include the Placement Agent Contingent Warrant Shares for sale in certain registration statements filed by the Company. The fair value of the Placement Agent Contingent Warrants is $56,000.
On January 28, 2021, the Company entered into the Third Amendment to Senior Subordinated Convertible Loan and Security Agreement and Joinder (the “LSA Third Amendment”) with the Tranche A Parties, the Tranche B Parties (that had not previously converted the loans attributable to each of them into shares of Common Stock), the Agent and certain other investors (the “Tranche C Parties”). Pursuant to the LSA Third Amendment, the parties agreed to increase the aggregate loan limit under the Subordinated Loan Agreement from $1,500,000 to $1,600,000 and the Tranche C Parties agreed to provide the Company with a commitment for a $600,000 term loan facility, all of which was advanced to the Company on January 29, 2021 (the “Tranche C Loans”). As is the case with the loans provided by the Tranche A Parties and Tranche B Parties, interest on the Tranche C Loans accrues at 12% per annum and is payable monthly in-kind, by the automatic increase of the principal amount of the loans on each monthly interest payment date, by the amount of the accrued interest payable at that time. The Company, at its option, may pay any interest due on the Tranche C Loans in cash on any interest payment date in lieu of PIK Interest. The Tranche C Parties also have the option, following Stockholder Approval (defined below) of converting the accreted principal balance of the Tranche C Loans attributable to each of them into shares of the Company’s Common Stock at a conversion price of $1.00.
Both the Purchase Agreement and the Subordinated Loan Agreement (as amended by the LSA Third Amendment) obligated the Company to call a special meeting of its stockholders to seek stockholder approval of the issuance of shares of its Common Stock issuable in connection with the transactions contemplated by the Securities Purchase Agreement and the LSA Third Amendment, in excess of 19.99% of the Company’s outstanding shares of Common Stock, in accordance with the requirements of Section 713(a) of the NYSE American Company Guide. Stockholder approval of the foregoing was obtained on March 4, 2021.
The obligations of the Company under the Subordinated Loan Agreement are guaranteed by Drake and are secured by substantially all of the Company’s and Drake’s assets. The Subordinated Loan Agreement has a maturity date three years from the date of closing, at which time the accreted principal balance of the loan (by virtue of the PIK Interest) plus any other accrued unpaid interest, would be due and payable in full. In connection with the Subordinated Loan Agreement, the Company, Drake, the Lenders and MidCap entered into a Subordination Agreement (the “Subordination Agreement”), pursuant to which the rights of the Lenders under the Subordinated Loan Agreement were subordinated to the rights of MidCap under the MidCap Agreement and related security documents. The Subordination Agreement precludes the Company from making cash payments of interest in lieu of PIK Interest, in the absence of the prior written consent of MidCap or unless the Company is able to meet certain predefined conditions precedent to the making of any such payments of interest (or principal), as more fully described in the Subordination Agreement.
As noted above, the principal and accrued interest under the Note evidencing the PPP Loan are forgivable after twenty-four weeks as long the Company has used the loan proceeds for eligible purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities, and maintains its payroll levels. The amount of loan forgiveness will be reduced if the Company terminates employees or reduces salaries during the eight-week period. The Company used the proceeds for purposes consistent with the PPP. While the Company currently believes that its use of the PPP Loan proceeds will meet the conditions for forgiveness of the PPP Loan, we cannot assure you that we will not take actions that could cause the Company to be ineligible for forgiveness of the PPP Loan, in whole or in part. In order to obtain full or partial forgiveness of the PPP Loan, the Company must request forgiveness and must provide satisfactory documentation in accordance with applicable Small Business Administration (“SBA”) guidelines. Interest payable on the Note may be forgiven only if the SBA agrees to pay such interest on the forgiven principal amount of the Note. The Company will be obligated to repay any portion of the principal amount of the Note that is not forgiven, together with interest accrued and accruing thereon at the rate set forth above, until such unforgiven portion is paid in full.
Beginning one month
following expiration of the Deferral Period, and continuing monthly until 24 months from the date of the Note (the “Maturity
Date”), the Company is obligated to make monthly payments of principal and interest to the Lender with respect to any
unforgiven portion of the Note, in such equal amounts required to fully amortize the principal amount outstanding on the Note as
of the last day of the Deferral Period by the Maturity Date. The Company is permitted to prepay the Note at any time without payment
of any premium.
In other efforts to
alleviate the liquidity pressures and reposition the Company to generate positive cash flow at a lower level of net sales, since
August 2019, the Company has implemented a multi-phase cost-reduction program which reduced cash expenses during 2019 by approximately
$200,000 per month and which provided annualized cash savings of approximately $2,400,000 during 2020, compared to the Company’s
costs as they existed prior to the commencement of the cost reduction program. Although the Company believes it has made and will
continue to make progress under these programs and the funding provided under the Subordinated Loan Agreement and available as
a result of the release of the availability block under the MidCap Facility, the Company operates in a rapidly evolving and often
unpredictable business environment that may change the timing or amount of expected future cash receipts and expenditures. Accordingly,
there can be no assurance that our planned improvements will be successful.
Additionally, beginning during the last week of February 2020 and extending currently, the Company has been experiencing specific COVID-19 related reductions in sales due to customers requesting to delay specific purchases and/or previously anticipated purchase orders and shipments. A portion of the Company’s customers are either fully or partially closed or operating with reduced staffing levels due in part to a range of government mandates or corporate policies such as shelter-in-place, the closure of non-essential businesses, and other restrictions. This reduction in sales began in the range of 15% to 30% week by week deviations from expected/forecasted levels in March 2020 and then grew to a range of 45% to 55% deviations from expected/forecasted levels during the April to August time period. One of our major customers who accounted for approximately 10% of net sales during the three-month period ended March 31, 2020, and who previously informed the Company that pending orders for delivery in May and June 2020 were on hold, has more recently advised the Company that a portion of those orders are now cancelled. It is possible that sales may continue to decline further in future periods during 2021 and beyond, as upticks in cases of COVID-19 continue to be reported around the country, which may result in renewed closures and governmental mandates restricting or further delaying efforts to return to business as usual. While the majority of the Company’s customers remain open for business and have informed the Company of their current intentions to remain open through the current circumstances, and despite a portion of the Company’s customers having reopened during Q3 2020, subsequent spikes in reported COVID-19 cases have resulted in certain customers deferring or delaying previously planned meetings and business discussions. The Company has reacted to these unprecedented circumstances, as many enterprises have had to do over the course of March through December 2020 (and continuing today), with a range of actions designed to compensate for anticipated temporary revenue shortfalls, manage the Company’s working capital and minimize the overall financial impact of this disruption, including implementation of exceptional short-term operating expense reductions, such as temporary manufacturing shut-downs, employee furloughs and supplier payment renegotiations. The Company has finalized several supplier renegotiations and is still in process with other suppliers to allow for alterations of shipment and receive dates of incoming parts and inventory in other cases.
While management of the Company believes that the Company will be successful in its planned operating activities, there can be no assurance that the Company will be successful in generating sufficient revenues and reduced expenses to sustain the operations of the Company. The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, which contemplate continuation of the Company as a going concern. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company experienced a decline in sales, a reduction in working capital, reported a loss from operations and net cash used in operating activities, in conjunction with liquidity constraints. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classification of liabilities that may result from the possible inability of the Company to continue as a going concern. If anticipated operating results are not achieved and/or the Company is unable to obtain additional financing, it may be required to take additional measures to reduce costs in order to conserve its cash in amounts sufficient to sustain operations and meet its obligations, which measures could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s ability to achieve its intended business objectives and may be insufficient to enable the Company to continue as a going concern for at least twelve months from the date these financial statements are made available to be issued.
The Company expects
to use cash generated from operations to meet its long-term debt obligations. The Company also expects to make financed and unfinanced
long-term capital expenditures from time to time in the ordinary course of business, which capital expenditures were $165,000
and $263,000 in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company expects to use cash generated from operations,
amounts available under the MidCap Facility, amounts available under the Subordinated Loan Facility, and purchase-money financing
to meet any anticipated long-term capital expenditures.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The Company prepares
its financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Preparing financial
statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles requires the Company to make estimates and assumptions that
affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the
financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. The following paragraphs include
a discussion of some critical areas where estimates are required. You should also review Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements
for further discussion of significant accounting policies.
Inventory and Obsolescence
Inventories are stated
at the lower of cost, determined by the first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) method, or net realizable value.
The Company periodically
analyzes anticipated product sales based on historical results, current backlog and marketing plans. Based on these analyses, the
Company anticipates that certain products will not be sold during the next twelve months. Inventories that are not anticipated
to be sold in the next twelve months, have been classified as non-current.
The Company continually
analyzes its slow-moving and excess inventories. Based on historical and projected sales volumes and anticipated selling prices,
the Company establishes reserves. Inventory that is in excess of current and projected use is reduced by an allowance to a level
that approximates its estimate of future demand. Products that are determined to be obsolete are written down to net realizable
value.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for
Doubtful Accounts
Accounts receivable
are customer obligations due under normal trade terms. The Company sells its products primarily to distributors and private cable
operators. The Company performs continuing credit evaluations of its customers’ financial condition and although the Company
generally does not require collateral, letters of credit may be required from its customers in certain circumstances.
Senior management reviews
accounts receivable on a monthly basis to determine if any receivables will potentially be uncollectible. The Company includes
any accounts receivable balances that are determined to be uncollectible, along with a general reserve based on historical experience,
in its overall allowance for doubtful accounts.
Long-Lived Assets
The Company continually
monitors events and changes in circumstances that could indicate carrying amounts of the long-lived assets, including intangible
assets may not be recoverable. When such events or changes in circumstances occur, the Company assesses recoverability by determining
whether the carrying value of such assets will be recovered through the undiscounted expected future cash flows. If the future
undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying amount of these assets, an impairment loss is recognized based on the excess
of the carrying amount over the fair value of the assets. The Company did not recognize any intangible asset impairment charges
in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Valuation of Deferred Tax Assets
The Company accounts
for income taxes under the provisions of the FASB ASC Topic 740 “Income Taxes”. Deferred income taxes are provided
for temporary differences in the recognition of certain income and expenses for financial and tax reporting purposes. Valuation
allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 in the financial statement pages.