ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. All references to “2021,” “2020” and “2019”are referring to the twelve-month period ended September 30 for each of those respective fiscal years. This section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended September 30, 2020. The following discussion may contain forward-looking statements that reflect our plans and expectation. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated by these forward-looking statements due to the factors discussed elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in the “Risk Factors” section. We do not undertake, and specifically disclaim, any obligation to update any forward-looking statements to reflect the occurrence of events or circumstances after the date of such statements except as required by law.
Overview
We are the largest publicly traded distributor of roofing materials and complementary building products in the United States and Canada. We are among the oldest and most established distributors in the industry, providing high-quality products to the building industry. Our customers rely on us for local access to the building products and services they need to operate their businesses and serve their clients.
On February 10, 2021, we completed the sale of our interior products and insulation businesses (“Interior Products”) to Foundation Building Materials Holding Company LLC for approximately $850 million in cash (subject to a working capital and certain other adjustments as set forth in the Purchase Agreement). As of September 30, 2021, the adjusted purchase price for Interior Products was $842.7 million. We used the proceeds from the divestiture of our Interior Products business to reduce net debt leverage and strengthen our balance sheet, which provides us the financial flexibility to pursue strategic growth initiatives in our core exterior products business. Beginning with the condensed consolidated financial statements for the three months ended December 31, 2020, we have reflected Interior Products as discontinued operations for all periods presented. Unless otherwise noted, amounts and disclosures relate to our continuing operations. For additional information, see Note 3 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
On January 15, 2020, we announced the rebranding of our exterior products branches with the trade name “Beacon Building Products” (the “Rebranding”). The new name, and a related logo, were adopted at substantially all of our exterior products branches.
As of September 30, 2021, we operated 446 branches throughout all 50 states in the U.S. and six provinces in Canada. We offer one of the most extensive assortments of high-quality branded products in the industry, with over 100,000 SKUs available across our branch network.
We serve over 80,000 customers by promptly providing the products they require, allowing our customers to deliver on the project specifications and timelines that are critical to their success. Our customer base is composed of professional contractors, home builders, building owners, lumberyards and retailers across the United States and Canada who depend on reliable local access to building products for residential and non-residential projects. Our customers vary in size, ranging from relatively small contractors to large contractors and builders that operate on a national scale.
Effective execution of both our sales and operating plans enables us to grow beyond the relative strength of the markets we serve. Our business model is a bottom-up approach, where each of our branches uses its local and regional knowledge and experience to assist with the development of a marketing plan and product mix that is best suited for its respective market. Local alignment with overall strategic goals provides the foundation for significant ownership of results at the branch level. Our distinctive operating model and branch level autonomy differentiate us from the competition. Our branch-based operating model is further enhanced in large markets by networking branches through our On-Time and Complete network (Beacon OTC®) that allows us to serve our customers more effectively and efficiently.
We provide the most complete digital offering in building products distribution and continue to expand our capabilities. Beacon PRO+ is our proprietary digital account management suite which allows customers to manage their business with us online, and Beacon 3D+ is our roofing estimating tool for our residential customers. These platforms help our customers save time, work more efficiently and
grow their businesses. We believe customer relations and our employees’ extensive industry knowledge are vital to promote customer loyalty and maintain customer satisfaction. We invest significant resources in professional development, management skills, product knowledge, and operational proficiency. These capabilities were developed on a foundation of continuous improvement, thereby driving our service excellence, productivity and efficiency.
Our history has been strongly influenced by significant acquisition-driven growth, highlighted by the acquisitions of Allied Building Products Corp. (“Allied”) for $2.88 billion in 2018 (the “Allied Acquisition”) and Roofing Supply Group, LLC for $1.17 billion in 2016. These strategic acquisitions expanded our geographic footprint, enhanced our market presence, and diversified our product offerings. The scale we have achieved from our expansion efforts serves as a competitive advantage, allowing us to use our assets more efficiently, and control our expenses to drive operating leverage.
We have also pursued and finalized numerous smaller acquisitions in key markets to complement the expansion of our geographic footprint, such as our recently announced acquisition of Midway Sales & Distributing, Inc., a leading Midwest distributor of residential and commercial exterior building and roofing supplies with 10 branches across Kansas, Missouri and Nebraska and annual sales of approximately $130 million.
We will continue to pursue strategic acquisitions to grow our business, and we remain heavily focused on improving our operations and continuing to identify additional opportunities for organic growth. Our recent highlights in these pursuits are demonstrated by the following results:
fiscal year 2021 organic daily sales growth of 12.7% compared to 2020;
eight new branch locations since the start of fiscal year 2020; and
significant improvements in labor cost efficiency and fleet utilization metrics as compared to historical levels, driven by strategic cost actions.
COVID-19 Pandemic
We continue to monitor the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the effects of recent notable variants of the virus. The health and safety of our employees, customers, and the communities in which we operate remains our top priority. Additional safety measures have been implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our essential business designation status in all the local markets that we serve has not changed, and we have yet to experience a significant amount of business disruption from forced temporary branch closures due to COVID-19. To date, our business experienced the largest adverse impact from COVID-19 in the third quarter of fiscal year 2020, mainly in areas with significant government construction restrictions that have since been reduced. We have the financial strength and operational flexibility to respond to future COVID-19 pandemic restrictions, and have taken proactive steps to make a number of the cost management initiatives undertaken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic permanent.
The exterior products industry experienced constrained supply chain dynamics in 2021. As a result, we experienced cost increases and, at times, a limited ability to purchase enough product to meet consumer demand. We have seen an increase in our short-cycle backlog metrics. Open orders, a measure of our backlog, ended the year significantly higher than the prior year-end. We took proactive measures to actively increase our inventory, price efficiently and deliver high-value solutions to our customers’ critical building material needs. These trends, caused in large part from global disruptions related to the COVID-19 pandemic, may persist in the near-term. As a leading distributor of essential building materials, we will continue to react quickly to market and supply chain developments and ensure high-quality service for our customers.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth consolidated statement of operations data and such data as a percentage of total net sales for the periods presented (in millions):
In managing our business, we consider all growth, including the opening of new branches, to be organic growth unless it results from an acquisition. When we refer to growth in existing markets or organic growth, we include growth from existing and newly opened branches, but exclude growth from acquired branches until they have been under our ownership for at least four full fiscal quarters at the start of the fiscal reporting period. We believe the existing market information is useful to investors because it helps explain organic growth or decline. When we refer to regions, we are referring to our geographic regions. When we refer to our net product costs, we are referring to our invoice cost less the impact of short-term buying programs (also referred to as “special buys” given the manner in which they are offered).
As of September 30, 2021, we had a total of 446 branches in operation. All 446 branches were acquired prior to the start of fiscal year 2020 and therefore meet our existing market definition. As a result, operating results for existing markets are equal to consolidated operating results for all periods presented.
Comparison of the Years Ended September 30, 2021 and 2020
Net Sales 	
Net sales increased 12.3% to $6.64 billion in 2021, from $5.92 billion in 2020 despite one fewer selling day. The comparative increase in net sales was primarily influenced by strong demand for residential and complementary products across all regions and the benefit of pricing execution across all three lines of business.
Net sales by geographic region increased from 2020 to 2021 as follows: Northeast 16.3%; Mid-Atlantic 5.5%; Southeast 26.3%; Southwest 14.8%; Midwest 4.4%; West 8.9%; and Canada 24.1%.
We estimate the impact of inflation or deflation on our sales and gross profit by looking at changes in our average selling prices and gross margins (discussed below).
The following table summarizes net sales by line of business for the periods presented (in millions):
Gross Profit
The following table summarizes gross profit and gross margin for the periods presented (in millions):
__________________________________
1.Percentage changes for dollar amounts represent the ratable increase or decrease from period-to-period. Percentage changes for percentages represent the net period-to-period change in basis points.
Gross margin was 26.5% in 2021, up 2.5 percentage points from 24.0% in 2020. The comparative increase in gross margin resulted from a weighted-average selling price increase of approximately 8-9%, partially offset by a weighted-average product cost increase of approximately 6-7%.
Operating Expense
The following table summarizes operating expense for the periods presented (in millions):
__________________________________
1.Percentage changes for dollar amounts represent the ratable increase or decrease from period-to-period. Percentage changes for percentages represent the net period-to-period change in basis points.
Operating expense decreased 6.1% to $1.30 billion in 2021, from $1.39 billion in 2020. The comparative decrease in operating expense was mainly influenced by a $158.6 million decrease in amortization expense, which included the gross impact of accelerated
amortization of $142.6 million related to the write-off of certain trade names in connection with the Rebranding in 2020. The decrease was partially offset by a $58.0 million increase in payroll and employee benefit costs, primarily due to the year-over-year increase in annual incentive expense in 2021, higher wages to support stronger demand, and the impact of certain temporary cost actions taken in 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our focus on improving our cost structure has allowed us to identify opportunities for efficiencies across our business. While certain of our cost actions have been temporary in nature, we continue our efforts to improve our expense structure in order to produce permanent efficiency gains. Our selling, general and administrative expense as a percentage of net sales improved by 0.9 percentage points, driven by the combination of higher year-over-year sales, lower travel and entertainment expenses, and improved operating leverage from labor productivity initiatives.
Interest Expense, Financing Costs and Other
Interest expense, financing costs and other expense was $98.1 million in 2021, compared to $128.6 million in 2020. The decrease is primarily due to a $37.4 million decrease in interest expense resulting from decreased debt balances and a lower weighted-average interest rate on our outstanding debt. The decrease was partially offset by:
a $5.6 million settlement received in 2020 in connection with a class action lawsuit; and
a $5.3 million refund received in 2020 as the final true-up of the $164.0 million payment resulting from the 338(h)(10) election made in connection with the Allied Acquisition.
Income Taxes
Provision for (benefit from) income taxes was $77.3 million in 2021, compared to $(27.0) million in 2020. The comparative increase in income tax expense was primarily due to an increase in pretax book income in 2021. The effective tax rate was 25.9% in 2021, compared to 24.9% in 2020.
Net Income (Loss)/Net Income (Loss) Per Share
Net income (loss) from continuing operations was $221.2 million in 2021, compared to $(81.3) million in 2020. Net income (loss) from discontinued operations was $(266.7) million in 2021, compared to $0.4 million in 2020 (see Note 3 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion). Net income (loss) was $(45.5) million in 2021, compared to $(80.9) million in 2020. There were $24.0 million of dividends on Preferred Stock in both 2021 and 2020, making net income (loss) attributable to common stockholders $(69.5) million and $(104.9) million, respectively.
We calculate net income (loss) per share by dividing net income (loss), less dividends on Preferred Stock and adjustments for participating securities, by the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding during the period. Diluted net income (loss) per share is calculated by utilizing the most dilutive result after applying and comparing the two-class method and if-converted method (see Note 5 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion).
The following table presents all the components utilized to calculate basic and diluted net income (loss) per share (in millions, except per share amounts; certain amounts may not recalculate due to rounding):
____________________________
1.The hypothetical conversion of the Preferred Stock became dilutive for the year ended September 30, 2021, primarily stemming from the significant income from continuing operations and offsetting loss from discontinued operations in 2021, and their combined effect on the Company’s calculation of diluted net income (loss) per share.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To provide investors with additional information regarding our financial results, we prepare certain financial measures that are not calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”), specifically:
Adjusted Operating Expense. We define Adjusted Operating Expense as operating expense excluding the impact of the adjusting items (as described below).
Adjusted Net Income (Loss). We define Adjusted Net Income (Loss) as net income (loss) from continuing operations, excluding the impact of the adjusting items (as described below).
Adjusted EBITDA. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) from continuing operations, excluding the impact of interest expense (net of interest income), income taxes, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, and the adjusting items (as described below).
We use these supplemental non-GAAP measures to evaluate financial performance, analyze the underlying trends in our business and establish operational goals and forecasts that are used when allocating resources. We expect to compute our non-GAAP financial measures consistently using the same methods each period.
We believe these non-GAAP measures are useful measures because they permit investors to better understand changes over comparative periods by providing financial results that are unaffected by certain items that are not indicative of ongoing operating performance.
While we believe that these non-GAAP measures are useful to investors when evaluating our business, they are not prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP, and therefore should be considered supplemental in nature. These non-GAAP measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for other financial performance measures presented in accordance with GAAP. These non-GAAP financial measures may have material limitations including, but not limited to, the exclusion of certain costs without a
corresponding reduction of net income for the income generated by the assets to which the excluded costs relate. In addition, these non-GAAP financial measures may differ from similarly titled measures presented by other companies.
Adjusting Items to Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The impact of the following expense (income) items is excluded from each of our non-GAAP measures (the “adjusting items”):
Acquisition costs. Represent certain costs related to historical acquisitions, including: amortization of intangible assets; professional fees, branch integration expenses, travel expenses, employee severance and retention costs, and other personnel expenses classified as selling, general and administrative; and amortization of debt issuance costs.
Restructuring costs. Represent costs stemming from headcount rationalization efforts; branch re-organization; certain rebranding costs; impact of the Interior Products divestiture; accrued estimated costs related to employee benefit plan withdrawals; and debt refinancing and extinguishment costs.
COVID-19 impacts. Represent costs directly related to the COVID-19 pandemic; and income tax provision (benefit) stemming from the revaluation of deferred tax assets and liabilities made in conjunction with our application of the CARES Act.
Effects of tax reform. Represents income tax provision (benefit) related to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017.
The following table presents the impact and respective location of the adjusting items in our consolidated statements of operations for each of the periods indicated (in millions):
______________________________
1.Selling, general and administrative expense (“SG&A”).
2.For tax impact of adjusting items, see Adjusted Net Income (Loss) table below.
3.Other (income) expense includes a loss on debt extinguishment of $60.2 million in connection with the write-off of debt issuance costs and payment of redemption premiums stemming from our refinancing transactions.
4.Other (income) expense includes a net $5.1 million refund received as the final true-up of the $164.0 million payment resulting from the 338(h)(10) election made in connection with the Allied Acquisition.
5.Amortization includes the impact of non-cash accelerated intangible asset amortization of $142.6 million related to the write-off of certain trade names in connection with the Rebranding. Other (income) expense includes a loss on debt extinguishment of $14.7 million in connection with the October 2019 debt refinancing.
6.Income taxes consist of a tax benefit of $0.7 million stemming from the revaluation of deferred tax assets and liabilities made in conjunction with our application of the CARES Act.
Adjusted Operating Expense
The following table presents a reconciliation of operating expense, the most directly comparable financial measure as measured in accordance with GAAP, to Adjusted Operating Expense for each of the periods indicated (in millions):
Adjusted Net Income (Loss)
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income (loss) from continuing operations, the most directly comparable financial measure as measured in accordance with GAAP, to Adjusted Net Income (Loss) for each of the periods indicated (in millions):
______________________________
1.Amounts represent tax impact on adjustments that are not included in our income tax provision (benefit) for the periods presented. The effective tax rate applied to these adjustments is calculated by using forecasted adjusted pre-tax income while factoring in estimated discrete tax adjustments for the fiscal year. The tax impact of adjustments for the years ended September 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019 were calculated using a blended effective tax rate of 25.6%, 25.6% and 25.5%, respectively.
Adjusted EBITDA
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income (loss) from continuing operations, the most directly comparable financial measure as measured in accordance with GAAP, to Adjusted EBITDA for each of the periods indicated (in millions):
______________________________
1.Amounts represent adjusting items included in selling, general, and administrative expense and other income (expense); remaining adjusting item balances are embedded within the other line item balances reported in this table.
Seasonality and Quarterly Fluctuations
The demand for building materials is closely correlated to both seasonal changes and unpredictable weather patterns, therefore demand fluctuations are expected.
In general, sales and net income are highest during our first, third and fourth fiscal quarters, which represent the peak months of construction and re-roofing. Conversely, we have historically experienced low net income levels or net losses during the second fiscal quarter, when winter construction cycles and cold weather patterns have an adverse impact on our customers’ ability to conduct their business.
Our balance sheet fluctuates throughout the year, driven by similar seasonal trends. We generally experience an increase in inventory and peak cash usage in the second and third fiscal quarters of the year, driven primarily by increased purchasing that is necessary to meet the rise in demand for our products during the warmer months. Accounts receivable, accounts payable, and cash collections are generally at their highest during the third and fourth fiscal quarters of the year, when sales are typically at their peak.
At times, we experience fluctuations in our financial performance that are driven by factors outside of our control, including the impact that severe weather events and unusual weather patterns may have on the timing and magnitude of demand and material availability.
In addition, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has caused, and may continue to cause, fluctuations in our financial results and working capital that are not aligned with the seasonality we generally experience.
Impact of Inflation
As a distributor, inflation has the potential to impact both the cost of products we deliver and various inputs into the operations of our distribution network. We have historically been successful in passing on the product-related cost increases from our suppliers to our customers in a timely manner. In 2021, we were able to successfully offset significant product cost increases with higher selling prices. We also endeavor to offset any non-product inflation in our operations such as such as fuel, wages and rent with annual productivity improvements.
There was no significant inflationary pressure in 2020. There was moderate product inflation from our suppliers in 2019, and we were able to mostly offset higher product costs with increased selling prices.
Liquidity
Liquidity is defined as the current amount of readily available cash and the ability to generate adequate amounts of cash to meet the current needs for cash. We assess our liquidity in terms of our cash and cash equivalents on hand and the ability to generate cash to fund our operating activities, taking into consideration available borrowings and the seasonal nature of our business.
Our principal sources of liquidity as of September 30, 2021 were our cash and cash equivalents of $260.0 million and our available borrowings of approximately $1.28 billion under our asset-based revolving lines of credit.
Significant factors which could affect future liquidity include the following:
the adequacy of available bank lines of credit;
the ability to attract long-term capital with satisfactory terms;
cash flows generated from operating activities;
working capital management;
acquisitions; and
capital expenditures.
Our primary capital needs are for working capital obligations and other general corporate purposes, including acquisitions and capital expenditures. Our primary sources of working capital are cash from operations and bank borrowings. We have financed large acquisitions through increased bank borrowings and the issuance of long-term debt and common or preferred stock. We then repay any such borrowings with cash flows from operations or subsequent financings. We have funded most of our capital expenditures with cash on hand, increased bank borrowings, or equipment financing, and then reduced those obligations with cash flows from operations. We may explore additional or replacement financing sources in order to bolster liquidity and strengthen our capital structure. For a schedule of lease payments over the next five years and thereafter, see Note 11 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For a schedule of principal payments for all outstanding financing arrangements over the next five years and thereafter, see Note 10 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
We believe we currently have adequate liquidity and availability of capital to fund our present operations, meet our commitments on our existing debt and fund anticipated growth, including expansion in existing and targeted market areas. We may seek potential acquisitions from time to time and hold discussions with certain acquisition candidates. If suitable acquisition opportunities or working capital needs arise that require additional financing, we believe that our financial position and earnings history provide a sufficient base for obtaining additional financing resources at reasonable rates and terms. We may also choose to issue additional shares of common stock or preferred stock in order to raise funds.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in millions):
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $78.0 million in 2021, compared to $479.3 million in 2020. Cash from operations decreased $401.3 million due to an incremental cash outflow of $520.7 million stemming from changes to our net working capital, mainly driven by increases in inventories and accounts receivable and a decrease in accounts payable, partially offset by an increase in net income after adjustments for non-cash items of $119.4 million. Operating cash flows provided by (used in) discontinued operations for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 were $(28.2) million and $84.9 million, respectively.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $773.9 million in 2021, compared to net cash used in investing activities of $39.0 million in 2020. The $812.9 million increase in investing cash flows was primarily due to proceeds from the sale of Interior Products. Investing
cash flows provided by (used in) discontinued operations for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 were $(2.5) million and $(7.5) million, respectively.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $1.22 billion in 2021, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $112.2 million in 2020. The financing cash flow decrease of $1.33 billion was primarily due to a $425.0 million decrease in net borrowings under our revolving lines of credit over the comparative periods and a $970.3 million decrease in net borrowings under our senior notes.
Monitoring and Assessing Collectability of Accounts Receivable
We perform periodic credit evaluations of our customers and typically do not require collateral, although we typically obtain payment and performance bonds for any type of public work and can lien projects under certain circumstances. Consistent with industry practices, we require payment from most customers within 30 days, except for sales to our non-residential roofing contractors, which we typically require to pay in 60 days.
As our business is seasonal in certain geographic regions, our customers’ businesses are also seasonal. Sales are lowest in the winter months and our past due accounts receivable balance as a percentage of total receivables generally increases during this time. Throughout the year, we closely monitor our receivables and record estimated reserves based upon our judgment of specific customer situations, aging of accounts, our historical write-offs of uncollectible accounts, and expected future circumstances that may impact collectability.
Our divisional credit offices are staffed to manage and monitor our receivable aging balances and our systems allow us to enforce pre-determined credit approval levels and properly leverage new business. The credit pre-approval process denotes the maximum credit that each level of management can approve, with the highest credit amount requiring approval by our CEO and CFO. There are daily communications with branch and field staff. Our divisional offices conduct periodic reviews with their branch managers, various regional management staff and the Chief Credit Officer. Depending on the state of the respective division’s receivables, these reviews can be weekly, bi-weekly or monthly. Additionally, the divisions are required to submit a monthly receivable forecast to the Chief Credit Officer. On a monthly basis, the Chief Credit Officer reviews and discusses these forecasts, as well as a prior month recap, with members of our executive management team.
Periodically, we perform a specific analysis of all accounts past due and write off account balances when we have exhausted reasonable collection efforts and determined that the likelihood of collection is remote based upon the following factors:
aging statistics and trends;
customer payment history;
review of the customer’s financial statements when available;
independent credit reports; and
discussions with customers.
We still pursue collection of amounts written off in certain circumstances and credit the allowance for any subsequent recoveries. Over the past three fiscal years, bad debt expense has been, on average, 0.15% of net sales. The continued limitation of bad debt expense is primarily attributed to the continued strengthening of our collections process and overall credit environment.
Capital Resources
In May 2021, we entered into a series of financing arrangements to refinance certain debt instruments to take advantage of lower market interest rates (the “2021 Debt Refinancing”). Upon completion of the 2021 Debt Refinancing, the weighted-average interest rate on our outstanding debt was 3.11% as of September 30, 2021, down from 4.21% as of March 31, 2021.
As of September 30, 2021 we had access to the following financing arrangements:
the 2026 U.S. Revolver, an asset-based revolving line of credit in the United States, in an amount up to $1.25 billion;
the 2026 Canada Revolver, an asset-based revolving line of credit in Canada, in an amount up to $50.0 million;
the 2028 Term Loan with an outstanding balance of $981.7 million; and
two separate senior note instruments, including the 2029 Senior Notes and 2026 Senior Notes, with an outstanding balance of $346.2 million and $296.6 million, respectively.
See Note 10 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on our current financing arrangements and the 2021 Debt Refinancing.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. Accounting policies, methods and estimates are an integral part of the preparation of consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP and, in part, are based upon management’s current judgments. Those judgments are normally based on knowledge and experience with regard to past and current events and assumptions about future events. Certain accounting policies, methods and estimates are particularly sensitive because of their significance to the consolidated financial statements and because of the possibility that future events affecting them may differ markedly from management’s current judgments. While there are a number of accounting policies, methods and estimates affecting our consolidated financial statements, areas that are particularly significant include:
Inventories (including vendor rebates)
Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles
Inventories (Including Vendor Rebates)
Inventories, consisting substantially of finished goods, are valued at the lower of cost or market (net realizable value). Cost is determined using the moving weighted-average cost method.
Our arrangements with vendors typically provide for rebates after we make a special purchase and/or monthly, quarterly and/or annual rebates of a specified amount of consideration payable when a number of measures have been achieved. Annual rebates are generally related to a specified cumulative level of purchases on a calendar-year basis. We account for such rebates as a reduction of the inventory value until the product is sold, at which time such rebates reduce cost of products sold in the consolidated statements of operations. Throughout the year, we estimate the amount of the periodic rebates based upon the expected level of purchases. We continually revise these estimates to reflect actual rebates earned based on actual purchase levels. Amounts due from vendors under these arrangements are included in “Prepaid expenses and other current assets” in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangibles
On an annual basis and at interim periods when circumstances require, we test the recoverability of our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets and review for indicators of impairment. Examples of such indicators include a significant change in the business climate, unexpected competition, loss of key personnel or a decline in our market capitalization below net book value.
We perform impairment assessments at the reporting unit level, which is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment, also known as a component. We currently have three components which we evaluate for aggregation by examining the distribution methods, sales mix, and operating results of each component to determine if these characteristics will be sustained over a long-term basis. For purposes of this evaluation, we expect components to exhibit similar economic characteristics 3-5 years after events such as an acquisition within our core roofing business or management/business restructuring. Components that exhibit similar economic characteristics are subsequently aggregated into a single reporting unit. Based on our most recent impairment assessment performed as of August 31, 2021, it was determined that all components exhibited similar economic characteristics, and therefore should be aggregated into a single reporting unit (collectively, the “Reporting Unit”).
To test for the recoverability of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, we first perform a qualitative assessment based on economic, industry and company-specific factors for all or selected reporting units to determine whether the existence of events and circumstances indicates that it is more likely than not that the goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible asset is impaired. Based on the results of the qualitative assessment, two additional steps in the impairment assessment may be required. The first step would require a comparison of each reporting unit’s fair value to the respective carrying value. If the carrying value exceeds the fair value, a second step is performed to measure the amount of impairment loss on a relative fair value basis, if any.
Based on our most recent impairment assessment performed as of August 31, 2021, we concluded that it was more likely than not that the fair value of the goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets exceeded their net carrying amount, therefore the quantitative two-step impairment test was not required. Our total market capitalization exceeded carrying value by approximately 112% as of August 31, 2021. We did not identify any macroeconomic, industry conditions or cost-related factors that would indicate it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit was less than its carrying value.
We amortize certain identifiable intangible assets that have finite lives, currently consisting of non-compete agreements, customer relationships and trade names. Non-compete agreements are amortized on a straight-line basis over the terms of the associated contractual agreements; customer relationship assets are amortized on an accelerated basis based on the expected cash flows generated by the existing customers; and trade names are amortized on an accelerated basis over a five- or ten-year period. Amortizable intangible assets are tested for impairment, when deemed necessary, based on undiscounted cash flows and, if impaired, are written down to fair
value based on either discounted cash flows or appraised values. In connection with certain financing arrangements, we have debt issuance costs that are amortized over the lives of the associated financings.