Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Outlook
The Company is affected by general economic and industrial growth, raw material availability, cost inflation, supply chain disruptions, and general industrial production. The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in both advantaged and disadvantaged products within all segments. During fiscal 2022, we anticipate a headwind as the advantaged products, particularly in our Health, Hygiene & Specialties segment, related to the COVID-19 pandemic moderate while recovery of disadvantaged products lags with the ultimate impact being affected by both the duration certain products remain advantaged and timing of when disadvantaged products normalize. Our business has both geographic and end market diversity, which reduces the effect of any one of these factors on our overall performance. Our results are affected by our ability to pass through raw material and other cost changes to our customers, improve manufacturing productivity and adapt to volume changes of our customers. By providing advantaged products in targeted markets, we continue to believe our underlying long-term demand fundamental in all divisions will remain strong as we focus on delivering protective solutions that enhance consumer safety and execute on the Company’s mission statement of “Always Advancing to Protect What’s Important.” For fiscal 2022, we project cash flow from operations between $1.8 to $1.7 billion, which includes the benefit from the lag in recovery of fiscal 2021 inflation, and free cash flow between $1 billion to $900 million. Projected fiscal 2022 free cash flow assumes $800 million of capital spending. For the definition of free cash flow and further information related to free cash flow as a non-GAAP financial measure, see “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Recent Dispositions
During fiscal 2021, the Company completed the sale of its U.S. Flexible Packaging Converting business which was primarily operated in the Engineered Materials segment for net proceeds of $140 million and its non-core Czech Republic Reaction Injection Molding business which was operated in the Consumer Packaging International segment for net proceeds of $22 million. A net pretax loss on the divestitures of $22 million was recorded in fiscal 2021 within Restructuring and transaction activities on the Consolidated Statements of Income. The U.S Flexible Packaging Converting business and the Czech Republic Reaction Injection Molding business recorded net sales during fiscal 2020 of $203 million and $41 million, respectively.
Discussion of Results of Operations for Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
The Company's U.S. based results for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 are based on a fifty-three and fifty-two week period, respectively. Business integration expenses consist of restructuring and impairment charges, acquisition and divestiture related costs, and other business optimization costs. Tables present dollars in millions. A discussion and analysis regarding our results of operations for fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 can be found on Form 8-K, Exhibit 99.1 filed with the SEC on September 2, 2021.
Net sales: The net sales growth is primarily attributed to increased selling prices of $1,429 million due to the pass through of inflation, organic volume growth of 4%, a $331 million favorable impact from foreign currency changes, and a $131 million increase from extra shipping days in fiscal 2021. These increases were partially offset by fiscal 2020 divestiture sales of $190 million. The organic volume growth was primarily due to organic growth investments, continued recovery of certain markets that had previously been facing COVID-19 headwinds, and higher demand in our advantaged health and hygiene products as the result of COVID-19.
Cost of goods sold: The cost of goods sold increase is primarily attributed to organic volume growth, product mix, inflation, an increase from foreign currency changes, and extra shipping days in fiscal 2021. These increases were partially offset by fiscal 2020 divestiture cost of goods sold of $157 million.
Operating Income: The operating income increase is primarily attributed to a $100 million increase from the organic volume growth, a $55 million favorable impact from foreign currency changes, a $37 million decrease in business integration, and a $22 million benefit from extra shipping days in fiscal 2021. These improvements are partially offset by a $75 million impact from inflation and product mix, a $19 million increase in depreciation and amortization, and fiscal 2020 divestiture operating income of $18 million.
Net sales: The net sales growth in the Consumer Packaging International segment is primarily attributed to increased selling prices of $130 million due to the pass through of inflation, organic volume growth of 3%, and a $227 million favorable impact from foreign currency changes, partially offset by fiscal 2020 divestiture sales of $22 million. The organic volume growth was primarily due to organic growth investments and recovery of certain markets that had previously been facing COVID-19 headwinds.
Cost of goods sold: The cost of goods sold increase is attributed to inflation, organic volume growth, an increase from foreign currency changes, and an increase in depreciation, partially offset by a decrease in business integration activities and fiscal 2020 divestiture cost of goods sold.
Operating Income: The operating income increase is primarily attributed to a $23 million increase from the organic volume growth, a $40 million favorable impact from foreign currency, and an $18 million decrease in business integration activities, partially offset by a $33 million unfavorable impact from price cost spread.
Net sales: The net sales growth in the Consumer Packaging North America segment is primarily attributed to organic volume growth of 4%, increased selling prices of $439 million due to the pass through of inflation, and a $40 million increase from extra shipping days in fiscal 2021. The organic volume growth was primarily due to organic growth investments and advantaged foodservice products as the result of COVID-19.
Cost of goods sold: The cost of goods sold increase is attributed to inflation, organic volume growth, and an increase from extra shipping days in fiscal 2021.
Operating Income: The operating income being flat is primarily attributed to a $27 million increase from the organic volume growth, an $11 million decrease in business integration activities, and a decrease in depreciation and amortization, partially offset by a $43 million unfavorable impact from price cost spread.
Net sales: The net sales growth in the Engineered Materials segment is primarily attributed to increased selling prices of $475 million due to the pass through of inflation, organic volume growth of 4%, a $63 million favorable impact from foreign currency changes, and a $44 million increase from extra shipping days in fiscal 2021, partially offset by fiscal 2020 divestiture sales of $134 million. The organic volume growth was primarily due to organic growth investments and recovery of certain markets that had previously been facing COVID-19 headwinds.
Cost of goods sold: The cost of goods sold increase is attributed to inflation, organic volume growth, an increase from foreign currency changes, and an increase from extra shipping days in fiscal 2021. These increases were partially offset by Fiscal 2020 divestiture cost of goods sold of $110 million.
Operating Income: The operating income decrease is primarily attributed to a $49 million unfavorable impact from price cost spread and Fiscal 2020 divestiture operating income of $14 million, partially offset by a $14 million improvement from the organic volume growth and a $6 million benefit from extra shipping days in fiscal 2021.
Net sales: The net sales growth in the Health, Hygiene & Specialties segment is primarily attributed to organic volume growth of 5%, increased selling prices of $385 million due to the pass through of inflation, a $42 million increase from extra shipping days in fiscal 2021, and a $41 million favorable impact from foreign currency changes, partially offset by fiscal 2020 divestiture sales of $34 million. The organic volume growth was primarily due to organic growth investments and higher demand in our advantaged health and hygiene products as the result of COVID-19.
Cost of goods sold: The cost of goods sold increase is attributed to inflation, organic volume growth, an increase from extra shipping days in fiscal 2021, and an increase from foreign currency changes.
Operating Income: The operating income increase is primarily attributed to a $36 million increase from the organic volume growth, a $48 million favorable impact from price cost spread, an $8 million benefit from extra shipping days in fiscal 2021, and a favorable impact from foreign currency changes.
The Other expense increase is primarily attributed to foreign currency changes related to the remeasurement of non-operating intercompany balances.
The interest expense decrease is primarily the result of repayments on long-term borrowings and recent refinancing activities (see Note 3).
The income tax expense increase is primarily attributed to higher pre-tax book income. Our effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 was 19% and was positively impacted by 3% from permanent foreign currency differences and 2% from change in foreign valuation allowance. These favorable items were partially offset by other discrete items. Refer to Note 6. Income Taxes for further information.
The increase in comprehensive income is primarily attributed to a $174 million increase in net income, a $123 million favorable change in currency translation, a $188 million favorable change in the fair value of interest rate hedges and a $109 million favorable change from unrealized gains on the Company’s pension plans. Currency translation gains are primarily related to non-U.S. subsidiaries with a functional currency other than the U.S. dollar whereby assets and liabilities are translated from the respective functional currency into U.S. dollars using period-end exchange rates. The change in currency translation was primarily attributed to locations utilizing the euro, British pound sterling, Brazilian real and Chinese renminbi as their functional currency. As part of the overall risk management, the Company uses derivative instruments to reduce exposure to changes in interest rates attributed to the Company’s floating-rate borrowings and records changes to the fair value of these instruments in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). The change in fair value of these instruments in fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020 is primarily attributed to a change in the forward interest curve between measurement dates.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Senior Secured Credit Facility
We manage our global cash requirements considering (i) available funds among the many subsidiaries through which we conduct our business, (ii) the geographic location of our liquidity needs, and (iii) the cost to access international cash balances. We have an $850 million asset-based revolving line of credit that matures in May 2024. At the end of fiscal 2021, the Company had no outstanding balance on the revolving credit facility. The Company was in compliance with all covenants at the end of fiscal 2021. Refer to Note 3. Long-Term Debt for further information.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities increased $50 million from fiscal 2020 primarily attributed to improved net income prior to non-cash activities, partially offset by working capital inflation.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities increased $195 million from fiscal 2020 primarily attributed to increased capital expenditures and proceeds from the settlement of cross-currency derivatives in fiscal 2020, partially offset for the divestiture of business in fiscal 2021.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities decreased $479 million from fiscal 2020 primarily attributed to lower net repayments on long-term borrowings.
Share Repurchases
The Company did not have any share repurchases in fiscal 2021 or 2020.
Free Cash Flow
We define "free cash flow" as cash flow from operating activities less net additions to property, plant and equipment. Based on our definition, our consolidated free cash flow is summarized as follows:
We use free cash flow as a supplemental measure of liquidity as it assists us in assessing our ability to fund growth through generation of cash. Free cash flow may be calculated differently by other companies, including other companies in our industry or peer group, limiting its usefulness. Free cash flow is not a generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP’) financial measure and should not be considered as an alternative to any other measure determined in accordance with GAAP.
Liquidity Outlook
At the end of fiscal 2021, our cash balance was $1,091 million, which was primarily located outside the U.S. We believe our existing and future U.S. based cash and cash flow from U.S. operations, together with available borrowings under our senior secured credit facilities, will be adequate to meet our short-term and long-term liquidity needs with the exception of funds needed to cover all long-term debt obligations which we intend to refinance prior to maturity. The Company has the ability to repatriate the cash located outside the U.S. to the extent not needed to meet operational and capital needs without significant restrictions. Our unremitted foreign earnings were $1.1 billion at the end of fiscal 2021. The computation of the deferred tax liability associated with unremitted earnings is not practicable.
Summarized Guarantor Financial Information
Berry Global, Inc. (“Issuer”) has notes outstanding which are fully, jointly, severally, and unconditionally guaranteed by its parent, Berry Global Group, Inc. (for purposes of this section, “Parent”) and substantially all of Issuer’s domestic subsidiaries. Separate narrative information or financial statements of the guarantor subsidiaries have not been included because they are 100% owned by Parent and the guarantor subsidiaries unconditionally guarantee such debt on a joint and several basis. A guarantee of a guarantor subsidiary of the securities will terminate upon the following customary circumstances: the sale of the capital stock of such guarantor if such sale complies with the indentures, the designation of such guarantor as an unrestricted subsidiary, the defeasance or discharge of the indenture or in the case of a restricted subsidiary that is required to guarantee after the relevant issuance date, if such guarantor no longer guarantees certain other indebtedness of the issuer. The guarantees of the guarantor subsidiaries are also limited as necessary to prevent them from constituting a fraudulent conveyance under applicable law and any guarantees guaranteeing subordinated debt are subordinated to certain other of the Company’s debts. Parent also guarantees the Issuer’s term loans and revolving credit facilities. The guarantor subsidiaries guarantee our term loans and are co-borrowers under our revolving credit facility.
Presented below is summarized financial information for the Parent, Issuer and guarantor subsidiaries on a combined basis, after intercompany transactions have been eliminated.
Includes $15 million of income associated with intercompany activity with non-guarantor subsidiaries.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We disclose those accounting policies that we consider to be significant in determining the amounts to be utilized for communicating our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows in the first note to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere herein. Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with these principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Pensions. The accounting for our pension plans requires us to recognize the overfunded or underfunded status of the pension plans on our balance sheet. For these sponsored plans, the relevant accounting guidance requires that management make certain assumptions relating to the long-term rate of return on plan assets, discount rates used to determine the present value of future obligations and expenses, salary inflation rates, mortality rates and other assumptions. We believe that the accounting estimates related to our pension plans are critical accounting estimates because they are highly susceptible to change from period to period based on the performance of plan assets, actuarial valuations, market conditions and contracted benefit changes. The selection of assumptions is based on historical trends and known economic and market conditions at the time of valuation, as well as independent studies of trends performed by our actuaries.
We review annually the discount rate used to calculate the present value of pension plan liabilities. The discount rate used at each measurement date is set based on a high-quality corporate bond yield curve, derived based on bond universe information sourced from reputable third-party indices, data providers, and rating agencies. In countries where there is no deep market in corporate bonds, we have used a government bond approach to set the discount rate. Additionally, the expected long term rate of return on plan assets is derived for each benefit plan by considering the expected future long-term return assumption for each individual asset class. A single long-term return assumption is then derived for each plan based upon the plan’s target asset allocation. Refer to Note 7. Retirement Plans for further information.
Deferred Taxes and Effective Tax Rates. We estimate the effective tax rate (“ETR”) and associated liabilities or assets for each of our legal entities in accordance with authoritative guidance. We utilize tax planning to minimize or defer tax liabilities to future periods. In recording ETRs and related liabilities and assets, we rely upon estimates, which are based upon our interpretation of U.S. and local tax laws as they apply to our legal entities and our overall tax structure. Audits by local tax jurisdictions, including the U.S. Government, could yield different interpretations from our own and cause the Company to owe more taxes than originally recorded. As part of the ETR, if we determine that a deferred tax asset arising from temporary differences is not likely to be utilized, we will establish a valuation allowance against that asset to record it at its expected realizable value. In multiple foreign jurisdictions, the Company believes that it will not generate sufficient future taxable income to realize the related tax benefits. The Company has provided a full valuation allowance against its foreign net operating losses included within the deferred tax assets in multiple foreign jurisdictions. The Company has not provided a valuation allowance on its federal net operating losses in the U.S. because it has determined that future reversals of its temporary taxable differences will occur in the same periods and are of the same nature as the temporary differences giving rise to the deferred tax assets. Refer to Note 6. Income Taxes for further information.