Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and footnotes thereto incorporated by reference included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a fast-casual “better burger” concept with approximately 119 franchised and corporate-owned restaurants, renowned for delivering an exceptional, all-natural premium burger experience in a refined, contemporary environment. BurgerFi offers a classic American menu of premium burgers, hot dogs, crispy chicken, frozen custard, hand-cut fries, shakes, beer, wine and more. Originally founded in February 2011 by John Rosatti in sunny Lauderdale-by-the-Sea, Florida, the purpose was simple - redeFining the way the world eats burgers by providing an upscale burger offering, at a fast-casual price point. We have become the go-to burger restaurant for good times, and high-quality food across the United States and beyond. Known for delivering the all-natural burger experience in a fast-casual environment, BurgerFi is committed to an uncompromising and rewarding dining experience that promises fresh food of transparent quality.
Today, we are among the nation’s fastest-growing better burger concepts and were ranked as one of the Top 10 Fastest and Smartest-Growing Brands in Franchising and named a leader in our category by Franchise Times in their Fast and Serious list for both 2018 and 2019. BurgerFi was also featured in the fourth annual Chain Reaction antibiotic scorecard by National Resources Defense Council and Consumer Reports with an “A” rating - one of only two brands serving passing grade beef.
Since our inception, we have grown steadily-with approximately 119 BurgerFi restaurants, as of December 31, 2020, in 2 countries and 23 states and Puerto Rico-and we continue to expand bringing the BurgerFi experience to new guests around the world.
Significant Recent Developments Regarding COVID-19
During March 2020, a global pandemic was declared by the World Health Organization related to the rapidly spreading outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus designated COVID-19. The pandemic has significantly impacted economic conditions in the United States, where all of our Company restaurants are located. We first began to experience impacts from COVID-19 around the middle of March 2020, as federal, state and local governments began to react to the public health crisis by encouraging or requiring social distancing, instituting stay-at-home orders, and requiring, in varying degrees, restaurant dine-in limitations, capacity limitations or other restrictions that largely limited restaurants to take-out, drive-thru and delivery sales. Our most significant declines in same store sales on a systemwide basis (which includes both company owned and franchised locations) were in late March through the third week in April, where we experienced same store declines of up to 42% in 2020 versus the same periods 2019. Beginning in May and through the end of June 2020, systemwide same store sales declines partially recovered to negative 15%. In an effort to mitigate these trends, we engaged with third-party delivery services and increased investment in our ordering capabilities in order to provide customers alternative means to traditional in-restaurant dining. In the third quarter of 2020, systemwide same stores sales declines continued to improve.
We experienced steady recovery in the business during the fourth quarter of 2020, all while continuing to support our teams, our guests, and the communities in which we operate. Systemwide same-store sales improved on a sequential basis in the fourth quarter of 2020 when compared to the third quarter of 2020, with performance driven by increases in in-store dining, the increased use of third-party delivery services and ordering through the Company’s digital app. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, systemwide same store sales were down only 4% compared to the same period in 2019. After the fourth quarter of 2020, in January and February of fiscal year 2021, systemwide same store sales continued to improve.
On a systemwide basis, orders taken through our digital platform combined with third party delivery providers accounted for over 1.6 million orders, totaling $38.9 million, or nearly 30% of systemwide sales during the year ended December 31, 2020. This represents an increase of 41% in order volume and 64% in sales volume over the prior year. The largest increases were during our fourth fiscal quarter, where the investments made in the digital platform throughout the year were becoming widely accepted by our guests. During the fourth fiscal quarter, these orders amounted to over 450,000 orders, totaling $11.3 million, or over 32% of systemwide sales. This represents an increase of 61% in order volume and 82% in sales volume over the prior year’s comparable period.
Although the volume and percentage of revenue we generate from in-restaurant dining as compared to delivery and orders through the digital app may normalize over time as the impact of the pandemic subsides, we believe these capabilities are a vital element to continuing to serve our customers and will continue to be a differentiator for BurgerFi as compared to some of our competitors. We intend to continue to make investments that enhance the guest experience, including our digital capabilities.
We did not experience any material supply chain difficulties as a result of COVID-19 during 2020; however, there can be no assurance that we will not experience supply chain challenges in the future. We experienced negative cash flow during the months of April and May 2020 and have since turned cash positive in June through December 2020. Although we have experienced some recovery since the initial impact of COVID-19 and are able to meet our obligations as they become due with our cash flow from operations. The long-term impact of COVID-19 on the economy and on our business remains uncertain, the duration and scope of which cannot currently be predicted. Please refer to the matters discussed under the caption “Risk Factors” beginning on page 17.
Key Metrics
The following are key metrics by which we evaluate our business and make strategic decisions:
Same Store Sales
We use the measure of same store sales to evaluate the performance of our store base, which excludes the impact of new stores and closed stores, in both periods under comparison. We include a restaurant in the calculation of same store sales once it has been in operation after 14 months. A restaurant which is temporarily closed, is included the same store sales computation. A restaurant which is closed permanently, such as upon termination of the lease, or other permanent closure, is immediately removed from the same store sales computation. Employee complimentary meals are excluded from the computation. Our calculation of same store sales may not be comparable to others in the industry.
Systemwide Restaurant Sales
Systemwide restaurant sales is presented as informational data in order to understand the aggregation of Company-owned stores and franchised stores. Systemwide restaurant sales for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 were $129.3 million as compared to $145.8 million in the prior year. The decrease is primarily attributable to the impacts of COVID-19 on the Company’s business.
Results of Operations
To reflect the application of different bases of accounting as a result of the Business Combination, the tables provided below separate the Company’s results via a black line into two distinct periods as follows: (1) up to and including the Business Combination closing date (labeled “Predecessor”) and (2) the period after that date (labeled “Successor”). The periods after December 15, 2020 are the “Successor” periods while the periods before December 16, 2020 are the “Predecessor” periods.
The historical financial information of Opes Acquisition Corp. prior to the Business Combination (a special purpose acquisition company, or “SPAC”) has not been reflected in the Predecessor financial statements as these historical amounts have been determined not to be useful information to a user of the financial statements. SPACs deposit the proceeds from their initial public offerings into a segregated trust account until a business combination occurs, where such funds are then used to pay consideration for the acquiree and/or to pay stockholders who elect to redeem their shares of common stock in connection with the business combination. The operations of a SPAC, until the closing of a business combination, other than income from the trust account investments and transaction expenses, are nominal. Accordingly, no other activity in the Company was reported for periods prior to December 16, 2020 besides BurgerFi’s operations as Predecessor.
As Opes Acquisition Corp.’s historical financial information is excluded from the Predecessor financial information, the businesses, and thus financial results, of the Successor and Predecessor entities, are expected to be largely consistent, excluding the impact on certain financial statement line items that were impacted by the Business Combination. Management believes reviewing our operating results for the twelve-months ended December 31, 2020 by combining the results of the Predecessor and Successor periods (“S/P Combined”) is more useful in discussing our overall operating performance when compared to the same period in the current year. Accordingly, in addition to presenting our results of operations as reported in our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP, the tables below present the non-GAAP combined results for the year.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Company Restaurant Sales
For the S/P Combined twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s restaurant sales increased $2,133,000 or 9.2% compared to the prior year. This increase was primarily due to three new Company restaurants opened and operating subsequent to December 31, 2019, as well as the two restaurants (Dania Pointe and Pembroke Pines City Center) which opened late in 2019 being open for the full year in 2020. This accounted for approximately $2,576,000 of the increase. This increase was partially offset by the COVID-19 outbreak which had a considerable impact on our business beginning in mid-March 2020. Same store sales were down $3,102,000 or 15% for the year ended December 31, 2020 versus the year ended 2019. There was no such outbreak in the comparable year period ended December 31, 2019.
Royalty and Other Fees
Royalty and other fees decreased $998,000, or 13.5% for the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 versus the year ended December 31, 2019. This is primarily due to the COVID-19 outbreak which began in mid-March 2020 and continued through December 31, 2020. Since our royalty revenue primarily consists of fees charged as a percentage of franchisee restaurant sales, any fluctuation in franchisees’ sales directly affected our royalty revenue. Our franchisees’ sales decreased approximately $16,700,000 for the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 versus the year ended December 31, 2019.
Terminated Franchise Fees
Terminated franchise fees decreased $132,000 or 16.0% for the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 versus the year ended December 31, 2019. Initial franchise fees are non-refundable payments of $37,500 per new location paid for by franchisees. In some cases, if the franchisee is in violation of its franchise agreement, the Company may terminate the franchise agreement. Since these fees are non-refundable, the Company is able to recognize these fees as revenue when the franchise agreement is terminated. The decrease in terminated franchise fees of $132,000 for the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 versus the comparable period in 2019 was due to primarily to the termination in 2019 of a multi-unit franchise development agreement in the United Kingdom for $400,000, versus the smaller amounts of terminations in 2020. This was much more significant than is typical.
Royalties - Brand Development and Co-op
Royalties - brand development and co-op advertising decreased $205,000, or 11.9% for the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 versus the year ended December 31, 2019. This is primarily due to the COVID-19 outbreak which began in mid-March 2020 and impacted the remaining months through December 31, 2020. Since our royalties - brand development and co-op revenue is 1.5% of franchisee sales, any fluctuation in franchisee sales directly affected our royalties - brand development revenue. Our Franchisees’ sales decreased approximately $16,700,000 for the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 versus the year ended December 31, 2019.
Initial Franchise Fees
Initial franchise fees decreased $71,000, or 15.5% for the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 versus the year ended December 31, 2019. Effective on December 16, 2020, the closing date of the Business Combination, the deferred Franchise Fees balance was re-evaluated for fair value (“FV”). The FV of the deferred franchise fees was determined to be $3,053,000, or $993,000 less than the carrying value of $4,046,000. This $993,000 reduction in FV is being amortized over the remaining lives of the franchise agreements in place as of December 31, 2020. The decrease in initial franchise fees was primarily due to this amortization for the period beginning December 16, 2020 and ending December 31, 2020. This was partially offset by the eight new franchise openings during 2020, which resulted in revenue of approximately $15,000 per location for distinct services recognized upon opening of these restaurants plus the amortization of the deferred initial franchise fees for franchise agreements entered into in prior periods. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we had 5 new openings which resulted in the carryforward amortization plus the recognition for distinct services performed by the Company at store opening date for these new locations.
Food, Beverage and Paper Costs
Food, beverage, and paper costs increased approximately $621,000, or 9.8% for the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020, versus the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily due to commodity cost inflation as well as three new Company-owned store openings subsequent to December 31, 2019. As a percentage of Company restaurant sales, food, beverage, and paper costs were 26.8% for the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 versus 26.5% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The percentage increase resulted primarily from commodity cost increases during the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 versus the year ended December 31, 2019.
Labor and Related Expenses
Labor and related expenses decreased by $577,000, or 8.1% for the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 versus the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was due primarily to less employees in our Company locations relevant to the COVID-19 outbreak which occurred beginning in mid-March 2020 and continued through December 31, 2020. This decrease was partially offset by three new Company restaurants in operation during 2020. As a percentage of Company restaurant sales, labor and related expenses were 26.0% for the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 versus 30.9% for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to the increased take-out and third-party delivery business resulting from the COVID-19 breakout which required less staff in our Company operated restaurants, which resulted in less labor costs as a percentage of total Company restaurant sales but is somewhat offset by delivery fees incurred in other operating costs.
Other Operating Expenses
Other operating expenses increased $1,059,000, or 20.1% for the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 versus the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to the three new Company restaurants opened and operating in 2020, as well as an increase in delivery fees due to the significant increase in delivery business due to the COVID-19 outbreak in 2020. As a percentage of total Company restaurant sales, other operating expenses were 25.0% of total restaurant sales for the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 compared to 22.7% for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to the increase in delivery fees and software fees during the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 versus the comparable period in 2019. In 2020, we began to implement more cloud-based software solutions. As a result of this re-positioning, software costs include additional cloud-based services such as our new point of sale, Micros Simphony, and our new general ledger software, Restaurant 365, for which we make monthly periodic payments and, accordingly, expense as period costs beginning in 2020 and continuing into future periods.
Occupancy and Related Expenses
Occupancy and related expenses increased $591,000, or 27.5% during the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 versus the year ended December 31, 2019. This is due primarily to the additional three new Company restaurants during the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 versus the year ended December 31, 2019.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $552,000, or 7.6% during the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 versus the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was due primarily to professional fees and transaction related expenses due to the Business Combination. As a percentage of total Company revenue, general and administrative expenses were 22.3% during the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 and 21.1% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Stock Compensation Expense
Stock compensation expense was $818,000 for the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 compared to $0 for the year ended December 31, 2019. On December 16, 2020, the Company entered into employment agreements with Executive Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, which included grants of the Company’s common stock, subject to certain performance conditions for vesting. The value of these restricted shares was determined to total $818,000 for 2020. There were no such employment agreements in 2019.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses increased by $585,000, or 70.9% during the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 versus the year ended December 31, 2019. $300,000 of this increase was due to the amortization of the intangible assets for the period beginning December 16, 2020 and ending December 31, 2020. These intangible assets acquired in connection with the Business Combination totaled $116,889,000. Additionally, we opened three new Company operated restaurants during the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 versus the year ended December 31, 2019. As a percentage of total Company revenue, depreciation and amortization expense was 4.0% versus 2.4% for the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020, and the year ended December 31, 2019 respectively.
Brand Development and Co-op advertising expense
Brand development and co-op advertising expense increased $585,000, or 33.8% for the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 versus the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2019. This is primarily due to the Company spending an additional amount of approximately $475,000 during the S/P combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 on production for BurgerFi commercials versus the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gain on extinguishment of debt
The Company recognized a gain on extinguishment of debt of $791,000 during the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 due to the termination of the asset purchase and management agreement and the franchise agreements of the two restaurants which resulted in the deconsolidation on December 31, 2020. See discussion in Note 1 of the consolidated financial statements.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased by $52,000 during the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 versus the year ended December 31, 2019. This is primarily due to the net increase in our line of credit by $695,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020. The remaining difference pertains to the notes payable at our two Jacksonville locations, as well as the interest on our seller note related to our purchase of the BurgerFi restaurant in Boca Raton, FL.
Warrant Liability
The private placement warrants, consisting of the warrants exercisable under the PIPE transaction (3,000,000 shares), the private placement warrants (445,000 shares) and the working capital warrants (150,000 shares), include provisions that affect the settlement amount. Such variables are outside of those used to determine the fair value of a fixed-for-fixed instrument, and as such, the warrants are accounted for as liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40, with changes in fair value included in the consolidated statement of operations.
The liability classified warrants were priced using a Dynamic Black Scholes model. This process relies upon inputs such as shares outstanding, estimated stock prices, strike price, risk free interest rate and volatility assumptions. The warrant liability was $22,113,000 on December 16, 2020 and $16,516,000 on December 31, 2020. The change in value of warrant liability between the two measurement dates was $5,597,000 and is recognized in the consolidated statement of operations for the period from December 16, 2020 to December 31, 2020. There were no warrants outstanding in the Predecessor periods.
The public warrants (11,500,000 shares) and the UPO warrants (750,000) contain no such provisions and are classified in equity.
Income Tax Expense
Prior to the Business Combination, the Company, with the consent of its members, had elected to be taxed as a partnership under the provisions of the Internal Revenue code and similar state provisions. Partnerships are generally not subject to federal and state income taxes, the partners reflect their respective share of the Company’s taxable income or loss on their individual tax returns, Therefore, there was no income tax recorded by the Company for the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to December 15, 2020 and the twelve-month period ended December 31, 2019.
The Successor company is being taxed as a corporation.
For the S/P Combined twelve-months ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an income tax benefit of $366,000 on pretax income of $5,617,000. The gain on change in value of warrant liability of $5,597,000 is not taxable to the Company.
Net Income
Net income was 5,983,000 and $2,970,000 for the S/P Combined twelve-month periods ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. This represented an increase in net income of $3,013,000. This increase was primarily due to the gain on change in value of warrant liability of $5,597,000. This increase was partially offset by the decrease in total revenue due to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, the decrease in royalty and other fees, terminated franchise fees, royalties - brand development and co-op revenue and initial franchise fees during the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 versus the year ended December 31, 2019. Additionally, the decrease in net income was due to the increases in food, beverage and paper costs, occupancy and related expenses, and other operating expenses, partially offset by the decrease in labor and related expenses as well as general and administrative expenses. As a percentage of total company revenue, net income was 17.5% and 8.9% for the S/P Combined twelve-month periods ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Liquidity, Capital Resources, and COVID-19
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash from operations, cash and cash equivalents on hand. As of December 31, 2020, we maintained a cash and cash equivalents balance of approximately $40,000,000, including $3.6 million of restricted cash. The revolving debt was subsequently repaid and terminated in January 2021.
Our primary requirements for liquidity are to fund our working capital needs, operating and finance lease obligations, capital expenditures and general corporate needs. Our requirements for working capital are generally not significant because our guests pay for their food and beverage purchases in cash or on debit or credit cards at the time of the sale and we are able to sell many of our inventory items before payment is due to the supplier of such items. Our ongoing capital expenditures are principally related to opening new BurgerFis, existing BurgerFi capital investments (both for remodels and maintenance), as well as investments in our digital and corporate infrastructure. We estimate our capital expenditures will be approximately $15,000,000 for the year ending December 31, 2021.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, combined with the actions we have taken in response to COVID-19, will be sufficient to fund our operating and finance lease obligations, capital expenditures, and working capital needs for at least the next 12 months and the foreseeable future.
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) announced a global health emergency because of a new strain of coronavirus originating in Wuhan, China (the “COVID-19 outbreak”) and the risks to the international community as the virus spreads globally beyond its point of origin. In March 2020, the WHO classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic, based on the rapid increase in exposure globally. On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was signed into law. As a result of the required changes to consumer behavior to largely off-premises dining, as well as promotional activities associated with delivery, we have seen some recovery in sales sequentially through 2020.
We did not experience any supply chain difficulties as a result of COVID-19 during the first three quarters of 2020; however, there can be no assurances that we will not experience supply chain challenges in the future. We experienced negative cash flow during the months of April and May 2020 and have since turned cash positive in June through September 2020. Additionally, on December 16, 2020, the Company completed its business combination with Opes. As a result of this business combination, the Company’s cash balance post-closing totaled approximately $38,870,000. Although we have experienced some recovery since the initial impact of COVID-19 and are currently able to meet our obligations as they become due with our cash flow from operations, the long-term impact of COVID-19 on the economy and on our business remains uncertain, the duration and scope of which cannot currently be predicted. Please refer to the matters discussed under the caption “Risk Factors” beginning on page 17.
The Company has taken steps to reduce operating costs through reductions in labor hours to align with reduced demand and reducing non-essential controllable costs. We negotiated temporary rent deferrals with some of our landlords in the second quarter of 2020 and have begun to repay these rent deferrals during the third quarter of 2020. Additional actions taken during the second quarter of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic include elimination of all non-essential general and administrative expense, deferral of all open support center positions, as well as a reduction in force at the support center.
We are currently able to pay our obligations as they become due, with our cash flow generated from operations and the significant post-closing cash balance of $38,870,000. We are committed to construct five additional restaurants within the next 12 months. The total amount due on these contracts is approximately $1,250,000. We believe that we will be able to pay these commitments from our cash generated from operations and our current cash balance. Should federal, state or municipal government authorities impose mandatory restrictions in excess of what they currently are, we believe that our current cash balance will allow us the liquidity to meet these commitments.
The following table presents the summary cash flow information for the periods indicated:
Cash Flows Provided by Operating Activities
During the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020, cash flows provided by operating activities were approximately $1,758,000. The cash flows provided by operating activities resulted from net income of $5,983,000, depreciation and amortization of $1,410,000 and net working capital decrease of $865,000. Our $6.0 million of net income was primarily related to a non-cash gain on change in value of warrant liability of $5,597,000. Our working capital decrease was due primarily to an increase in accounts payable and other current liabilities as well as a decrease in other assets. Our accounts payable increase was primarily due to us operating three new Company-owned restaurants during the period beginning January 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020. Additionally, we have two Company-owned restaurants under construction as of December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities
During the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020, cash flows used in investing activities were $26,929,000, which were primarily the result of the Successor utilizing $30,000,000 to acquire BurgerFi on December 16, 2020. Additionally, the Company used $650,000 for the payment due at closing for the purchase of the Boca Pointe franchise location, construction costs of $3,509,000 on development of new restaurants, partially offset by $3,268,000 in net advances to related parties, and the deposit on sale of the Dania Beach location of $906,500.
Cash Flows Used in Financing Activities
During the S/P Combined twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020 cash flows used in by financing activities were $2,943,000. The Company received $2,406,000 in proceeds from notes payable from the CARES Act, $2,987,000 in proceeds from our revolving line of credit, partially offset by members’ distributions of $6,007,000 to settle the amount due to related parties at December 16, 2020.
Line of Credit
Effective July 13, 2018, we entered into a $2,000,000 revolving line of credit agreement (“LOC”) with a bank. The LOC is collateralized mainly by certain assets owned by one of the members of the Company as described in the Pledge Agreement required by the bank. The LOC initially had a maturity date of July 13, 2020 and has been extended to July 13, 2021. The annual interest on advances under the LOC is equal to the LIBOR Daily Floating rate plus 0.75%. On October 31, 2019, the LOC was amended to increase the amount available under the LOC from $2,000,000 to $5,000,000. We had an outstanding balance on the LOC of $3,012,000 and $2,317,000 as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Unused borrowing capacity at December 31, 2020 was $1,988,000, which was subsequently repaid and terminated in January 2021.
PPP Loan
In May 2020, we entered into a note with Pilot Bank, under the CARES Act pursuant to which Pilot Bank agreed to make a loan to us in the amount of approximately $2.2 million. The PPP Loan matures in May 2022, bears interest at a rate of 1.0% per annum and requires no payments during the first six months from the date of the loan. The PPP Loan is unsecured and guaranteed by the SBA. Under the terms of the PPP Loan, the principal amount of the loan may be forgiven to the extent it is used for qualifying expenses as described in the CARES Act and we otherwise request forgiveness in accordance with the terms of the PPP Loan and the requirements of the SBA. During February 2021, we began the process of applying for PPP Loan forgiveness. We cannot guarantee that we will be successful in obtaining forgiveness of all or any part of such principal amount.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingencies at the date of the condensed consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires us to make estimates and assumptions in applying our critical accounting policies that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amount of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Our estimates and assumptions affect, among other things, impairment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, the fair value of assets acquired in business combinations, impairment of long-lived assets, realizability of deferred tax assets, and federal and state income tax uncertainties. We evaluate those estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis based on historical experience and on various other factors which we believe are reasonable under the circumstances.
We believe that the following represent our more critical estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Impairment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets.
We test goodwill for impairment annually, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset may be impaired. Our annual impairment test of goodwill may be completed through a qualitative assessment to determine if the fair value of the reporting unit is more likely than not greater than the carrying amount. If we elect to bypass the qualitative assessment for any reporting units, or if a qualitative assessment indicates it is more likely than not that the estimated carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, we perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test. Under the quantitative test, the fair value of the reporting unit is compared with its carrying value (including goodwill). If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. The fair value of the reporting unit is determined by management and is based on the results of (1) estimates we made regarding the present value of the anticipated cash flows associated with each reporting unit (the “income approach”) and/or (2) the indicated value of the reporting units based on a comparison and correlation of the Company and other similar companies (the “market approach”).
The income approach, which considers factors unique to each of our reporting units and related long-range plans that may not be comparable to other companies and that are not yet publicly available, is dependent on several critical management assumptions. These assumptions include estimates of future sales growth, operating profit, income tax rates, terminal value growth rates, capital expenditures and the weighted average cost of capital (discount rate). Anticipated cash flows used under the income approach are developed every fourth quarter in conjunction with our annual budgeting process and also incorporate amounts and timing of future cash flows based on our long-range plan.
The discount rates used in the income approach are an estimate of the rate of return that a market participant would expect of each reporting unit. To select an appropriate rate for discounting the future earnings stream, a review is made of short-term interest rate yields of long-term corporate and government bonds, as well as the typical capital structure of companies in the industry. The discount rates used for each reporting unit may vary depending on the risk inherent in the cash flow projections, as well as the risk level that would be perceived by a market participant. A terminal value is included at the end of the projection period used in our discounted cash flow analysis to reflect the remaining value that each reporting unit is expected to generate. The terminal value represents the present value in the last year of the projection period of all subsequent cash flows into perpetuity. The terminal value growth rate is a key assumption used in determining the terminal value as it represents the annual growth of all subsequent cash flows into perpetuity.
Under the market approach, we apply the guideline company method in estimating fair value. The guideline company method makes use of market price data of corporations whose stock is actively traded in a public market. The corporations we select as guideline companies are engaged in a similar line of business or are subject to similar financial and business risks, including the opportunity for growth. The guideline company method of the market approach provides an indication of value by relating the equity or invested capital (debt plus equity) of guideline companies to various measures of their earnings and cash flow, then applying such multiples to the business being valued. The result of applying the guideline company approach is adjusted based on the incremental value associated with a controlling interest in the business. This “control premium” represents the amount a new controlling shareholder would pay for the benefits resulting from synergies and other potential benefits derived from controlling the enterprise.
The Company completed the Business Combination with BurgerFi in December 2020 and the provisional valuation was performed in December 2020. There is only one reporting unit, which is the Company-operated and franchise restaurants. Based on the results of our goodwill impairment test, we determined it was not more likely than not that goodwill was impaired.
Our indefinite-lived intangible assets represent licenses of $235,000 as of December 31, 2020. We test indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the assets may be impaired. Our annual impairment test may be completed through a qualitative assessment to determine if the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible assets is more likely than not greater than the carrying amount. If we elect to bypass the qualitative assessment, or if a qualitative assessment indicates it is more likely than not that the estimated carrying value exceeds the fair value, we test for impairment using a quantitative process. Our quantitative process includes comparing the carrying value to the fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets, with any excess recognized as an impairment loss. Our critical estimates in the determination of the fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets include the anticipated future revenue of Company-operated and franchised restaurants and the resulting cash flows.
For the annual impairment test of our indefinite-lived intangible assets in the fourth quarter of 2020, we elected to perform a qualitative assessment. The qualitative assessment indicated the fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets was more likely than not greater than the carrying amount.
The estimated fair values of our goodwill reporting units and indefinite-lived intangible assets are subject to change as a result of many factors including, among others, any changes in our business plans, changing economic conditions and the competitive environment. Should actual cash flows and our future estimates vary adversely from those estimates we use, we may be required to recognize impairment charges in future years.
The accounting for the Business Combination with BurgerFi is considered provisional because we have not finalized certain aspects of the purchase price allocation including the valuation of certain acquired customer-related intangible assets.
Impairment of long-lived assets
As of December 31, 2020, the total net carrying value of our long-lived tangible and definite-lived intangible assets was $125,000,000. Our long-lived assets include (1) properties and equipment, and (2) Company-operated restaurant assets and related definite-lived intangible assets, which include trademarks and tradenames and franchise agreements.
We review our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. We assess the recoverability of our long-lived assets by comparing the carrying amount of the asset group to future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated through leases and/or subleases or by our individual Company-operated restaurants. If the carrying amount of the long-lived asset group is not recoverable on an undiscounted cash flow basis, then impairment is recognized to the extent that the carrying amount exceeds its fair value and is included in “Impairment of long-lived assets.” Our critical estimates in this review process include the anticipated future cash flows from Company-operated restaurants, which is used in assessing the recoverability of the respective long-lived assets.
Our fair value estimates are subject to change as a result of many factors including, among others, any changes in our business plans, changing economic conditions and the competitive environment. Should actual cash flows and our future estimates vary adversely from those estimates we used, we may be required to recognize additional impairment charges in future years.
Warrant Liability
The private placement warrants, consisting of the warrants exercisable under the PIPE transaction (3,000,000 shares), the private placement warrants (445,000 shares) and the working capital warrants (150,000 shares), include provisions that affect the settlement amount. Such variables are outside of those used to determine the fair value of a fixed-for-fixed instrument, and as such, the warrants are accounted for as liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40, with changes in fair value included in the consolidated statement of operations.
The liability classified warrants were priced using a Dynamic Black Scholes model. This process relies upon inputs such as shares outstanding, estimated stock prices, strike price, risk free interest rate and volatility assumptions. The warrant liability was $22,113,000 on December 16, 2020 and $16,516,000 on December 31, 2020. The change in value of warrant liability between the two measurement dates was $5,597,000 and is recognized in the consolidated statement of operations for the period from December 16, 2020 to December 31, 2020. There were no warrants outstanding in the Predecessor periods.
The public warrants (11,500,000 shares) and the UPO warrants (750,000) contain no such provisions and are classified in equity.
Business Combinations
We account for business combinations using the purchase method of accounting. Accordingly, assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their estimated fair values at the acquisition date. The excess of purchase price over fair value of net assets acquired, including the amount assigned to identifiable intangible assets, is recorded as goodwill. The results of operations of acquired businesses are included in the consolidated financial statements, from the acquisition date. The accounting for the Business Combination with BurgerFi is considered provisional because we have not finalized certain aspects of the purchase price allocation including the valuation.
Acquired personal property assets consist of leasehold improvements, kitchen equipment, and restaurant furniture and fixtures, computer and point of sale systems, audio and video equipment (“Personal Property”), which were valued on in-use basis. The Company enlisted a third-party consultant to assist in the valuation of the Personal Property (the “Valuation”) which were valued on an in-use basis.
Goodwill is recognized as the excess of consideration over the net assets acquired by BurgerFi and represents the value derived by BurgerFi’s market share and expected growth in the market.
Identifiable intangible assets acquired consist of customer relationships of franchise agreements, Tradenames and trademarks, Liquor licenses, Reef Kitchens license agreements and the VegeFi product. The Company determined the useful life of the tradenames and trademarks to be 30 years.
Identifiable intangible assets acquired consist of customer relationships of $24,839,000, trade names of $83,033,000 and Reef Kitchens license agreements of $8,882,000. The customer relationships were valued using the multi-period excess earnings method. The Company determined the useful life of the customer relationships to be 7 years. This is based on the average remaining terms of our franchise agreements with our franchisees. The trade names were valued using the relief-from-royalty method. The Company determined the useful life of the trade names to be 30 years. The Reef Kitchens license agreements and the customer relationships were valued using the multi-period excess earnings method. The Company determined the useful life of the Reef Kitchens license agreements to be 10 years.
Segment Reporting
We own and operate BurgerFi restaurants in the United States, and also have domestic and international franchisees. The chief operating decision makers (the “CODMs”) are our Executive Chairman, Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer. As the CODMs review financial performance and allocate resources at a consolidated level on a recurring basis, the Company has one operating reporting segment and one reportable segment.
Variable Interest Entities
For Variable Interest Entities (“VIEs”), we assess whether we are the primary beneficiary as prescribed by the accounting guidance on the consolidation of a VIE. The primary beneficiary of a VIE is the party that has the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact the performance of the entity and the obligation to absorb the losses or the right to receive the benefits that could potentially be significant to the entity.
We evaluate our business relationships with franchisees and related parties to identify potential VIEs under ASC 810 “Consolidation”. Should the VIE require consolidation due to us being the primary beneficiary, then we account for these as a business combination under ASC 805 Business Combinations.
We consolidate VIEs in which we are considered to be the primary beneficiary. Entities are considered to be the primary beneficiary if they have both of the following characteristics: (i) the power to direct the activities that, when taken together, most significantly impact the VIE’s performance, and (ii) the obligation to absorb losses and right to receive the returns from the VIE that would be significant to the VIE. Our judgment with respect to our level of influence or control of an entity involves the consideration of various factors including the form of our ownership interest, our representation in the entity’s governance, the size of our investment, estimates of future cash flows, our ability to participate in policy making decisions and the rights of the other investors to participate in the decision making process and to replace us as manager and/or liquidate the joint venture, if applicable.
Revenue Recognition
On January 1, 2019, the Company adopted ASU 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), using the modified retrospective method applied to those contracts which were not completed as of January 1, 2019. The Company elected a practical expedient to aggregate the effect of all contract modifications that occurred before the adoption date, which did not have a material impact to the consolidated financial statements. Results for reporting periods beginning on or after January 1, 2019 are presented under ASC 606.
Revenue consists of restaurant sales and franchise licensing revenue. Generally, revenue is recognized as performance obligations transfer to the customer in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services.
Restaurant Revenue
Revenue from restaurant sales is presented net of discounts and recognized when food, beverage and retail products are sold. Sales tax collected from customers is excluded from restaurant sales and the obligation is included in sales tax payable until the taxes are remitted to the appropriate taxing authorities. Sales from our gift cards are deferred and recognized upon redemption for goods or services. Revenue is reported gross on the accompanying consolidated statements of operations with employee complimentary meals recorded as a component of store opening expenses. Revenue from restaurant sales is generally paid at the time of sale. Credit cards and delivery service partners sales are generally collected shortly after sale occurs.
The revenue from electronic gift cards is deferred when purchased by the customer and revenue is recognized when the gift cards are redeemed. The Company is a Delaware limited liability company and is subject to Delaware escheatment laws. Delaware escheatment laws state that gift cards are presumed to be abandoned after five years and the balance remitted should represent the maximum cost to the issuer of merchandise.
We contract with delivery service partners for delivery of goods and services to customers. We have determined that the delivery service partners are agents and that we are the principal. Therefore, restaurant sales through delivery services are recognized as gross sales and delivery service revenue is recorded as expense.
Franchise Revenue
The franchise agreements require the franchisee to pay an initial, non-refundable fee of $37,500 and continuing fees based upon a percentage of sales. Owners can make a deposit equal to 50% of the total franchise fee to reserve the right to open additional locations. The remaining balance of the franchise fee is due upon signing by the franchisee of the applicable location’s lease or mortgage. Franchise agreements and deposit agreements outline a schedule for store openings. Failure to meet the schedule can result in forfeiture of deposits made.
Franchise revenue is comprised of certain initial franchise fees and ongoing sales-based royalty fees from a franchised BurgerFi restaurant. Generally, the licenses granted to develop, open and operate each BurgerFi franchise in a specified territory are the performance obligations transferred to the licensee in our contracts, and represent symbolic intellectual property. Ancillary promised services, such as training and assistance during the initial opening
of a BurgerFi restaurant are typically combined with the licenses and considered as one performance obligation per BurgerFi franchise. Certain initial services such as site selection and lease review are considered distinct services that are recognized at a point in time when the performance obligations have been provided, generally when the BurgerFi has been opened. We determine the transaction price for each contract and allocate it to the distinct services based on their standalone selling price based on the costs to provide the service and a profit margin. The remainder of the transaction price is recognized over the remaining term of the franchise agreement once the BurgerFi restaurant has been opened. Because we are transferring licenses to access our intellectual property during a contractual term, revenue is recognized on a straight-line basis over the license term. Generally, payment for the initial franchise fee is received upon execution of the licensing agreement These payments are initially deferred and recognized as revenue as the performance obligations are satisfied.
Franchise deposits received in advance for locations not expected to open within one year are classified as long-term liabilities. Forfeiture of deposits is recognized as other revenue once contracts have been terminated for failure to comply. All terminations are communicated to the franchisee in writing using formal termination letters.
Revenue from sales-based royalties is recognized as the related sales occur. Rebates from vendors received on franchisees sales are also recognized as revenue from sales-based royalties.
Our contract liabilities consist of initial franchise fees and the related direct costs, which we refer to as deferred initial franchise fees, are deferred until the franchisee begins operations.
Concentration of Credit Risk
Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to concentrations of credit risk consist primarily of cash. The Company places its temporary cash investments with financial institutions and during 2020 and 2019 there were amounts on deposit in excess of federal insurance limits.
Income Taxes
Prior to the Business Combination, the Company, with the consent of its members, had elected to be taxed as a partnership under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code and similar state provisions. Partnerships generally are not subject to Federal and state income taxes. In lieu of corporation income taxes, the partners reflect their respective share of the Company’s taxable income or loss on their individual income tax returns. Therefore, there was no federal income tax recorded by the Company for the year ended December 31, 2019 and for the period from January 1, 2020 through December 15, 2020. In these periods, there were neither liabilities nor deferred tax assets relating to uncertain income tax positions taken or expected to be taken on the tax return.
The Successor is being taxed as a corporation. Both the Predecessor and Successor are subject to state income taxes. The Successor has recorded a tax benefit of approximately $366,000 for the period from December 16, 2020 through December 31, 2020.
Our ability to realize deferred tax assets
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method. A deferred tax asset or liability is recognized whenever there are (1) future tax effects from temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and (2) operating loss, capital loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to the years in which those differences are expected to be recovered or settled.
Tax assets are recognized to the extent the Company believes these assets will more likely than not be realized. In evaluating the realizability of deferred tax assets, the Company considers all available positive and negative evidence, including the interaction and the timing of future reversals of existing temporary differences, recent operating results, tax-planning strategies, and projected future taxable income. In projecting future taxable income, we begin with historical results from continuing operations and incorporate assumptions including future operating income, the reversal of temporary differences and the implementation of feasible and prudent tax planning strategies. These assumptions require significant judgment and are consistent with the plans and estimates we are using to manage our underlying business. In evaluating the objective evidence that historical results provide, we consider three years of cumulative operating income.
When considered necessary, a valuation allowance is recorded to reduce the carrying amount of the deferred tax assets to their anticipated realizable value. Our evaluation of the realizability of our deferred tax assets is subject to change because of many factors including, among others, any changes in our business plans, changing economic
conditions, the competitive environment and the effect of future tax legislation. Should future taxable income vary from projected taxable income, we may be required to adjust our valuation allowance in future years.
Net operating loss and credit carryforwards are subject to various limitations and carryforward periods. As of December 31, 2020, we have deferred tax assets for net operating loss carryforwards of $366,000, as well as federal net operating loss carryforwards of $6,944,000 which may be carried forward indefinitely. We believe it is more likely than not that the benefit from the net operating loss carryforwards will be realized. There is no valuation allowance as of December 31, 2020.
Income tax uncertainties
We measure income tax uncertainties in accordance with a two-step process of evaluating a tax position. We first determine if it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination based on the technical merits of the position. A tax position that meets the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold is then measured, for purposes of financial statement recognition, as the largest amount that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon effective settlement. We currently have no unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2020.
We accrue interest related to uncertain tax positions in “Interest expense” and penalties in “General and administrative expenses.” At December 31, 2020, we had no amounts accrued for interest and for penalties.
The statute of limitations for the Company’s state tax returns varies, but generally the Company’s federal and state income tax returns from its 2017 fiscal year forward remain subject to examination. We believe that adequate provisions have been made for any liabilities, including interest and penalties that may result from the completion of these examinations.
New Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) issued ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) (“ASU 2016-02”), which requires lessees to recognize lease assets and lease liabilities on the balance sheet for all leases with terms longer than 12 months and disclose certain information about the leasing arrangements. Leases will be classified as either finance or operating, with classification affecting the pattern of expense recognition in the income statement. As an emerging growth company, this guidance will be effective for our fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of the adoption of the new standard on the consolidated financial statements.
The FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (“Topic 326”) in June 2016, subsequently amended by various standard updates. This guidance replaces the incurred loss impairment methodology in current GAAP with a methodology that reflects expected credit losses and requires consideration of a broader range of reasonable and supportable information when determining credit loss estimates and requires financial assets to be measured net of expected credit losses at the time of initial recognition. As an emerging growth company, this guidance will be effective for our fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (“Topic 740”) as part of its Simplification Initiative. This guidance provides amendments to simplify the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740. The amendments also improve consistent application of and simplify GAAP for other areas of Topic 740 by clarifying and amending existing guidance. This guidance is effective for annual and interim reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2020, and early adoption is permitted. We are currently evaluating the full impact this guidance will have on our consolidated financial statements.
In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-04 Reference Rate Reform (“Topic 848”) to provide optional guidance for a limited period of time, from March 12, 2020 through December 31, 2022, to ease the burden of financial reporting due to reference rate reform. An entity can elect to utilize the guidance at any time during the period. The Company is currently evaluating the effect this guidance will have on the consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40), an amendment that simplifies the accounting for certain financial instruments with characteristics of liabilities and equity, including convertible instruments and contracts on an entity’s own equity. The amendment simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current accounting guidance. In addition, the
amendment removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, which will permit more equity contracts to qualify for the exception, and also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The amendment is effective beginning after December 15, 2023 for smaller reporting companies. We are currently evaluating the impact of the adoption of this guidance on our consolidated financial statements.
Sale of Dania Beach Restaurant to Franchisee
In February 2020, the Company entered into an asset purchase agreement with an unrelated third-party for the sale of substantially all of the assets used in connection with the operation of BF Dania Beach, LLC for an aggregate purchase price of $1,299,000. From January to March 2020, the Company received three cash deposits totaling $906,500 in connection with this transaction. The closing of this transaction has been delayed due additional negotiation that has been on-going through the report date of April 28, 2021. In the event the transaction is terminated, the Company will resume operation of the restaurant, and return the $906,500 to the unrelated third-party purchaser. Assets used in the operations of BF Dania Beach, LLC have been classified as held for sale and the deposit is included within the December 31, 2020 consolidated balance sheet.