Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations, estimates and assumptions concerning events and financial trends that may affect our future operating results or financial position. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Until February 12, 2021, we were a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on February 4, 2020 for the purpose of effecting capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We consummated our initial public offering on May 26, 2020 and our business combination on February 12, 2021.
Recent Developments
On February 12, 2021, we consummated the previously announced business combination (the “Business Combination”) pursuant to the terms of the Business Combination Agreement, dated as of November 19, 2020 (the “Business Combination Agreement”), by and among Longview Acquisition Corp. (“Longview”), Clay Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Merger Sub”), and Butterfly Network, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Legacy Butterfly”).
Immediately upon the consummation of the Business Combination and the other transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement (collectively, the “Transactions”, and such completion, the “Closing”), Merger Sub merged with and into Legacy Butterfly, with Legacy Butterfly surviving the business combination as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Longview (the “Merger”).
In connection with the Transactions, Longview changed its name to “Butterfly Network, Inc.” and Legacy Butterfly changed its name to “BFLY Operations, Inc.”
As a result of the Business Combination, each share of Longview Class B common stock that was issued and outstanding as of immediately prior to the effective time of the Merger (the “Effective Time”) was converted, on a one-for-one basis, into shares of the Company’s Class A common stock. The Business Combination had no effect on the Longview Class A common stock that was issued and outstanding as of immediately prior to the Effective Time, which continues to remain outstanding.
Pursuant to the Merger, at the Effective Time, (i) each share of Legacy Butterfly capital stock (other than the Legacy Butterfly Series A preferred stock) that was issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time was automatically canceled and converted into the right to receive 1.0383 shares of the Company’s Class A common stock, rounded down to the nearest whole number of shares; (ii) each share of Legacy Butterfly Series A preferred stock that was issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time was automatically canceled and converted into the right to receive 1.0383 shares of the Company’s Class B common stock, rounded down to the nearest whole number of shares; (iii) each option to purchase shares of Legacy Butterfly common stock, whether vested or unvested, that was outstanding and unexercised as of immediately prior to the Effective Time was assumed by the Company and became an option (vested or unvested, as applicable) to purchase a number of shares of the Company’s Class A common stock equal to the number of shares of Legacy Butterfly common stock subject to such option immediately prior to the Effective Time multiplied by 1.0383, rounded down to the nearest whole number of shares, at an exercise price per share equal to the exercise price per share of such option immediately prior to the Effective Time divided by 1.0383 and rounded up to the nearest whole cent; (iv) each Legacy Butterfly restricted stock unit outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time was assumed by the Company and became a restricted stock unit with respect to a number of shares of the Company’s Class A common stock, rounded to the nearest whole share, equal to the number of shares of Legacy Butterfly common stock subject to such Legacy Butterfly restricted stock unit immediately prior to the Effective Time multiplied by 1.0383; and (v) the principal amount plus accrued but unpaid interest, if any, on the Legacy Butterfly convertible notes outstanding as of immediately prior to the Effective Time was automatically canceled and converted into the right to receive shares of the Company’s Class A common stock, with such shares of the Company’s Class A common stock calculated by dividing the outstanding principal plus accrued interest, if any, of each Legacy Butterfly convertible note by $10.00, rounded down to the nearest whole number of shares.
In addition, on February 12, 2021, Longview filed the Second Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation (the “Restated Certificate”) with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware, which became effective simultaneously with the Effective Time. As a consequence of filing the Restated Certificate, the Company adopted a dual class structure, comprised of the Company’s Class A common stock, which is entitled to one vote per share, and the Company’s Class B common stock, which is entitled to 20 votes per share. The Company’s Class B common stock has the same economic terms as the Company’s Class A common stock, but is subject to a “sunset” provision if Jonathan M. Rothberg, Ph.D., the founder of Legacy Butterfly and Chairman of the Company, and other permitted holders of the Company’s Class B common stock collectively cease to beneficially own at least twenty percent (20%) of the number of shares of the Company’s Class B common stock (as such number of shares is equitably adjusted in respect of any reclassification, stock dividend, subdivision, combination or recapitalization of the Company’s Class B common stock) collectively held by Dr. Rothberg and permitted transferees of the Company’s Class B common stock as of the Effective Time.
Our Business after the Business Combination
We are an innovative digital health business with a mission of democratizing healthcare by making medical imaging accessible to everyone around the world. Powered by our proprietary Ultrasound-on-Chip™ technology, our solution addresses the needs of point of care imaging with a unique combination of software and hardware technology. Butterfly iQ, followed by our recently launched Butterfly iQ+, is our first product powered by Butterfly’s Ultrasound-on-Chip™, and is the only ultrasound transducer that can perform “whole-body imaging” in a single handheld probe using semiconductor technology. Our Ultrasound-on-Chip™ reduces the cost of manufacturing, while our software is intended to make the product easy to use and fully integrated with the clinical workflow, accessible on a user’s smartphone, tablet, and almost any hospital computer system connected to the Internet. Through our portable proprietary, handheld solution, protected by a robust intellectual property portfolio and empowered in part by its proprietary software and Artificial Intelligence (“AI”), Butterfly aims to enable earlier detection throughout the body and remote management of health conditions around the world.
The Butterfly iQ / iQ+ is currently cleared by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) and has the CE mark for use by health care practitioners. It is commercially available in over 20 countries including, the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and throughout greater Europe.
Butterfly is focused on driving the adoption of our handheld solution. We look to drive adoption by increasing the touchpoints with our customer, via new sales channels, as well as helping customers understand the power of point of care imaging in clinical decision making expanding its use cases and the settings where it is used. We also invest in upgrading the product. In October 2020, we launched the Butterfly iQ+, a second generation version of our handheld probe which costs less to manufacture and features lower power consumption, faster frame rates and improved interoperability. Additionally, over the course of 2020, we launched multiple new software features which improve image acquisition, interpretation, and ease of use.
We are also focused on improving gross margins by focusing on operational excellence in our supply chain and expanding our customer relationships to incorporate higher margin products.
Results of Operations
Our only activities from inception to December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering, described below, identifying a target company for a business combination and consummating the acquisition of Legacy Butterfly. We did not generate any revenue from inception to December 31, 2020. We generated non-operating income in the form of interest income earned on marketable securities held in our trust account (“Trust Account”). We also incurred expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing the Business Combination.
For the period from February 4, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $3,454,848, which consists of operating costs of $3,774,125 and provision for income taxes of $36,632, offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $355,909.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Longview
On May 26, 2020, we consummated our initial public offering of 36,000,000 units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $360,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 6,133,333 private placement warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant, generating gross proceeds of $9,200,000.
On June 9, 2020, in connection with the underwriters’ election to partially exercise their over-allotment option, we consummated the sale of an additional 4,000,000 units and the sale of an additional 533,333 private placement warrants, generating total gross proceeds of $40,800,000.
On June 26, 2020, in connection with the underwriters’ election to exercise their remaining over-allotment option, we consummated the sale of an additional 1,400,000 units and the sale of an additional 186,667 private placement warrants, generating total gross proceeds of $14,280,000.
Following our initial public offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the private placement warrants, a total of $414,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $23,491,852 in transaction costs, including $8,280,000 of underwriting fees, $14,490,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $721,852 of other offering costs.
For the period from February 4, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $1,166,549. Net loss of $3,454,848 was impacted by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $355,909 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $2,644,208 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities in the Trust Account of $414,333,909 and cash outside the Trust Account of $158,599.
In addition, concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, on November 19, 2020, Longview entered into subscription agreements (the “Subscription Agreements”) with certain institutional investors (the “PIPE Investors”), pursuant to which the PIPE Investors purchased, immediately prior to the closing of the Business Combination, an aggregate of 17,500,000 shares of Longview Class A common stock at a purchase price of $10.00 per share (the “PIPE Financing”).
Butterfly and Legacy Butterfly
Unless noted otherwise, the below discussion of liquidity and capital resources refers to Legacy Butterfly prior to the closing of the Business Combination and to Butterfly after the closing of the Business Combination.
Legacy Butterfly’s primary sources of liquidity has historically been cash flows from operations and issuances of preferred stock and convertible notes. In addition, on February 12, 2021, we completed the Business Combination with Longview, and as a result we received gross proceeds of approximately $589 million. Our primary uses of liquidity are operating expenses, working capital requirements and capital expenditures. Cash flows from operations have been historically negative as we continue to develop new products and services and increase our sales and marketing efforts. We expect to be cash flow negative on an annual basis, although we may have quarterly results where cash flows from operations are positive.
We expect to continue to incur net losses in the short term, as we continue to invest in research and development of our products and invest in the sales and marketing and expand into new markets and verticals.
We expect that the funds raised in connection with the Business Combination and cash flows from operations will be sufficient to meet our liquidity, capital expenditure, and anticipated working capital requirements and fund our operations for at least the next 12 months. We expect to use the funds raised in connection with the Business Combination to scale our sales and marketing capabilities, develop new products and services, and for working capital and general corporate purposes.
Cash
Legacy Butterfly’s cash and cash equivalents balance as of December 31, 2020 was $60.2 million. Our future capital requirements may vary from those currently planned and will depend on various factors, including our rate of revenue growth and the timing and extent of spending on strategic business initiatives.
Cash flows
Comparison of the period for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
The following table summarizes Legacy Butterfly’s sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
Cash flows used in operating activities
Net cash flows used in operating activities represent the cash receipts and disbursements related to Legacy Butterfly’s activities other than investing and financing activities. We expect cash provided by financing activities will continue to be our primary source of funds to support operating needs and capital expenditures for the foreseeable future.
Net cash flows used in operating activities is derived by adjusting our net loss for:
· non-cash operating items such as depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation and other non-cash income or expenses;
· changes in operating assets and liabilities reflect timing differences between the receipt and payment of cash associated with transactions and when they are recognized in results of operations as well as any losses on disposal of fixed assets.
Net cash used in operating activities decreased by $38.7 million, or 32.2%, to $81.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net cash used in operating activities resulted from higher outstanding liabilities of $58.9 million and lower vendor advances of $50.2 million due to a spending ramp in 2019 that did not recur in 2020. The higher outstanding liabilities consisted of purchase commitments accrual of $45.5 million due to minimum purchase commitments for inventory that could not be sold through, as well as higher accrued expenses and other liabilities of $4.7 million and accounts payable of $8.6 million resulting from the timing of payments. The decrease in net cash used in operating activities was also due to an increase of non-cash charges of $13.0 million. The increase of $13.0 million was primarily the result of an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $5.0 million and an increase in inventory write-downs of $4.4 million as well as an impairment charge of $1.4 million with regards to other long term assets.
The offsetting decrease resulted from an increase in net loss of $63 million on a year over year basis and increases in cash used for inventory and accounts receivable of $22.1 million and $3.2 million, respectively. The increase in cash used for inventory is due to maintaining higher levels of inventory on hand for expected sales growth in future years.
Cash flows used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $2.1 million, or 46.8%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to Legacy Butterfly’s lower spending on machinery and equipment and leasehold improvements.
Cash flows provided by financing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $54.3 million, reflecting net proceeds from the issuance of $47.9 million in convertible debt, proceeds received of $4.4 million under the Paycheck Protection Program and proceeds of $2 million from exercise of stock options.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities, administrative and support services provided to the Company. We began incurring these fees on May 26, 2020 and continued to incur these fees monthly until the completion of the Business Combination.
The underwriters in our initial public offering were entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $14,490,000 in the aggregate, which was paid in connection with the closing of the Business Combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, the common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted, for Class A redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable taxes, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A redeemable common stock outstanding since issuance. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted, for Class B non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing net loss less income attributable to Class A redeemable common stock, by the weighted average number of shares of Class B non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.