ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
THE FOLLOWING DISCUSSION SHOULD BE READ TOGETHER WITH THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND RELATED NOTES INCLUDED ELSEWHERE IN THIS ANNUAL REPORT ON FORM 10-K.
The following discussion reflects the results of our operations. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the financial statements which are attached to this report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements, including statements regarding our expected financial position, business and financing plans. These statements involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this report, particularly under the headings "Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements."
Unless the context otherwise suggests, "we," "our," "us," and similar terms, as well as references to "BFNH" or "BioForce" all refer to BioForce Nanosciences Holdings, Inc. as of the date of this report.
Coronavirus Impact (COVID-19)
Due to the recent outbreak of the coronavirus reported in many countries worldwide, local and federal governments have issued travel advisories, canceled large scale public events and closed schools. In addition, companies have begun to cancel conferences and travel plans and require employees to work from home. Global financial markets have also experienced extreme volatility and disruptions to capital and credit markets.
Adverse events such as health-related concerns about working in our offices, the inability to travel, potential impact on our business partners and customers, and other matters affecting the general work and business environment could harm our business and delay the implementation of our business strategy.
Management is currently aware of the global and domestic issues arising from the Covid-19 pandemic and the possible direct and indirect effects on the Company's operations which could have a material adverse effect on the Company's current financial position, future results of operations, or liquidity, because its current operations are limited. However, investors should also be aware of factors, which includes the possibility of Covid-19 effects on operational status, could have a negative impact on the Company's prospects and the consistency of progress in the areas of revenue generation, liquidity, and generation of capital resources. These may include: (i) variations in revenue, (ii) possible inability to attract investors for its equity securities or otherwise raise adequate funds from any source should the company seek to do so, (iii) increased governmental regulation or significant changes in that regulation, (iv) increased competition, (v) unfavorable outcomes to litigation involving the Company or to which the Company may become a party in the future, and (vi) a very competitive and rapidly changing operating environment. The adverse events may also adversely impact our ability to raise capital or to continue as a going concern. We continue to monitor the recent outbreak of the coronavirus on our operations. The global economic slowdown and the other risks and uncertainties associated with the pandemic could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and growth prospects. In addition, to the extent the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic adversely affects the Company's business and results of operations, it may also have the effect of heightening many of the other risks and uncertainties which the Company faces.
Going Concern
On December 31, 2020, we had total assets of $39,865 and total liabilities of $399,773. In the absence of significant revenue and profits, we will be completely dependent on additional debt and equity financing. If we are unable to raise needed funds on acceptable terms, we will not be able to execute our business plan, develop or enhance existing services, take advantage of future opportunities, if any, or respond to competitive pressures or unanticipated requirements. If we do not obtain sufficient capital, we will not be able to continue operations.
As of December 31, 2020, BioForce had an accumulated deficit of $159,170,307, which included a net loss of $158,408,555 reported for the year ended December 31, 2020. Also, during the year ended December 31 2020, we used net cash of $80,196 for operating activities. These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
While we are attempting to generate revenues, our cash position may not be significant enough to support our daily operations. Management intends to raise additional funds by way of an offering of our debt or equity securities. Management believes that the actions presently being taken to further implement our business plan and generate revenues provide the opportunity for BioForce to continue as a going concern. While we believe in the viability of our strategy to generate revenues and in our ability to raise additional funds, we may not be successful.
Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our capability to further implement our business plan and generate revenues.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019.
Revenues for the Company's year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $-0- from the sales of its vitamin supplements. The decrease of $17,775 as compared to the same period ending December 31, 2019 was attributed to -0- sales of the Company's vitamin supplements.
Cost of Goods Sold for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $-0- compared to $13,415 for year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to -0- unit sales of the "BioForce Eclipse" supplement product in 2020.
Gross margins changed between 2020 and 2019 due to decrease of net sales of units sold of the "BioForce Eclipse" supplement product, -0- units in 2020 compared to 790 units in 2019.
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $-0- as compared to gross profit for $4,360 for the year ended December 31, 2019. A decrease in gross profit for the period ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019 was due to -0- sales of the Company's vitamin supplements.
General and Administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $81,038 compared to $50,898 for December 31, 2019, primarily due to increases in professional service fees.
Net Loss
Net loss for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $158,408,555 and $46,538, respectively. The increase in loss of $158,362,017 was due to equity based compensation to the two Board of Directors.
Liquidity and Capital Resources:
As of December 31, 2020, our assets totaled $39,865, which consisted of cash. The Company's total liabilities were $399,773, which consisted of accounts payable and accrued expenses, accrued board of directors compensation and amounts due to related parties. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had an accumulated deficit of $159,170, 307 and working capital deficit of $359,908.
As of December 31, 2019, our assets totaled $58,895, which consisted of cash and prepaid expenses. The Company's total liabilities were $11,587, which consisted of accounts payable and accrued expenses and stock payable. As of December 31, 2019, the Company had an accumulated deficit of $761,752 and working capital of $47,308.
The Company's significant operating losses raise substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. As indicated herein, we need capital for the implementation of our business plan, and we will need additional capital for continuing our operations. We do not have sufficient revenues to pay our operating expenses at this time. Unless the Company is able to raise working capital, it is likely that the Company will either have to cease operations or substantially change its methods of operations or change its business plan. For the next 12 months the Company has an oral commitment from its CEO to advance funds as necessary to meeting our operating requirement.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $0 for both calendar years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019.
Cash from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $67,166 for year ended December 31, 2020, and was $47,886 for year ended December 31, 2019.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. Preparing financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that impact the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are affected by management's application of accounting policies. Critical accounting policies include revenue recognition and impairment of long-lived assets.
Revenue Recognition
In accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers ("ASC 606"), revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our clients, in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods and services. To achieve this core principle, we apply the following five steps: 1) Identify the contract with a client; (2) Identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) Determine the transaction price; (4) Allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract; and (5) Recognize revenues when or as the company satisfies a performance obligation.
We adopted this ASC on January 1, 2018. Although the new revenue standard is expected to have an immaterial impact, if any, on our ongoing net income, we did implement changes to our processes related to revenue recognition and the control activities within them.
Inventory
Inventory is carried at the lower of cost or (net realizable value), using last- in, first-out method of determining cost. The Company only orders inventory once a sales invoice is obtained. Inventory consists of finished goods of the "BioForce Eclipse" supplement, shipped from our private-label distributor.
All existing inventory is considered current and usable and no reserve for obsolescence was carried for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for employee and non-employee stock-based compensation in accordance with the guidance of FASB ASC Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, which requires all share-based payments, including grants of stock options, to be recognized in the financial statements based on their fair values. The fair value of the equity instrument is charged directly to compensation expense and credited to additional paid-in capital over the period during which services are rendered.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The Company has implemented all new accounting pronouncements that are in effect and is evaluating any that may impact its financial statements, including revenue recognition. The Company does not believe that there are any other new accounting pronouncements that have been issued that might have a material impact on its financial position or results of operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.