ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Throughout this section, the Big 5 Sporting Goods Corporation (“we,” “our,” “us”) fiscal years ended January 3, 2021 and December 29, 2019 are referred to as fiscal 2020 and 2019, respectively. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal 2020 and 2019 includes information with respect to our plans and strategies for our business and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes, the risk factors and the cautionary statement regarding forward-looking information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our fiscal year ends on the Sunday nearest December 31. Fiscal 2020 included 53 weeks and fiscal 2019 included 52 weeks.
Impact of COVID-19
During March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the rapidly growing novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) outbreak to be a global pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted health and economic conditions throughout the United States, as public concern about becoming ill with the virus has led to the issuance of recommendations and/or mandates from federal, state and local authorities to practice social distancing or self-quarantine.
Beginning on March 20, 2020, we temporarily closed more than one-half of our retail store locations in response to state and local shelter orders related to the COVID-19 outbreak. We were subsequently able to gradually reopen all store locations based initially on qualifying as an “essential” business under applicable regulations and later as a result of the easing of regulatory restrictions on retail operations in our market areas. Additionally, and throughout fiscal 2020, the pandemic and the shelter orders that were in place in our market areas negatively impacted customer traffic into the stores that were operating, and certain stores required additional closures during the remainder of the year. In an effort to promote social distancing protocols, we implemented reduced store hours for our open stores and limited the number of customers in our stores at any one time. While these temporary store closures, limited hours of operation and shelter orders in our market areas related to the initial COVID-19 outbreak contributed to a decrease in same store sales in the first half of fiscal 2020 of 7.5% compared with the prior year, as we began reopening stores we recognized significant shifts in consumer demand in favor of fitness and outdoor recreational products, and we rapidly evolved our product assortment. For the second half of fiscal 2020 our same store sales increased by 12.7% compared to the prior year. As of January 3, 2021, all of our stores that were temporarily closed due to COVID-19 had reopened for in-store shopping, subject to continued appropriate social distancing restrictions and with reduced operating hours.
The initial decrease in sales caused by the COVID-19 outbreak caused us to take various actions to enhance our liquidity. On March 27, 2020, we increased borrowings under our $140.0 million existing credit facility to $124.3 million. On March 30, 2020, we exercised the accordion feature and increased the amount available under the revolving credit facility to $165.0 million, and we drew down additional amounts under our revolving credit facility that resulted in long-term revolving credit borrowings of $143.3 million as of March 31, 2020, our highest borrowing level. Additionally, we took measures to reduce expense and preserve capital across the organization, including negotiating lease concessions with landlords that would reduce or defer our lease-related payments, scaling back merchandise inventory orders and extending payment terms with merchandise vendors, implementing temporary and permanent workforce reductions throughout the organization, reducing advertising and the amount of planned capital spending in fiscal 2020, and suspending our quarterly dividend payment, among other measures. Although a certain portion of these expense reduction initiatives only benefited the second quarter of fiscal 2020, the remainder of fiscal 2020 continued to reflect labor expense savings due primarily to reduced store operating hours, as well as advertising expense savings due to significantly reduced advertising activity.
While we began to resume some normal operating activities in the third quarter of fiscal 2020, including resuming workforce rehiring, increasing our inventory purchasing activities and resuming rent payments that were previously deferred, we again became subject to greater restrictions from federal, state and local authorities implemented late in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 as COVID-19 concerns escalated, which required the temporary closure of in-store shopping at our New Mexico stores during the period surrounding the Thanksgiving holiday. As we adjusted to these restrictions, during the third and fourth quarters of fiscal 2020, our sales continued to benefit from increased consumer demand for certain product categories as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, including fitness, firearm-related products and outdoor recreation. This benefit was partially offset by reduced sales in team sports and back-to-school products as a result of limitations on those activities related to COVID-19. Our higher sales, reduced store operating hours and reduced advertising and promotional programs during the third and fourth quarters of fiscal 2020 as a result of COVID-19 contributed to higher profitability.
With our favorable operating results in the second half of fiscal 2020, we were able to fully repay our borrowings while increasing our levels of cash and cash equivalents. As of January 3, 2021, we had paid down our long-term revolving credit borrowings to zero, compared to $124.3 million and $66.6 million outstanding as of the first quarter ended March 29, 2020 and fiscal year ended December 29, 2019, respectively. As of January 3, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $64.7 million compared to cash of $44.2 million and $8.2 million as of the first quarter ended March 29, 2020 and fiscal year ended December 29, 2019, respectively. In response to the strength of our balance sheet, operations and cash flow generation, in the third quarter of fiscal 2020 our Board of Directors reinstated our previously suspended quarterly cash dividend at the previous rate of $0.05 per share of outstanding common stock and paid an additional $0.05 per share of outstanding common stock in recognition that we did not pay a dividend in the second quarter of fiscal 2020. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, our Board of Directors increased our cash dividend to $0.10 per share of outstanding common stock.
Overview
We are a leading sporting goods retailer in the western United States, operating 430 stores and an e-commerce platform under the name “Big 5 Sporting Goods” as of January 3, 2021. We provide a full-line product offering in a traditional sporting goods store format that averages approximately 11,000 square feet. Through our e-commerce platform, we also offer selected products online. E-commerce sales for fiscal 2020 and 2019 were not material. Our product mix includes athletic shoes, apparel and accessories, as well as a broad selection of outdoor and athletic equipment for team sports, fitness, camping, hunting, fishing, home recreation, tennis, golf, and winter and summer recreation. We supplement our traditional sports merchandise mix with an assortment of other products that we purchase through opportunistic buys of vendor over-stock or close-out merchandise.
We believe that over our 66-year history we have developed a reputation with the competitive and recreational sporting goods customer as a convenient neighborhood sporting goods retailer that consistently delivers value on quality merchandise. Our stores carry a wide range of products at competitive prices from well-known brand name manufacturers, including adidas, Coleman, Columbia, Everlast, New Balance, Nike, Rawlings, Skechers, Spalding, Under Armour and Wilson. We also offer brand name merchandise produced exclusively for us, private label merchandise and specials on quality items we purchase through opportunistic buys of vendor over-stock and close-out merchandise. We reinforce our value reputation through digital marketing and print advertising in major and local newspapers, and direct mailers, designed to generate customer traffic, drive sales and build brand awareness. We also maintain social media sites to enhance distribution capabilities for our promotional offers and to enable communication with our customers.
Throughout our history, we have emphasized controlled growth. Our store openings during recent years reflect our cautious approach toward store expansion in the current retail environment, which includes increasing e-commerce competition, especially in response to changing consumer buying habits resulting from concerns surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic. The following table summarizes our store count for the periods presented:
(1)
Stores that are relocated are classified as new stores. Sales from the prior location are treated as sales from a closed store and thus are excluded from same store sales calculations.
For fiscal 2021, we anticipate opening approximately five new stores and closing one store.
Executive Summary
Our increased net income for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was mainly attributable to higher net sales and merchandise margins combined with lower selling and administrative expense in fiscal 2020. Higher net sales in fiscal 2020 primarily reflected strong consumer demand for various products as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic for most of the fiscal year, despite reduced sales during the first quarter of fiscal 2020 caused by unfavorable winter weather compared to the first quarter of fiscal 2019. Merchandise margins increased in fiscal 2020 due primarily to a shift in our product sales mix along with reduced promotional activity. Selling and administrative expense for fiscal 2020 declined year over year mainly reflecting lower advertising and employee labor expenses.
•
Net sales for fiscal 2020 increased 4.5% to $1,041.2 million compared to $996.5 million for fiscal 2019. The increase in net sales was primarily attributable to an increase in sales from same stores and added sales from new stores, partially offset by lower sales from closed stores. Net sales in fiscal 2020 also reflected one extra week of activity compared with fiscal 2019.
•
Our same store sales increased 3.0% for fiscal 2020 versus the comparable 53-week period in the prior year. Same store sales in fiscal 2020 increased for our major merchandise category of hardgoods, and decreased for our footwear and apparel categories, and primarily reflected strong consumer demand for various products as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic for most of the fiscal year. Same store sales for a period reflect sales from stores that operated throughout the period as well as the full corresponding prior-year period, and same store sales comparisons exclude sales from stores closed during the comparable periods.
•
Gross profit for fiscal 2020 represented 33.5% of net sales, compared with 31.3% in the prior year. Merchandise margins were 190 basis points higher than the prior year, due primarily to a shift in our product sales mix along with reduced promotions, and occupancy expense as a percentage of net sales was lower in fiscal 2020 compared with the prior year. These favorable impacts were partially offset by higher distribution expense, including costs capitalized into inventory, as a percentage of net sales compared with fiscal 2019.
•
Selling and administrative expense for fiscal 2020 decreased 7.3% to $275.4 million, or 26.5% of net sales, compared to $297.2 million, or 29.8% of net sales, for fiscal 2019. The decrease in selling and administrative expense primarily reflects lower print advertising costs and lower employee labor expense, partially offset by higher company performance-based incentive accruals in fiscal 2020.
•
Net income for fiscal 2020 was $55.9 million, or $2.58 per diluted share, compared to net income of $8.4 million, or $0.40 per diluted share, for fiscal 2019. The increase was driven primarily by increased net sales and merchandise margins and decreased selling and administrative expense in fiscal 2020.
Our principal liquidity requirements are for working capital, capital expenditures and cash dividends. We fund our liquidity requirements primarily through cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operations and borrowings from our revolving credit facility.
•
Operating cash flow for fiscal 2020 was a positive $148.7 million compared to a positive $14.3 million in the prior year. The increase in operating cash flow primarily reflected decreased funding for merchandise inventory as a result of lower inventory levels due to strong consumer demand for various products, combined with higher net income in fiscal 2020.
•
Capital expenditures for fiscal 2020 decreased to $7.3 million from $9.4 million in fiscal 2019 reflecting our initial intent to preserve capital during the COVID-19 pandemic.
•
Borrowings under our credit facility were zero as of January 3, 2021, compared with $124.3 million and $66.6 million as of March 29, 2020 and December 29, 2019, respectively. Our zero borrowings as of January 3, 2021 reflected a full pay-down of the credit facility since the end of the first fiscal quarter when, to support our potential additional liquidity needs during the COVID-19 pandemic, we drew down additional amounts under the facility. We had cash and cash equivalents of $64.7 million as of January 3, 2021, compared to cash of $44.2 million and $8.2 million as of March 29, 2020 and December 29, 2019, respectively. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, we invested excess cash on hand of $50.0 million into highly liquid U.S. Treasury bills.
•
We paid cash dividends in fiscal 2020 of $5.5 million, or $0.25 per share, compared with $4.4 million, or $0.20 per share, in fiscal 2019. As a result of the impact of COVID-19 and as previously announced, our Board of Directors suspended our quarterly cash dividend during the second quarter of fiscal 2020. Our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend of $0.10 per share of outstanding common stock during the third quarter of fiscal 2020, which reflected the reinstatement of our quarterly cash dividend of $0.05 per share of outstanding common stock for the third quarter of fiscal 2020 and also included an additional $0.05 per share of outstanding common stock in recognition that we did not pay a dividend in the second quarter of fiscal 2020. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, our Board of Directors increased our cash dividend to $0.10 per share of outstanding common stock.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth selected items from our consolidated statements of operations by dollar and as a percentage of our net sales, and other financial data, for the periods indicated:
(1)
Fiscal 2020 and 2019 included 53 weeks and 52 weeks, respectively.
(2)
Cost of sales includes the cost of merchandise, net of discounts or allowances earned, freight, inventory reserves, buying, distribution center expense, including depreciation, and store occupancy expense. Store occupancy expense includes rent, amortization of leasehold improvements, common area maintenance, property taxes and insurance.
(3)
Selling and administrative expense includes store-related expense, other than store occupancy expense, as well as advertising, depreciation and amortization, expense associated with operating our corporate headquarters and impairment charges, if any.
(4)
Same store sales for a period reflect net sales from stores that operated throughout the period as well as the full corresponding prior-year period and sales from e-commerce. For purposes of reporting same store sales comparisons to the prior year for fiscal 2020 and 2019, we used comparable 53-week periods.
Net Sales. Net sales increased by $44.7 million, or 4.5%, to $1,041.2 million for fiscal 2020 from $996.5 million for fiscal 2019. The change in net sales was primarily attributable to the following:
•
Same store sales increased by $30.2 million, or 3.0%, for fiscal 2020 versus the comparable prior-year period. The increase in same store sales reflected the following:
o
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, state and local shelter orders were issued in our various market areas that led to the temporary closure of more than one-half of our stores that began on March 20, 2020 and significantly impacted the first and second fiscal quarters of fiscal 2020, resulting in reduced same store sales versus the prior year. Over the first half of the second fiscal quarter, when the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic forced us to operate with a significantly reduced store count, our same store sales decreased by 28.2% compared to the prior-year period. However, as we began reopening stores, we recognized significant shifts in consumer demand and rapidly evolved our product assortment, and for the second half of the second fiscal quarter our same store sales increased by 15.5% compared to the prior year. This positive sales trending continued throughout the remainder of fiscal 2020, as our same store sales increased 12.7% in the second half of fiscal 2020 due to strong consumer demand for various products as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, including fitness, firearm-related products and outdoor recreation, partially offset by reduced sales in team sports and back-to-school products as a result of limitations on those activities related to the pandemic.
o
Same store sales in the first quarter of fiscal 2020 were negatively impacted by challenging winter-weather conditions compared with the same period in the prior year. In the first quarter of fiscal 2019, strong sales of winter-related products were driven by highly favorable cold and wet winter weather conditions across our markets compared with warm and dry winter-weather conditions in the first quarter of fiscal 2020.
o
Sales for our major merchandise category of hardgoods increased during fiscal 2020, partially offset by decreases in our categories of footwear and apparel, due largely to reduced team sports and back-to-school sales as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
o
The increase in same store sales compares to a 1.2% increase in same store sales for fiscal 2019. The increase in same store sales in fiscal 2019 was based on a 52-week comparison to the prior fiscal year.
o
Same store sales for a period normally consist of sales for stores that operated throughout the period and the full corresponding prior-year period, along with sales from e-commerce. Despite the same store sales increase, our same store sales for fiscal 2020 included the negative impact of sales declines resulting from the temporary store closures during the year as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Same store sales comparisons exclude sales from stores permanently closed, or stores in the process of closing, during the comparable periods. Sales from e-commerce in fiscal 2020 and 2019 were not material.
•
Net sales in fiscal 2020 reflected an additional $19.3 million in sales that resulted from one extra week of activity compared with fiscal 2019 as a result of the 53-week fiscal year in 2020.
•
A reduction in sales from permanently closed stores, including a store temporarily closed for the first half of fiscal 2020 due to a fire, was partially offset by added sales from new stores opened since December 30, 2018.
•
We experienced a higher average sale per transaction and decreased customer transactions, due primarily to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019.
Gross Profit. Gross profit increased by $37.2 million to $349.2 million, or 33.5% of net sales, in fiscal 2020 from $312.0 million, or 31.3% of net sales, in fiscal 2019. The change in gross profit was primarily attributable to the following:
•
Net sales increased by $44.7 million, or 4.5%, in fiscal 2020 compared to the prior year.
•
Merchandise margins, which exclude buying, occupancy and distribution expense, increased by a favorable 190 basis points compared with fiscal 2019, when merchandise margins increased by a favorable 66 basis points over the prior year. This increase primarily reflected a shift in our product sales mix along with lower promotional activity.
•
Store occupancy expense decreased by $1.3 million, or a favorable 55 basis points, year over year in fiscal 2020 primarily as a result of the favorable impact in the second quarter from negotiated lease concessions in the amount of $3.1 million in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
•
Distribution expense, including costs capitalized into inventory, increased by $7.8 million, or an unfavorable 53 basis points, compared to the prior year. The increase primarily reflected lower costs capitalized into inventory corresponding to the decrease in merchandise inventories compared with fiscal 2019.
Selling and Administrative Expense. Selling and administrative expense decreased by $21.8 million, or 7.3%, to $275.4 million, or 26.5% of net sales, in fiscal 2020 from $297.2 million, or 29.8% of net sales, in fiscal 2019. The change in selling and administrative expense was primarily attributable to the following:
•
Advertising expense decreased by $17.2 million, due mainly to lower print advertising in fiscal 2020 that resulted from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
•
Store-related expense, excluding occupancy, decreased by $10.0 million, due largely to significantly reduced employee labor and benefit-related expense as a result of temporary workforce reductions and reduced store operating hours in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as decreases in other store operating expenses, partially offset by increased insurance premiums.
o
The decrease in employee labor-related expense included an employee retention credit provided by the U.S. Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) to provide relief for employers subject to closure due to the impact of COVID-19, which reduced employee labor-related expense by $0.9 million for fiscal 2020 compared with fiscal 2019. The decrease in employee labor-related expense was partially offset by an increase in sick leave expense reflecting a California regulatory requirement that employers provide two weeks of COVID-19-related sick-time benefits to employees while they are self-quarantining.
o
The decrease in employee labor-related expense was partially offset by wage pressures that continue to reflect the incremental impact of legislated minimum wage rate increases primarily in California, where over fifty percent of our stores are located. In April 2016, California passed legislation to enact additional state-wide minimum wage rate increases from $10.00 to $15.00 per hour to be implemented in annual increments through fiscal 2022, with annual increases of $0.50 per hour effective in fiscal 2017 and fiscal 2018, and annual increases of $1.00 per hour effective in fiscal 2019 through fiscal 2022. Additionally, certain other jurisdictions within California, including Los Angeles and San Francisco, as well as various other states in which we do business, are implementing their own scheduled increases, which may also include interim impacts effective at various points throughout the year. We estimate that the impact of the California state-wide minimum wage rate increase, combined with the impact of the additional minimum wage rate increases in certain other jurisdictions within California and other states, caused our labor expense to increase by approximately $2.8 million for fiscal 2020 compared with fiscal 2019.
•
Administrative expense increased by $5.4 million, primarily attributable to an increase in company performance-based incentive accruals as well as employee labor and benefit-related expense, partially offset by an insurance recovery of $1.7 million related to a store damaged as a result of a fire and decreases in various other operating expenses that resulted from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, administrative expense in fiscal 2019 was favorably impacted by a settlement that resulted in a gain of $1.1 million related to the termination of a software contract.
Other Income. Other income in fiscal 2020 consisted of a cash condemnation settlement related to eminent domain proceedings, as more fully described in Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Interest Expense. Interest expense decreased to $1.9 million in fiscal 2020 compared with $3.0 million in fiscal 2019, primarily reflecting a zero balance in borrowings under our existing credit facility since July 2020.
Income Taxes. The provision for income taxes increased to $18.4 million for fiscal 2020 compared to $3.3 million for fiscal 2019, primarily reflecting higher pre-tax income in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. Our effective tax rate of 24.8% for fiscal 2020 compared with 28.3% for fiscal 2019 and reflects the write-off of deferred tax assets related to share-based compensation of $0.3 million and $0.4 million in fiscal 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our effective tax rate in fiscal 2020 also reflects a $0.4 million favorable reduction of our previously established valuation allowance related to unused California Enterprise Zone Tax Credits. As a result of the CARES Act, we amended our 2018 income tax return and our effective tax rate for fiscal 2020 reflects a $0.8 million carryback of our 2018 net operating loss to a period with a higher statutory income tax rate.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal liquidity requirements are for working capital, capital expenditures and cash dividends. We fund our liquidity requirements primarily through cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operations and borrowings from our revolving credit facility. We believe our cash and cash equivalents, future cash flows from operations and borrowings from our revolving credit facility will be sufficient to fund our cash requirements for at least the next 12 months.
We ended fiscal 2020 with $64.7 million of cash and cash equivalents compared with $8.2 million of cash as of the end of fiscal 2019. We decreased our revolving credit borrowings to zero in fiscal 2020 from $66.6 million at the end of fiscal 2019. The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for each of the past two fiscal years:
The seasonality of our business historically provides greater cash flows from operations during the holiday and winter selling season. We use operating cash flows and borrowings under our revolving credit facility to fund inventory increases in anticipation of the holidays and our inventory levels are normally at their highest in the months leading up to Christmas. As holiday sales typically reduce inventory levels, this reduction, combined with net income, historically provides us with strong cash flows from operations at the end of our fiscal year.
For fiscal 2020, we experienced weak customer demand for winter-related products in the first quarter as a result of unfavorable warm and dry weather in most of our markets which contributed to higher merchandise inventory and lower operating cash flow compared to the first quarter of 2019. Also beginning on March 20, 2020, we temporarily closed more than one-half of our retail store locations in response to state and local shelter orders related to the COVID-19 outbreak and took measures to reduce expenses across the organization and enhance liquidity, including scaling back merchandise inventory orders and extending payment terms with merchandise vendors, among other measures. We were subsequently able to gradually reopen all store locations during the second quarter and, as we began reopening stores, we recognized significant increases in consumer demand. The combination of increasing sales and margins, reduced expenses and scaled back inventory purchases contributed to substantially higher operating cash flow for the second quarter and first half of fiscal 2020. In the second half of fiscal 2020, strong consumer demand related to COVID-19 continued to drive higher sales and margins which, combined with a reduced cost structure and lower merchandise inventory, produced meaningfully-higher operating cash flow for the year and enabled us to pay down credit facility borrowings to zero.
For fiscal 2019, we increased our purchases of merchandise inventory compared to fiscal 2018 initially as a response to higher customer demand for winter-related products during the first quarter of fiscal 2019 resulting from favorable cold weather conditions experienced in most of our markets in the winter months of fiscal 2019. Higher purchases of merchandise inventory in the fourth quarter, in part due to bringing in certain merchandise early in anticipation of future cost increases, also contributed to higher accounts payable at the end of fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018, and debt was slightly higher year over year. Increased funding of merchandise inventory purchases offset by higher sales in fiscal 2019 resulted in higher merchandise inventory levels at the end of fiscal 2019 versus fiscal 2018 and reduced cash flow from operations year over year.
Operating Activities. Operating cash flows for fiscal 2020 and 2019 were a positive $148.7 million and a positive $14.3 million, respectively. The increase in cash flow from operating activities for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 primarily reflects decreased funding for merchandise inventory as a result of lower inventory levels due to strong consumer demand for various products that arose from the COVID-19 pandemic, combined with higher net income in fiscal 2020.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2020 and 2019 was $5.4 million and $9.2 million, respectively, which were reduced primarily by proceeds from insurance recoveries for fiscal 2020 and 2019 of $1.8 million and $0.2 million, respectively. Our capital spending is primarily to fund store-related remodeling, distribution center equipment, the opening of new stores and computer hardware and software purchases. Capital expenditures by category for each of the last two fiscal years are as follows:
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, our capital expenditures included no new stores in fiscal 2020 and three new stores in fiscal 2019. Capital expenditures in both fiscal years included investment in existing store remodeling to support our merchandising initiatives and enhancement of information security measures to support our infrastructure.
Financing Activities. Financing cash flows for fiscal 2020 and 2019 were a negative $87.0 million and a negative $3.6 million, respectively. For fiscal 2020, net cash was used primarily to pay down borrowings under the credit facility, fund payments of outstanding checks, dividend payments and finance lease payments. For fiscal 2019, net cash was used primarily for dividend payments and finance lease payments, partially offset by increased net borrowings under our revolving credit facility. The increased cash flow used in financing activities for fiscal 2020 compared to the same period last year primarily reflects a full pay-down of borrowings under the credit facility during fiscal 2020 to zero, as a result of improved profitability and cash generation from increased consumer demand related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
As of January 3, 2021, we had revolving credit borrowings of zero and letter of credit commitments of $2.6 million outstanding. These balances compare to borrowings of $66.6 million and letter of credit commitments of $0.7 million outstanding as of December 29, 2019.
In each quarter of fiscal 2019 and the first quarter of fiscal 2020 we paid a quarterly cash dividend of $0.05 per share of outstanding common stock. In an effort to enhance financial flexibility during the COVID-19 pandemic, we implemented expense reduction and cash preservation initiatives throughout the organization. In connection with that effort, in the second quarter of fiscal 2020 our Board of Directors suspended our quarterly cash dividend. In response to improved strength of our balance sheet, operations and cash flow generation, in the third quarter of fiscal 2020, our Board of Directors reinstated our quarterly cash dividend at the previous rate of $0.05 per share of outstanding common stock and declared a cash dividend of $0.10 per share of outstanding common stock. The $0.10 cash dividend reflected our reinstated quarterly cash dividend of $0.05 per share of outstanding common stock for the third quarter of fiscal 2020, and also included an additional $0.05 per share of outstanding common stock in recognition that we did not pay a dividend in the second quarter of fiscal 2020. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend of $0.10 per share of outstanding common stock, which was an increase from the previous quarterly cash dividend of $0.05 per share of outstanding common stock. In the first quarter of fiscal 2021, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.15 per share of outstanding common stock, which will be paid on March 26, 2021 to stockholders of record as of March 12, 2021.
Periodically, we repurchase our common stock in the open market pursuant to programs approved by our Board of Directors. We may repurchase our common stock for a variety of reasons, including, among other things, our alternative cash requirements, existing business conditions and the current market price of our stock. In fiscal 2016, our Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase program for the purchase of up to $25.0 million of our common stock. Under the authorization, we may purchase shares from time to time in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions in compliance with the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission. However, the timing and amount of such purchases, if any, would be at the discretion of our management and Board of Directors, and would depend on market conditions and other considerations. We repurchased no shares of common stock in fiscal 2020 and 2019. Since the inception of our initial share repurchase program in May 2006 through January 3, 2021, we have repurchased a total of 3,528,972 shares for $41.8 million. As of January 3, 2021, a total of $15.3 million remained available for share repurchases under our current share repurchase program.
Loan Agreement. As of January 3, 2021, we had a credit agreement with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association (“Wells Fargo”), as administrative agent, and a syndicate of other lenders, as amended (the “Prior Credit Agreement”), which was terminated and replaced on February 24, 2021 as discussed below.
On February 24, 2021, we entered into a Loan, Guaranty and Security agreement with Bank of America, N.A. (“BofA”), as agent and lender (the “Loan Agreement”), at which time the Prior Credit Agreement was terminated. The Loan Agreement has a maturity date of February 24, 2026 and provides for a revolving credit facility with an aggregate committed availability of up to $150.0 million. We may also request additional increases in aggregate availability, up to a maximum of $200.0 million, in which case the existing lenders under the Loan Agreement will have the option to increase their commitment to accommodate the requested increase. If the lenders do not exercise that option, we may (with the consent of BofA in its role as the administrative agent, not to be unreasonably withheld) seek other lenders willing to provide such commitments. The credit facility includes a $50.0 million sublimit for issuances of letters of credit.
Similar to the Prior Credit Agreement, we may borrow under the Loan Agreement from time to time, provided the amounts outstanding will not exceed the lesser of the then aggregate committed availability (as discussed above) and the Borrowing Base (such lesser amount being referred to as the “Line Cap”). As defined in the Loan Agreement, the “Borrowing Base” generally is comprised of the sum, at the time of calculation, of (a) 90.00% of eligible credit card receivables; plus (b) the cost of eligible inventory (other than eligible in-transit inventory), net of inventory reserves, multiplied by 90.00% of the appraised net orderly liquidation value of eligible inventory (expressed as a percentage of the cost of eligible inventory); plus (c) the cost of eligible in-transit inventory, net of inventory reserves, multiplied by 90.00% of the appraised net orderly liquidation value of eligible in-transit inventory (expressed as a percentage of the cost of eligible in-transit inventory), minus (d) certain agreed-upon reserves as well as other reserves established by BofA in its role as the administrative agent in its reasonable discretion.
Generally, we may designate specific borrowings under the Loan Agreement as either base rate loans or LIBO rate loans. The applicable interest rate on our borrowings is a function of the daily average, over the preceding fiscal quarter, of the excess of the Line Cap over amounts borrowed (such amount being referred to as the “Average Daily Availability”). Those loans designated as LIBO rate loans bear interest at a rate equal to the then applicable adjusted LIBO rate plus an applicable margin as shown in the table below. Those loans designated as base rate loans bear interest at a rate equal to the applicable margin for base rate loans (as shown below) plus the highest of (a) the Federal funds rate, as in effect from time to time, plus one-half of one percent (0.50%), (b) the LIBO rate, plus one percentage point (1.00%), or (c) the rate of interest in effect for such day as announced from time to time within BofA as its “prime rate.” The applicable margin for all loans will be a function of Average Daily Availability for the preceding fiscal quarter as set forth below.
The commitment fee assessed on the unused portion of the credit facility is 0.20% per annum.
Obligations under the Loan Agreement are secured by a general lien on and security interest in substantially all of our assets. The Loan Agreement contains covenants that require us to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio of not less than 1.0:1.0 in certain circumstances, and limits the ability to, among other things, incur liens, incur additional indebtedness, transfer or dispose of assets, change the nature of the business, guarantee obligations, pay dividends or make other distributions or repurchase stock, and make advances, loans or investments. We may generally declare or pay cash dividends or repurchase stock only if, among other things, no default or event of default then exists or would arise from such dividend or repurchase of stock and, after giving effect to such dividend or repurchase, certain availability and/or fixed charge coverage ratio requirements are satisfied, although we are permitted to make up to $5 million of dividend payments or stock repurchases per year without satisfaction of the availability or fixed charge coverage ratio requirements, but dividends or stock repurchases made without satisfying the availability and/or fixed charge coverage ratio requirements will require the establishment of an additional reserve that will reduce borrowing availability under the Loan Agreement for 75 days. The Loan Agreement contains customary events of default, including, without limitation, failure to pay when due principal amounts with respect to the credit facility, failure to pay any interest or other amounts under the credit facility, failure to comply with certain agreements or covenants contained in the Loan Agreement, failure to satisfy certain judgments against us, failure to pay when due (or any other default which permits the acceleration of) certain other material indebtedness in principal amount in excess of $5.0 million, and certain insolvency and bankruptcy events.
The Prior Credit Agreement had a maturity date of September 29, 2022 and, as amended, provided for a line of credit up to $140.0 million, which amount could be increased at our option up to a maximum of $165.0 million. We could also request additional increases in aggregate availability, on an uncommitted basis up to a maximum of $200.0 million. The prior revolving credit facility included a $25.0 million sublimit for issuances of letters of credit and a $20.0 million sublimit for swingline loans. The Prior Credit Agreement provided for LIBO rate loans to bear interest at a rate equal to the applicable adjusted LIBO rate plus an applicable margin, as shown in the table below. The loans designated as base rate loans bore interest at a rate equal to the applicable margin for base rate loans plus the highest of (a) the Federal funds rate in effect plus one-half of one percent, (b) the LIBO rate, plus one percentage point, or (c) the prime interest rate. Under the Prior Credit Agreement, the applicable margin for all loans was a function of Average Daily Availability for the preceding fiscal quarter as set forth below.
The commitment fee assessed on the unused portion of the prior credit facility was 0.20% per annum.
In order to support our liquidity in response to the rapidly growing COVID-19 outbreak, on March 27, 2020, we increased borrowings under our $140.0 million prior credit facility to $124.3 million. On March 30, 2020, we exercised the accordion feature under that facility and drew down additional amounts under the Prior Credit Facility that resulted in long-term revolving credit borrowings of $143.3 million as of March 31, 2020, our highest borrowing level. As a result of improved profitability and cash generation activities in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we paid down to zero our long-term revolving credit borrowings and we had letter of credit commitments of $2.6 million outstanding as of January 3, 2021, compared with borrowings of $66.6 million and letter of credit commitments of $0.7 million as of December 29, 2019. Total remaining borrowing availability, after subtracting letters of credit, was $162.4 million and $72.7 million as of January 3, 2021 and December 29, 2019, respectively.
The following table provides information about our revolving credit borrowings as of and for the periods indicated:
Future Capital Requirements. We had cash and cash equivalents on hand of $64.7 million as of January 3, 2021. We expect capital expenditures for fiscal 2021, excluding non-cash acquisitions, to range from approximately $12.0 million to $16.0 million, primarily for the opening of new stores, store-related remodeling, distribution center equipment and computer hardware and software purchases. For fiscal 2021, we anticipate opening approximately five new stores and closing one store.
In fiscal 2020 and 2019 we paid annual cash dividends of $0.25 per share and $0.20 per share, respectively, of outstanding common stock. In the first quarter of fiscal 2021, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.15 per share of outstanding common stock, which will be paid on March 26, 2021 to stockholders of record as of March 12, 2021.
As of January 3, 2021, a total of $15.3 million remained available for share repurchases under our share repurchase program. We consider several factors in determining when and if we make share repurchases including, among other things, our alternative cash requirements, existing business conditions and the market price of our stock.
Contractual Obligations. Our material contractual obligations include operating lease commitments associated with our leased properties and other occupancy expense, finance lease obligations, borrowings under our credit facility and other liabilities. Operating lease commitments consist principally of leases for our retail store facilities, distribution center and corporate offices. These leases frequently include options which permit us to extend the terms beyond the initial fixed lease term, and we intend to renegotiate most of these leases as they expire. Operating lease commitments also consist of information technology (“IT”) systems hardware and distribution center delivery tractors. Additional information regarding our operating leases is available in Item 2, Properties and Note 7, Lease Commitments, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into arrangements with vendors to purchase merchandise in advance of expected delivery. Because most of these purchase orders do not contain any termination payments or other penalties if cancelled, they are not considered as outstanding contractual obligations.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our critical accounting estimates detailed below are included in our significant accounting policies as described in Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Those consolidated financial statements were prepared in accordance with GAAP. Critical accounting estimates are those that we believe are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expense. Our estimates are evaluated on an ongoing basis and drawn from historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be relevant at the time our consolidated financial statements are prepared. Actual results may differ from our estimates. Management believes that the following accounting estimates are critical and reflect the more significant judgments and estimates we use in preparing our consolidated financial statements.
Valuation of Merchandise Inventories, Net
Our merchandise inventories are made up of finished goods and are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value using the weighted-average cost method that approximates the first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) method. Average cost consists of the direct purchase price of merchandise inventory, net of vendor allowances and cash discounts, in-bound freight-related costs and allocated overhead costs associated with our distribution center.
We record valuation reserves on a quarterly basis for merchandise items with slow-moving or obsolescence exposure and merchandise that has a carrying value that exceeds net realizable value. These reserves are estimates of a reduction in value to reflect inventory valuation at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Factors included in determining slow-moving or obsolescence reserve estimates include recent customer demand, merchandise aging, seasonal trends and decisions to discontinue certain products. Because of our merchandise mix, we have not historically experienced significant occurrences of obsolescence. Our inventory valuation reserves for damaged and defective merchandise, slow-moving or obsolete merchandise and for lower of cost or net realizable value provisions totaled $3.5 million and $3.7 million as of January 3, 2021 and December 29, 2019, respectively, representing approximately 1% of our merchandise inventory for both periods.
A 10% change in our inventory valuation reserves estimate in total as of January 3, 2021, would result in a change in reserves of $0.3 million and a change in pre-tax earnings by the same amount. Our reserves are estimates, which could vary significantly, either favorably or unfavorably, from actual results if future economic conditions, consumer demand and competitive environments differ from our expectations. At this time, we do not believe that there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the future estimates or assumptions that we use to calculate our inventory reserves.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with ASC 360, Property, Plant and Equipment, we review our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable.
Long-lived assets are reviewed for recoverability at the lowest level in which there are identifiable cash flows (“asset group”), usually at the store level. The carrying amount of a store asset group includes stores’ operating lease ROU assets and property and equipment, which consists primarily of leasehold improvements. Factors that could trigger an impairment review include a current-period operating or cash flow loss combined with a history of operating or cash flow losses, and a projection that demonstrates continuing losses or insufficient income over the remaining reasonably certain lease term associated with the use of a store asset group. Other factors may include an adverse change in the business climate or an adverse action or assessment by a regulator in the market of a store asset group.
We evaluate the store asset groups with indicators of impairment by estimating future undiscounted cash flows of a store asset group over its remaining reasonably certain lease term to determine whether the long-lived assets are recoverable. In situations where the carrying amount of the store asset group exceeds the undiscounted cash flows, a fair value of the store asset group is determined using discounted cash flow valuation techniques and impairment is recognized when the carrying amount exceeds the fair value.
We determine the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the asset group by projecting future revenue, gross margin and operating expense for each store under evaluation for impairment. The estimates of future cash flows involve management judgment and are based upon assumptions about expected future operating performance. Assumptions used in these forecasts are consistent with internal planning, and include assumptions about sales growth rates, gross margins, operating expense in relation to the current economic environment and our future expectations, competitive factors in our various markets, inflation, sales trends and other relevant environmental factors that may impact the store under evaluation. The actual cash flows could differ from management’s estimates due to changes in business conditions, operating performance and economic conditions.
The resulting impairment charge, if any, is allocated to the property and equipment, primarily leasehold improvements, and operating lease ROU assets on a pro rata basis using the relative carrying amounts of those assets. The allocated impairment charge to a long-lived asset is limited to the extent that the impairment charge does not reduce the carrying amount of the long-lived asset below its individual fair value. The estimation of the fair value of an ROU asset involves the evaluation of current market value rental amounts for leases associated with ROU assets. The estimates of current market value rental amounts are primarily based on recent observable market rental data of other comparable retail store locations. The fair value of an ROU asset is measured using a discounted cash flow valuation technique by discounting the estimated current and future market rental values using a property-specific discount rate.
Our evaluation resulted in no impairment charges recognized in fiscal 2020 and $0.5 million recognized in fiscal 2019 related to certain underperforming stores. These impairment charges represented property and equipment, which consisted primarily of leasehold improvements.
Any material changes in the sum of our undiscounted cash flow estimates resulting from different assumptions used as of January 3, 2021 for those store asset groups included in our evaluation could result in a material change in the long-lived asset impairment charge for fiscal 2020. Our projections are estimates, which could vary significantly, either favorably or unfavorably, from actual results if future economic conditions, consumer demand and competitive environments differ from our expectations. At this time, we do not believe that there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the future estimates or assumptions that we use to calculate our long-lived asset impairment charge.
Seasonality and Impact of Inflation
We experience seasonal fluctuations in our net sales and operating results, which can suffer when weather does not conform to seasonal norms, such as the first quarter of fiscal 2020 when we experienced warm and dry winter-weather conditions across our markets. Seasonality in our net sales influences our buying patterns which directly impacts our merchandise and accounts payable levels and cash flows. We purchase merchandise for seasonal activities in advance of a season and supplement our merchandise assortment as necessary and when possible during the season. Our efforts to replenish products during a season are not always successful. In the fourth fiscal quarter, which includes the holiday selling season and the start of the winter selling season, we normally experience higher inventory purchase volumes and increased expense for staffing and advertising. If we miscalculate the consumer demand for our products generally or for our product mix in advance of a season, particularly the fourth quarter, our net sales can decline, which can harm our financial performance. A significant shortfall from expected net sales, particularly during the fourth quarter, can negatively impact our annual operating results.
In fiscal 2020 and 2019, the impact of inflation and tariffs on products we purchase was minimal. We have evolved our product mix to include more branded merchandise that we believe gives us added flexibility to adjust selling prices for purchase cost increases. If we are unable to adjust our selling prices for purchase cost increases that might occur, then our merchandise margins will decline, which will adversely impact our operating results. We do not believe that inflation or tariffs had a material impact on our operating results for the reporting periods.
Recently Issued Accounting Updates
See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.