Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with “Item 6 - Selected Consolidated Financial Data” and our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors. We discuss factors that we believe could cause or contribute to these differences below and elsewhere in this report, including those set forth under “Part I-Item 1A - Risk Factors” and under “Forward-Looking Statements and Market Data” in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a global, commercial-stage biotechnology company focused on discovering, developing, manufacturing, and commercializing innovative medicines to improve treatment outcomes and expand access for patients worldwide.
Our research organization has delivered ten molecules into the clinic in our first ten years, including our two lead commercial medicines, BRUKINSA®, a small molecule inhibitor of Bruton’s Tyrosine Kinase (“BTK”) for the treatment of various blood cancers, and tislelizumab, an anti-PD-1 antibody immunotherapy for the treatment of various solid tumor and blood cancers. We are marketing BRUKINSA® in the world’s two largest pharmaceutical markets, the United States and China, and tislelizumab in China, with an established, science-based commercial organization. We have built state-of-the-art biologic and small molecule manufacturing facilities in China to support the potential future demand of our products, and we also work with high quality contract manufacturing organizations (“CMOs”) to manufacture our internally developed clinical and commercial products.
We are a leader in China-inclusive global clinical development, which we believe can facilitate faster and more cost-effective development of innovative medicines. Our internal clinical development capabilities are deep, including a more than 1,600-person global clinical development team that is running more than 60 ongoing or planned clinical trials. This includes more than 25 pivotal or registration-enabling trials for three product candidates that have enrolled more than 12,000 patients and healthy volunteers, of which approximately one-half have been outside of China, as of January 2021. We have over 45 products and product candidates in commercial stage or clinical development, including 7 approved medicines, 5 pending approval, and over 30 in clinical development.
Supported by our development and commercial capabilities, we have entered into collaborations with world-leading biopharmaceutical companies such as Amgen and Novartis to develop and commercialize innovative medicines globally. Since our inception in 2010 in Beijing, we have become a fully integrated global organization of over 5,300 employees in 14 countries and regions, including China, the United States, Europe and Australia.
Recent Developments
On February 17, 2021, we announced that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ("FDA") accepted a supplemental new drug application ("sNDA") for BRUKINSA® for the treatment of adult patients with Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia ("WM"). The Prescription Drug User Fee Act ("PDUFA") target action date is October 18, 2021.
On January 29, 2021, we announced that the Shanghai Stock Exchange (the "SSE") had accepted our listing application for a proposed public offering of our ordinary shares and listing of such shares on the Science and Technology Innovation Board (the “STAR Market”) of the SSE (the “STAR Offering”). The consummation of the STAR Offering is subject to, among other things, market conditions, shareholder approval, and applicable regulatory approvals.
On January 13, 2021, we announced that our anti-PD-1 antibody tislelizumab received approval from the China National Medical Products Administration ("NMPA") for use in combination with chemotherapy as a first-line treatment for patients with advanced squamous non-small cell lung cancer ("NSCLC"). This is the third approval in China for tislelizumab, and its first in a lung cancer indication.
On January 11, 2021, we announced a collaboration and license agreement with Novartis Pharma AG ("Novartis") to develop, manufacture and commercialize tislelizumab in the United States, Canada, Mexico, member countries of the European Union, United Kingdom, Norway, Switzerland, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Russia, and Japan. We have agreed to jointly develop tislelizumab with Novartis in these licensed countries, with Novartis responsible for regulatory submissions after a transition period and for commercialization upon regulatory approvals. In addition, both companies may conduct clinical trials globally to explore combinations of tislelizumab with other cancer treatments, and we have an option to co-detail the product in North America, funded in part by Novartis. The transaction is expected to close in the first quarter of 2021, subject to expiration or early termination of the waiting period under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act.
On December 27, 2020, we announced that three of our innovative oncology medicines were included in the updated National Reimbursement Drug List ("NRDL") by the China National Healthcare Security Administration (NHSA), including our internally-developed anti-PD1 antibody tislelizumab, our internally-developed BTK inhibitor BRUKINSA® (zanubrutinib), and XGEVA® (120-mg denosumab) from our strategic collaboration with Amgen.
On December 7, 2020, we announced that the NMPA approved BLINCYTO® (blinatumomab) for injection for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory ("R/R") B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). The biologics license application ("BLA") had been submitted by Amgen and received priority review by the Center for Drug Evaluation ("CDE") of the NMPA. Developed by Amgen and licensed to us in China under a strategic collaboration commenced earlier in 2020, this is the first approval for BLINCYTO® in China and our first product licensed from Amgen to be newly approved. With this approval, BLINCYTO® has become the first bispecific immunotherapy approved in China.
On November 19, 2020, we announced that the NMPA approved XGEVA® (denosumab) for the prevention of skeletal-related events ("SREs") in patients with bone metastases from solid tumors and in patients with multiple myeloma ("MM"). Developed by Amgen and licensed to BeiGene in China under a strategic collaboration commenced earlier in 2020, XGEVA® is also approved and marketed in China for the treatment of adults and skeletally mature adolescents with giant cell tumor of the bone ("GCTB") that is unresectable or where surgical resection is likely to result in severe morbidity.
Components of Operating Results
Revenue
Product Revenue
We began generating product revenue in September 2017 through our in-license agreement with BMS to distribute the approved cancer therapies REVLIMID®, VIDAZA®, and ABRAXANE® in China. Following approval from the FDA in November 2019, we launched our first internally developed medicine, BRUKINSA®, in the United States. We launched our second internally developed medicine, tislelizumab, in China in March 2020 and in June 2020, we launched BRUKINSA® in China. In July 2020, we began selling XGEVA® under our in-license agreement with Amgen.
Revenues from product sales are recognized when there is a transfer of control from the Company to the customer. The Company determines transfer of control based on when the product is delivered, and title passes to the customer. Revenues from product sales are recognized net of variable consideration resulting from rebates, chargebacks, trade discounts and allowances, sales returns allowances and other incentives. Provisions for estimated reductions to revenue are provided for in the same period the related sales are recorded and are based on contractual terms, historical experience and trend analysis. We expect revenue from our internal product sales to increase during 2021. We received approval for BLINCYTO® in China in December 2020 and plan to launch additional in-licensed products from our collaborations in 2021, and continue to expand our efforts to promote our existing commercial products.
Collaboration Revenue
We recognize collaboration revenues for amounts earned under collaborative and out-licensing arrangements. Prior to the third quarter of 2019, we recorded revenue from our 2017 collaboration and license agreement with BMS for tislelizumab, which was terminated in June 2019. Under this agreement, we received an upfront payment related to the license fee, which was recognized upon the delivery of the license right. Additionally, the portion of the upfront payment related to the reimbursement of undelivered research and development services was deferred and recognized over the performance period of the collaboration arrangement. We recognized the remainder of the deferred research and development services revenue balance upon termination of the collaboration agreement. We also received research and development reimbursement revenue for the clinical trials that BMS opted into until the termination of the collaboration agreement. Pursuant to the terms of the termination agreement, we received a one-time payment of $150 million in June 2019, which was recognized in full at that time because we had no further performance obligations under the collaboration. We also recognized revenue for upfront license fees and milestone payments from a prior collaboration agreement with Merck KGaA, Darmstadt Germany during the year ended December 31, 2018.
Expenses
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales includes the cost of products purchased from Amgen and BMS and distributed in China and the costs to manufacture our internally developed commercial products. Also included in cost of sales are amounts paid to Amgen for its share of net sales or gross margin earned on sales of their in-licensed products. Costs to manufacture inventory in preparation for commercial launch of a product incurred prior to regulatory approval are expensed to research and development expense as incurred. Cost of sales for newly launched products will not be recorded until the initial pre-launch inventory is depleted and additional inventory is manufactured.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of the costs associated with our research and development activities, conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, and activities related to regulatory filings. Our research and development expenses consist of:
•expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations ("CROs"), CMOs, and consultants that conduct and support clinical trials and preclinical studies;
•costs of comparator drugs in certain of our clinical trials;
•manufacturing costs related to pre-commercial activities;
•costs associated with preclinical activities and development activities;
•costs associated with regulatory operations;
•employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel and share-based compensation expense for research and development personnel;
•in-process research and development costs expensed as part of collaboration agreements entered into; and
•other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance and other supplies used in research and development activities.
Our current research and development activities mainly relate to the clinical advancement of our internally developed medicines and drug candidates:
•BRUKINSA® (zanubrutinib), a small molecule inhibitor of BTK;
•tislelizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody against PD-1;
•pamiparib, an investigational selective small molecule inhibitor of PARP1 and PARP2;
•BGB-A1217, an investigational humanized monoclonal antibody against TIGIT;
•BGB-11417, an investigational small molecular inhibitor of Bcl-2;
•lifirafenib, an investigational novel small molecule inhibitor of both the monomer and dimer forms of BRAF;
•BGB-A333, an investigational humanized monoclonal antibody against PD-L1; and
•BGB-A425, an investigational humanized monoclonal antibody against TIM-3.
Research and development activities also include costs associated with in-licensed drug candidates, including:
•R&D expense related to the co-development of pipeline assets under the Amgen collaboration agreement. Our total cost share obligation to Amgen is split between R&D expense and a reduction to the R&D cost share liability;
•sitravatinib, an investigational, spectrum-selective kinase inhibitor, licensed from Mirati Therapeutics, Inc. ("Mirati");
•zanidatamab (ZW25) and ZW49, two investigational bispecific antibody-based product candidates targeting HER2, licensed from Zymeworks Inc. ("Zymeworks");
•BA3071, an investigational CAB-CTLA-4 antibody, licensed from BioAtla, Inc. ("BioAtla");
•BAT1706, an investigational biosimilar to Avastin® (bevacizumab), licensed from Bio-Thera Solutions, Ltd. ("Bio-Thera"); and
•DXP-593 and DXP-604, investigational anti-COVID-19 antibodies, licensed from Singlomics (Beijing DanXu) Biopharmaceuticals Co., Ltd. ("Singlomics").
We expense research and development costs when we incur them. We record costs for certain development activities, such as clinical trials, based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as subject enrollment, clinical site activations or information our vendors provide to us. We expense the manufacturing costs of our internally developed products that are used in clinical trials as they are incurred as research and development expense. We do not allocate employee-related costs, depreciation, rental and other indirect costs to specific research and development programs because these costs are deployed across multiple product programs under research and development and, as such, are separately classified as unallocated research and development expenses.
At this time, it is difficult to estimate or know for certain, the nature, timing and estimated costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the development of our internally developed medicines and drug candidates. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, material net cash inflows will commence from sales of our medicines and drug candidates, if approved. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing such medicines and drug candidates, including the uncertainty of:
•successful enrollment in and completion of clinical trials;
•establishing an appropriate safety and efficacy profile;
•establishing commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers;
•receipt of marketing and other required approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•successfully launching and commercializing our medicines and drug candidates, if and when approved, whether as monotherapies or in combination with our internally developed medicines and drug candidates or third-party products;
•market acceptance, pricing and reimbursement;
•obtaining and maintaining patent and trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity for our medicines and drug candidates;
•continued acceptable safety and efficacy profiles of the products following approval;
•sufficient supply of the products following approval;
•competition from competing products; and
•retention of key personnel.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our medicines and drug candidates would significantly change the costs, timing and viability associated with the commercialization or development of that medicine or drug candidate.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. We expect research and development costs to increase significantly for the foreseeable future as our development programs progress, as we continue to support the clinical trials of our medicines and drug candidates as treatments for various cancers and as we move these medicines and drug candidates into additional clinical trials, including potential pivotal trials. There are numerous factors associated with the successful commercialization of any of our medicines and drug candidates, including future trial design and various regulatory requirements, many of which cannot be determined with accuracy at this time based on our stage of development. Additionally, future commercial and regulatory factors beyond our control may impact our clinical development and commercial programs and plans.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of product promotion costs, distribution costs, salaries and related benefit costs, including share-based compensation for selling, general and administrative personnel. Other selling,
general and administrative expenses include professional fees for legal, consulting, auditing and tax services as well as other direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, travel costs, insurance and other supplies used in selling, general and administrative activities. We anticipate that our selling, general and administrative expenses will increase in future periods to support planned increases in commercialization activities with respect to tislelizumab, BRUKINSA®, XGEVA® and BLINCYTO® and the preparation for potential launch and commercialization of additional in-licensed products from our collaborations and internally developed products, if approved. We also expect selling, general and administrative expenses to increase in future periods to support our research and development efforts, including the continuation of the clinical trials of our treatments for various cancers and the initiation of clinical trials for potential new indications or drug candidates. These cost increases will likely be due to increased promotional costs, increased headcount, increased share-based compensation expenses, expanded infrastructure and increased costs for insurance. We also incur significant legal, compliance, accounting, insurance and investor and public relations expenses associated with being a public company with our ADSs and ordinary shares listed for trading on The NASDAQ Global Select Market and The Hong Kong Stock Exchange, respectively.
Interest Income (Expense), Net
Interest Income
Interest income consists primarily of interest generated from our cash and short-term investments in money market funds, time deposits, U.S. Treasury securities and U.S. agency securities.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest on our bank loans and shareholder loan.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income consists primarily of gains recognized related to equity investments, government grants and subsidies received that involve no conditions or continuing performance obligations by us, realized and unrealized gains and losses related to foreign currency exchange rates, unrealized gains and losses on equity securities, and realized gains and losses on the sale of investments.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Revenue
Total revenue decreased by $119.3 million to $308.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $428.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the cessation of collaboration revenue following the termination of the BMS collaboration agreement in the second quarter of 2019, and the related $150.0 million termination fee that was recognized as revenue. The following table summarizes the components of our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively:
Net product revenue consisted of the following:
Net product revenue was $308.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $222.6 million in the prior year, primarily due to increased sales of our internally-developed products, BRUKINSA® and tislelizumab, as well as initial sales of Amgen's XGEVA®, offset by decreased sales of the BMS products in China. Product revenue for tislelizumab reflects sales since its launch in China in March 2020. Product revenue for BRUKINSA® reflects sales in China since its launch in June 2020, as well as sales in the United States since its launch in November 2019. Product revenue for XGEVA® reflects sales in China since July 2020.
In December 2020, we announced the inclusion of tislelizumab, BRUKINSA®, and XGEVA® in the updated NRDL by the NHSA, effective March 2021. The NRDL’s inclusion is expected to help expand access to these high-quality oncology treatments across China, but we expect net product revenue in China in the first quarter of 2021 to be impacted as the lower NRDL price is applied to tislelizumab, BRUKINSA® and XGEVA® product in the distribution channel. Overall, we expect our internally-developed products and in-licensed products from Amgen to lead to total product revenue growth in 2021, driven by an increase in sales volumes as our launches mature.
We expect product revenue from the in-licensed products from BMS to continue to be impacted by the NMPA’s suspension of the importation, sales and use of ABRAXANE® in China in March 2020 and the subsequent voluntary recall of ABRAXANE® by BMS, as well as increased competition from generic products for REVLIMID® and the loss of VBP status for VIDAZA®. Although the impact of COVID-19 on commercial activities in China lessened in the second half of 2020, there is continued uncertainty regarding the future potential impact of the pandemic both in China and the United States, as well as globally. We do not expect revenue from ABRAXANE® until the NMPA lifts its suspension on the importation, sale and use of ABRAXANE® and qualified drug is manufactured and available for sale in China. We do not know when the NMPA suspension of ABRAXANE® will be lifted and when we will be able to re-commence sales of ABRAXANE®.
We did not have any collaboration revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020. Collaboration revenue totaled $205.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, comprised primarily of a $150.0 million payment received upon termination of the collaboration agreement with BMS for tislelizumab, as well as the revenue recognition of previously deferred amounts. Additionally, we recognized $27.6 million for the reimbursement of research and development costs for the clinical trials that BMS had opted into prior to the agreement being terminated.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales decreased to $70.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $71.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a change in sales mix from lower margin in-licensed products to higher margin internally-developed products.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense increased by $367.5 million, or 39.6%, to $1.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $927.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The following table summarizes the external cost of development programs, upfront license fees, and internal research and development expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
1. Our co-funding obligation for the development of the pipeline assets under the Amgen collaboration for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $231.0 million, of which $117.0 million was recorded as R&D expense. The remaining $114.0 million was recorded as a reduction for the R&D cost share liability.
The increase in research and development expenses for the year December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to:
•an increase of $117.0 million related to expense recognized on co-development fees to Amgen;
•an increase of $59.5 million related to license fees under collaboration agreements; and
•an increase of $18.9 million in external clinical program costs, primarily due to the continued enrollment and expansion of pivotal clinical trials for our tislelizumab program and increases due to the expansion and advancement of and manufacturing costs for our earlier-stage clinical drug candidates.
Internal research and development expense increased $172.2 million, primarily attributable to the expansion of our global development organization including the internalization of previously outsourced activities and the continued development of our clinical and preclinical drug candidates, and included the following:
•$67.6 million increase of employee salary and benefits, primarily attributable to hiring more research and development personnel to support our expanding research and development activities;
•$60.3 million increase of materials and reagent expenses, primarily in connection with the in-house manufacturing of drug candidates used for clinical purposes;
•$16.7 million increase of share-based compensation expense, primarily attributable to our increased headcount, resulting in more awards being expensed related to the growing employee population; and
•$30.5 million increase of facilities, depreciation, office expense, rental fees, and other expenses to support the growth of our organization.
These expense increases were partially offset by a $2.9 million decrease of consulting fees, which was primarily attributable to decreased travel, meeting and seminar expenses related to scientific, regulatory and development consulting activities.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense increased by $211.9 million, or 54.6%, to $600.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $388.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to the following:
•$117.5 million increase in employee salary and benefits, which was primarily attributable to the expansion of our commercial organizations in China and the United States and the hiring of more personnel to support our growing business;
•$36.2 million increase in external commercial expenses, including selling and marketing, market access studies, meeting and seminar expenses, promotional activities, and sponsorship and grant expenses;
•$32.6 million increase in share-based compensation expense, primarily attributable to our increased headcount, resulting in more awards being expensed related to the growing employee population; and
•$25.6 million increase in professional fees, consulting, recruiting, information technology, tax, accounting and audit services; and facility expenses, rental fees, office expenses, and other administrative expenses, primarily attributable to
the global expansion of our business, including the expansion of our commercial operations in China and the United States.
Interest Income, Net
Interest income, net decreased to $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $9.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest income, net, was primarily attributable to higher interest expense related to larger loan balances in 2020 and lower interest earned on our investments.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net increased by $30.3 million to $37.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $7.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was mainly attributable to the gain recognized in conjunction with the deconsolidation of MapKure, unrealized gains on equity securities, and realized gains on sales of available-for-sale securities, as well as foreign currency exchange gains.
Income Tax (Benefit) Expense
Income tax benefit was $17.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with income tax expense of $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to the tax benefit of U.S. share-based compensation deductions in excess of the tax expense on income reported in certain China subsidiaries as adjusted for certain non-deductible expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table represents our cash, short-term investments, and debt balances as of December 31, 2020:
We have incurred annual net losses and negative cash flows from operations since inception, resulting from the funding of our research and development programs and selling, general and administrative expenses associated with our operations, as well as to support the commercialization of our products globally. We incurred net losses of $1.6 billion and $950.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $3.6 billion.
To date, we have financed our operations principally through proceeds from public and private offerings of our securities and proceeds from our collaborations, together with product sales since September 2017. Based on our current operating plan, we expect that our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments as of December 31, 2020 will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months after the date that the financial statements included in this report are issued.
On January 29, 2021, the Shanghai Stock Exchange (the "SSE") accepted our listing application for a proposed public offering of our ordinary shares and listing of such shares on the Science and Technology Innovation Board (the “STAR Market”) of the SSE (the “STAR Offering”). The STAR Offering will be conducted within the PRC, and such shares will be issued to and subscribed for by investors in Renminbi (“RMB”) in the PRC and listed and traded on the STAR Market in RMB (the “RMB Shares”). The number of RMB Shares (including the over-allotment option) to be issued will not exceed 132,313,549 ordinary shares, representing no more than 10% of the sum of the total number of our issued ordinary shares as of January 7, 2021 and the total number of RMB Shares to be issued in the STAR Offering. The STAR Offering is subject to, among other things, market conditions, the approval of our shareholders, and applicable regulatory approvals.
On January 11, 2021, we entered into a collaboration and license agreement with Novartis Pharma AG ("Novartis") to develop, manufacture and commercialize tislelizumab in the United States, Canada, Mexico, member countries of the European Union, United Kingdom, Norway, Switzerland, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Russia, and Japan. Under the agreement, we will receive an upfront cash payment of $650 million from Novartis, which is not included in our cash balance as of December 31, 2020, upon closing of the transaction, which is subject to the expiration or early termination of the waiting period under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act.
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Operating Activities
Cash flows from operating activities is net income adjusted for certain non-cash items and changes in assets and liabilities.
Operating activities used $1.3 billion of cash for the year ended December 31, 2020, which resulted principally from our net loss of $1.6 billion, partially offset by non-cash charges of $166.5 million and a decrease in our net operating assets and liabilities of $150.6 million. The non-cash charges were primarily driven by share-based compensation expense, offset by amortization of the research and development cost share liability. The decrease in working capital were driven largely by increases in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities, offset by increases in inventory and prepaid expenses.
Operating activities used $750.3 million of cash for the year ended December 31, 2019, which resulted principally from our net loss of $950.6 million and an increase in our net operating assets and liabilities of $10.8 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $211.1 million. The increase in working capital was driven primarily by increases in accounts receivable and other non-current assets, as well as a decrease in deferred revenue, offset by increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Investing Activities
Cash flows from investing activities consist primarily of capital expenditures, investment purchases, sales, maturities, and disposals, and upfront payments related to our collaboration agreements.
Investing activities used $3.2 billion of cash for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisting of $5.7 billion in purchases of investment securities, $117.5 million of capital expenditures, and $109.5 million upfront collaboration payments, all of which were offset by sales and maturities of investment securities of $2.8 billion.
Investing activities provided $554.2 million of cash for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was primarily due to cash proceeds from the sale and maturities of investment securities of $1.9 billion, partially offset by purchases of investment securities of $1.2 billion, $69.0 million of upfront payments related to our license agreements and the termination of our collaboration agreement with Merck KGaA, Darmstadt Germany, and capital expenditures of $89.6 million.
Financing Activities
Cash flows from financing activities consist primarily of sale of ordinary shares and ADSs through equity offerings, issuance and repayment of short-term and long-term debt, and proceeds from the sale of ordinary shares and ADSs through employee equity compensation plans.
Financing activities provided $5.2 billion of cash for the year ended December 31, 2020. This consisted primarily of $2.8 billion received from our collaboration with Amgen and $2.1 billion from a registered direct offering of ordinary shares to certain existing investors. Other inflows included $93.1 million from the exercise of employee share options and proceeds from the issuance of shares through our employee share purchase plan, and $433.9 million from loan proceeds. These inflows were partially offset by $144.3 million of repayment of principal under the Shareholder Loan with GET and $28.7 million of cash consideration paid for the acquisition of the remaining 5% minority interest in our subsidiary BeiGene Biologics Co., Ltd.("BeiGene Biologics").
Financing activities provided $85.7 million of cash for the year ended December 31, 2019. This consisted primarily of $67.5 million from bank loans to fund our Guangzhou manufacturing facility and working capital requirements and $47.0 million from the exercise of employee share options. These inflows were partially offset by $32.8 million for repayments of our Suzhou manufacturing facility and working capital bank loans.
Effects of Exchange Rates on Cash
We have substantial operations in the PRC, which generate a significant amount of RMB-denominated cash from product sales and require a significant amount of RMB-denominated cash to pay our obligations. Since the reporting currency of the Company is the U.S. dollar, periods of volatility in exchange rates may have a significant impact on our consolidated cash balances.
Operating Capital Requirements
We expect to continue to incur losses for the foreseeable future and expect these losses to increase in the near term, as we continue to develop and seek regulatory approvals for our product candidates, expand our research and manufacturing facilities and activities, and commercialize both our internally developed and in-licensed products. The size of our future net losses will depend, in part, on the number and scope of our development programs and the associated costs of those programs, our ability to generate product revenue, and the timing and amount of payments we make or receive from arrangements with third parties. If any of our products and product candidates fail in clinical trials or do not gain regulatory approval, or if approved, fail to achieve market acceptance, we may never become profitable. Even if we achieve profitability in the future, we may not be able to sustain profitability in subsequent periods.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•our ability to successfully commercialize our internally developed and in-licensed medicines and drug candidates, if approved;
•the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory reviews and approvals;
•the ability of our drug candidates to progress through clinical development successfully;
•the initiation, progress, timing, costs and results of nonclinical studies and clinical trials for our other programs and potential drug candidates;
•the number and characteristics of the medicines and drug candidates we pursue;
•the costs of establishing or expanding commercial manufacturing capabilities or securing necessary supplies from third-party manufacturers;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims;
•the costs of establishing and expanding our commercial operations and the success of those operations;
•the extent to which we acquire or in-license other products and technologies; and
•our ability to establish and maintain collaboration arrangements on favorable terms, if at all.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we may be required to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaboration agreements, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements, government grants, and other available sources. Under the rules of the SEC, we currently qualify as a “well-known seasoned issuer,” which allows us to file shelf registration statements to register an unspecified amount of securities that are effective upon filing. On May 11, 2020, we filed such a shelf registration statement with the SEC for the issuance of an unspecified amount of ordinary shares (including in the form of ADSs), preferred shares, various series of debt securities and/or warrants to purchase any of such securities, either individually or in units, from time to time at prices and on terms to be determined at the time of any such offering. This registration statement was effective upon filing and will remain in effect for up to three years from filing, prior to which time we may file another shelf registration statement that will be effective for up to three years from filing.
To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our shareholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a holder of ADSs or ordinary shares. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures, or declaring dividends, and may require the issuance of warrants, which could potentially dilute your ownership interest. If we raise additional funds through collaboration agreements, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our products or drug candidates, future revenue streams or research programs, or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity
or debt financings, collaborations or other sources when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market products or drug candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations as of payment due date by period at December 31, 2020:
Operating Lease Commitments
We lease office or manufacturing facilities in Beijing, Shanghai, Suzhou and Guangzhou in China; office facilities in California, Massachusetts, Maryland, and New Jersey in the United States; and in Basel, Switzerland under non-cancelable operating leases expiring on various dates. Payments under operating leases are expensed on a straight-line basis over the respective lease terms. The aggregate future minimum payments under these non-cancelable operating leases are summarized in the table above.
Purchase Commitments
As of December 31, 2020, purchase commitments amounted to $123.4 million, of which $101.3 million related to minimum purchase requirements for supply purchased from CMOs and $22.1 million related to binding purchase order obligations of inventory from BMS and Amgen. We do not have any minimum purchase requirements for inventory from BMS or Amgen.
Debt Obligations
The following table summarizes our short-term debt and long-term bank loans as of December 31, 2020 (amounts in thousands, except for percentage data):
1.The outstanding borrowings bear a floating interest rate benchmarking RMB loan interest rates of financial institutions in the PRC. The loan interest rate was 4.9% as of December 31, 2020.
2.$120.0 million of the Senior Loan was designated to fund the JV share repurchase and repayment of the shareholder loan and $80.0 million was designated for general working capital purposes. The Senior Loan has an original maturity date of October 8, 2021, which is the first anniversary of the first date of utilization of the loan. We may extend the original maturity date for up to two additional twelve-month periods. On October 9, 2020, we drew down $80.0 million of the working capital facility and $118.3 million of the acquisition facility to be used for the JV share repurchase.
3.RMB100.0 million of the Related Party Loan was designated for general corporate purposes and RMB400.0 million was designated for repayment of the Senior Loan, including principal, interest and fees. The loan matures at the earlier of: (i) November 9, 2021, which is one month after the Senior Loan maturity date, if not extended, or (ii) ten business days after the Senior Loan is fully repaid. On September 30, 2020, we drew down the first tranche of $14.7 million (RMB100.0 million).
4.We entered into additional short-term working capital loans with China Industrial Bank and China Merchants Bank to borrow up to RMB1.5 billion in aggregate, with maturity dates ranging from April 19, 2021 to December 16, 2021 during the year ended December 31, 2020. The weighted average interest rate for the short-term working capital loans was approximately 4.4% as of December 31, 2020.
5.On January 22, 2020, our BeiGene Guangzhou Factory subsidiary entered into a nine-year bank loan with China Merchants Bank to borrow up to RMB1.1 billion at a floating interest rate benchmarked against prevailing interest rates of certain PRC financial institutions. In connection with our short-term loan agreements with China Merchants Bank entered into during the year ended December 31, 2020, the line of credit was reduced from RMB1.1 billion to RMB350.0 million. The loan interest rate was 4.4% as of December 31, 2020.
6.The outstanding borrowings bear a floating interest rate benchmarking RMB loan interest rates of financial institutions in the PRC. The loan interest rate was 4.3% as of December 31, 2020.
Interest on Debt
Interest on bank loans and the Related Party Loan is paid quarterly until the respective loans are fully settled. For the purpose of contractual obligations calculation, current interest rates on floating rate obligations were used for the remainder contractual life of the outstanding borrowings.
Co-Development Funding Commitments
Under our collaboration with Amgen, we are responsible for co-funding global development costs for the licensed oncology pipeline assets, up to a total cap of $1.25 billion. We are funding our portion of the co-development costs by contributing cash and/or development services. As of December 31, 2020, our remaining co-development funding commitment was $1.0 billion.
Pension Plan
We maintain a defined benefit pension plan in Switzerland. Funding obligations under the defined benefit pension plan are equivalent to $1.4 million per year based on annual funding contributions in effect as of December 31, 2020 to achieve fully funded status where the market value of plan assets equals the projected benefit obligations. Future funding requirements will be subject to change as a result of future changes in staffing and compensation levels, various actuarial assumptions and actual investment returns on plan assets.
Capital Commitments
We had capital commitments amounting to $45.0 million for the acquisition of property, plant and equipment as of December 31, 2020, which was primarily for BeiGene Guangzhou Factory’s manufacturing facility, expansion of BGC's research and development activities in Guangzhou, China, and research and development operations at our Changping facility in Beijing, China.
Other Business Agreements
We enter into agreements in the ordinary course of business with CROs to provide research and development services. These contracts are generally cancelable at any time by us with prior written notice.
We also enter into collaboration agreements with institutions and companies to license intellectual property. We may be obligated to make future development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments and royalty payments on future sales of specified products associated with these agreements. Payments under these agreements generally become due and payable upon achievement of such milestones or sales. These commitments are not recorded on our balance sheet because the achievement and timing of these milestones are not fixed and determinable. When the achievement of these milestones or sales have occurred, the corresponding amounts are recognized in our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the periods presented we did not have, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC rules, such as relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, which are often referred to
as structured finance or special purpose entities, established for the purpose of facilitating financing transactions that are not required to be reflected on our balance sheets.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP"). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis, and our actual results may differ from these estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, contractual milestones and other various factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
Our most critical accounting policies are summarized below. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for a description of our other significant accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
Effective January 1, 2018, we adopted Accounting Standards Codification, Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”) using the modified retrospective approach.
Under ASC 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration that the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of ASC 606, the entity performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price, including variable consideration, if any; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. The Company only applies the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that the entity will collect the consideration to which it is entitled in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer.
Once a contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606 at contract inception, we review the contract to determine which performance obligations it must deliver and which of these performance obligations are distinct. We recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to each performance obligation when that performance obligation is satisfied or as it is satisfied.
Product Revenue
The Company generates product revenue in China through the sale of its internally developed drugs tislelizumab and BRUKINSA®, and the sale of in-licensed products in China through its agreements with Amgen and BMS. Under the commercial profit share arrangement with Amgen, the Company is the principal for in-licensed product sales to customers in China during the commercialization period and recognizes 100% of net product revenue on these sales. Amounts due to Amgen for its portion of net product sales are recorded as cost of sales. In the United States, the Company generates product revenue from the sale of BRUKINSA®.
In China, the Company sells its internally developed products to multiple distributors, who in turn sell the products to hospitals or pharmacies within their authorized territories to be sold ultimately to patients. In-licensed products are sold to a first-tier distributor who subsequently resells the products to second-tier distributors who ultimately sell the products to health care providers and patients. In the United States, the Company distributes BRUKINSA® through specialty pharmacies and specialty distributors. The specialty pharmacies and specialty distributors subsequently resell the product to health care providers and patients. We are the principal under the product sales, as we control the products with the ability to direct the use of, and obtain substantially all the remaining benefits, from the products before they are sold to the customer. For product sales transactions, we have a single performance obligation, which is to sell the products to our customer. We include variable consideration in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal will not occur and estimate variable consideration from rebates, chargebacks, trade discounts and allowances, sales returns allowances, and other incentives using the expected value method. Revenues for product sales are recognized at a point in time when the single performance obligation is satisfied upon delivery to the customer. Our payment terms are approximately 45-90 days. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. We will reassess estimates for variable consideration periodically. If actual results in the future vary from our estimates, we will adjust these estimates, which would affect net product revenue and earnings in the period such variances become known.
In China, rebates are offered to distributors. We record a provision for rebates at the time of sale based on contracted rates and historical redemption rates. Assumptions used to establish the provision include the level of distributor inventories, sales volumes and contract pricing and estimated acceptance of government pricing or reimbursement amounts (such as provincial acceptance of the NRDL pricing in the PRC). We regularly review the information related to these estimates and adjust the provision accordingly.
In the United States, estimates for variable consideration for which reserves are established at the time of sale include government rebates, chargebacks, trade discounts and allowances, sales returns allowances and other incentives that are offered within contracts between the Company and our U.S. customers, health care providers and other indirect customers. Where appropriate, these estimates take into consideration a range of possible outcomes that are probability-weighted for relevant factors such as our historical experience, current contractual and statutory requirements, specific known market events and trends, industry data and forecasted customer buying and payment patterns.
We base our sales returns allowance on estimated distributor inventories, customer demand as reported by third-party sources, and actual returns history, as well as other factors, as appropriate. For newly launched products where actual returns history is not yet available, the sales returns allowance is initially calculated based on benchmarking data from similar products and industry experience. If the historical or benchmarking data we use to calculate these estimates do not properly reflect future returns, then a change in the allowance would be made in the period in which such a determination is made and revenues in that period could be materially affected. Any changes from the historical trend rates are considered in determining the current sales return allowance. To date, sales returns have not been significant.
Collaboration Revenue
At contract inception, we analyze our collaboration arrangements to assess whether they are within the scope of ASC 808, Collaborative Arrangements (“ASC 808”) to determine whether such arrangements involve joint operating activities performed by parties that are both active participants in the activities and exposed to significant risks and rewards dependent on the commercial success of such activities. For collaboration arrangements within the scope of ASC 808 that contain multiple elements, we first determine which elements of the collaboration are deemed to be within the scope of ASC 808 and those that are more reflective of a vendor-customer relationship and therefore within the scope of ASC 606. For elements of collaboration arrangements that are accounted for pursuant to ASC 808, an appropriate recognition method is determined and applied consistently.
In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under each of our agreements, we perform the five-step model under ASC 606 noted above.
Our collaborative arrangements may contain more than one unit of account, or performance obligation, including grants of licenses to intellectual property rights, agreements to provide research and development services and other deliverables. The collaborative arrangements do not include a right of return for any deliverable. As part of the accounting for these arrangements, we must develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract. In developing the stand-alone selling price for a performance obligation, we consider competitor pricing for a similar or identical product, market awareness of and perception of the product, expected product life and current market trends. In general, the consideration allocated to each performance obligation is recognized when the respective obligation is satisfied either by delivering a good or providing a service, limited to the consideration that is not constrained. Non-refundable payments received before all of the relevant criteria for revenue recognition are satisfied are recorded as advances from customers.
Licenses of Intellectual Property: Upfront non-refundable payments for licensing our intellectual property are evaluated to determine if the license is distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement. For licenses determined to be distinct, we recognize revenues from non-refundable up-front fees allocated to the license at a point in time, when the license is transferred to the licensee and the licensee is able to use and benefit from the license.
Research and Development Services: The portion of the transaction price allocated to research and development services performance obligations is deferred and recognized as collaboration revenue overtime as delivery or performance of such services occurs. R&D reimbursement revenue for revenue attributable to the clinical trials that BMS had opted into is recognized as delivery or performance of such services occurs.
Milestone Payments: At the inception of each arrangement that includes development milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimates the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestones related to our development-based activities may include initiation of various phases of clinical trials. Due to the uncertainty involved in meeting these development-based targets, they
are generally fully constrained at contract inception. We will assess whether the variable consideration is fully constrained each reporting period based on the facts and circumstances surrounding the clinical trials. Upon changes to constraint associated with the developmental milestones, variable consideration will be included in the transaction price when a significant reversal of revenue recognized is not expected to occur and allocated to the separate performance obligations. Regulatory milestones are fully constrained until the period in which those regulatory approvals are achieved due to the inherent uncertainty with the approval process. Regulatory milestones are included in the transaction price in the period regulatory approval is obtained.
Royalties: For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied).
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses represent costs associated with our research and development activities, which primarily include (1) payroll and related costs (including share-based compensation) associated with research and development personnel; (2) costs related to clinical trials and preclinical testing of our technologies under development; (3) costs to develop the product candidates, including raw materials and supplies, product testing, depreciation, and facility related expenses; (4) expenses for research services provided by universities and contract laboratories, including sponsored research funding; and (5) other research and development expenses. Research and development expenses are charged to expense as incurred when these expenditures relate to our research and development services and have no alternative future uses.
Clinical trial costs are a significant component of our research and development expenses. We have a history of contracting with third parties that perform various clinical trial activities on behalf of us in the ongoing development of our product candidates. Expenses related to clinical trials are accrued based on our estimates of the actual services performed by the third parties for the respective period. If the contracted amounts are modified (for instance, as a result of changes in the clinical trial protocol or scope of work to be performed), we will modify the related accruals accordingly on a prospective basis. Revisions in the scope of a contract are charged to expense in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become reasonably certain.
The process of estimating our research and development expenses involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated costs incurred for the services when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advanced payments. We make estimates of our expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in us reporting expenses that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, we have not made any material adjustments to our prior estimates of research and development expenses.
Acquired In-Process Research and Development Expense
We have acquired rights to develop and commercialize drug products and product candidates. Upfront payments that relate to the acquisition of a new drug compound, as well as pre-commercial milestone payments, are immediately expensed as acquired in-process research and development in the period in which they are incurred, provided that the new drug compound did not also include processes or activities that would constitute a “business” as defined under GAAP, the drug has not achieved regulatory approval for marketing and, absent obtaining such approval, has no established alternative future use. Milestone payments made to third parties subsequent to regulatory approval are capitalized as intangible assets and amortized over the estimated remaining useful life of the related product. Royalties owed on sales of the products licensed pursuant to the agreements are expensed in the period the related revenues are recognized.
Income Taxes
We use the liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial reporting and the tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using enacted tax rates that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of a deferred tax asset will not be realized.
We evaluate our uncertain tax positions using the provisions of ASC 740, Income Taxes, which prescribes a recognition threshold that a tax position is required to meet before being recognized in the financial statements. We recognize in the
financial statements the benefit of a tax position which is “more likely than not” to be sustained under examination based solely on the technical merits of the position assuming a review by tax authorities having all relevant information. Tax positions that meet the recognition threshold are measured using a cumulative probability approach, at the largest amount of tax benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon settlement. It is our policy to recognize interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits, if any, as a component of income tax expense.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for information regarding recent accounting pronouncements.