Item 7. Management’s Discussion And Analysis Of Financial Condition And Results Of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on September 10, 2020, for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On February 23, 2021, we entered into a Merger Agreement with Merger Sub and Berkshire Grey, relating to a proposed business combination transaction between us and Berkshire Grey.
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, Merger Sub will merge with and into Berkshire Grey, with Berkshire Grey being the surviving corporation of the merger and a direct, wholly owned subsidiary of the Company.
Subject to the terms and conditions of the Merger Agreement, the consideration to be paid in respect of each share of Berkshire Grey Common Stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the effective time of the Merger will be a number of shares of our newly-issued Class A Stock, equal to (x) $2,250,000,000 divided by (y) the number of shares of Aggregate Fully Diluted Company Stock (as defined in the Merger Agreement). Immediately prior to the Closing, all of the outstanding shares of each series of Berkshire Grey Preferred Stock (as defined in the Merger Agreement) will be converted into shares of Berkshire Grey Common Stock.
At the Closing, each outstanding option to acquire Berkshire Grey Common Stock and each award of restricted Berkshire Grey Common Stock will be converted into the right to receive an option relating to shares of Class A Stock and an award of restricted shares of Class A Stock, as applicable, upon substantially the same terms and conditions, including with respect to vesting and termination-related provisions, as existed prior to the Closing, except that the number of shares underlying such option and the exercise price and the number of shares subject to restricted stock awards, in each case, shall be determined as set forth in the Merger Agreement.
The Merger Agreement contains customary representations, warranties and covenants by the parties thereto and the closing is subject to certain conditions as further described in the Merger Agreement.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below identifying a target for our business combination and activities in connection with the proposed acquisition of Berkshire Grey. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from September 10, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $181,675, which consists of operating costs of $172,935 and an unrealized loss on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $16,467, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $7,721 and interest income from operating bank account of $6.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Until the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of common stock by the Sponsor and loans from our Sponsor.
On December 10, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 28,750,000 Units, which included the full exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option in the amount of 3,750,000 Units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $287,500,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 5,166,667 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.50 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $7,750,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $287,500,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $16,242,914 in transaction costs, including $5,750,000 of underwriting fees, $10,062,500 of deferred underwriting fees and $430,414 of other costs.
For the period from September 10, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $814,294. Net loss of $181,675 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $7,721, an unrealized loss on marketable securities held in our Trust Account $16,467, and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which used $641,365 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $287,491,254. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less deferred underwriting commissions and income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay franchise and income taxes. During the period ended December 31, 2020, we did not withdraw any interest earned on the Trust Account. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $780,292 outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor or certain of our directors and officers may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender.
We may need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our Sponsor, stockholders, officers, directors or third parties. Our officers, directors and Sponsor may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern through March 17, 2022.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, administrative and support services. We began incurring these fees on December 7, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and our liquidation.
The underwriter is entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $10,062,500 in the aggregate. Of such amount, at our sole and absolute discretion, up to $0.175 per Unit, or up to $5,031,250, may be paid to third parties not participating in the Initial Public Offering that assist us in consummating a business combination. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss per Share
Net loss per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in its Initial Public Offering and Private Placement Warrants to purchase an aggregate of 14,750,000 shares in the calculation of diluted loss per share, since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive.
The Company’s statement of operations includes a presentation of loss per share for common stock subject to possible redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of loss per share. Net loss per share, basic and diluted, for common stock subject to possible redemption is calculated by dividing the proportionate share of loss on marketable securities held by the Trust Account by the weighted average number of shares of common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding since original issuance.
Net loss per share, basic and diluted, for non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the net loss, adjusted for loss on marketable securities attributable to Class A common stock subject to possible redemption, by the weighted average number of non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period.
Non-redeemable common stock includes founder shares, alignment shares and non-redeemable Class A common stock as these shares do not have any redemption features. Non-redeemable common stock participates in the loss on marketable securities based on non-redeemable Class A common stock’s proportionate interest.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.