Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those set forth under Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” under the heading “Forward-Looking Statements” before Part I of this report and elsewhere in this report. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report.
General
We manufacture, sell and distribute a diverse portfolio of branded, high quality, shelf-stable and frozen foods and household products, many of which have leading regional or national market shares. In general, we position our branded products to appeal to the consumer desiring a high quality and reasonably priced product. We complement our branded product retail sales with institutional and foodservice sales and private label sales.
Our company has been built upon a successful track record of acquisition-driven growth. Our goal is to continue to increase sales, profitability and cash flows through strategic acquisitions, new product development and organic growth. We intend to implement our growth strategy through the following initiatives: expanding our brand portfolio with disciplined acquisitions of complementary branded businesses, continuing to develop new products and delivering them to market quickly, leveraging our multiple channel sales and distribution system and continuing to focus on higher growth customers and distribution channels.
Since 1996, we have successfully acquired and integrated more than 50 brands into our company. Most recently, on December 1, 2020, we acquired the Crisco oils and shortening business from The J.M. Smucker Company and certain of its affiliates. On February 19, 2020, we acquired Farmwise LLC, maker of Farmwise Veggie Fries, Farmwise Veggie Tots and Farmwise Veggie Rings, from its founders and certain other sellers. On May 15, 2019, we acquired the Clabber Girl Corporation, including the Clabber Girl, Rumford, Davis, Hearth Club and Royal brands of retail baking powder, baking soda and corn starch, and the Royal brand of foodservice dessert mixes, from Hulman & Company. We refer to these acquisitions in this report as the “Crisco acquisition,” the “Farmwise acquisition” and the “Clabber Girl acquisition.” All of these recent acquisitions have been accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting and, accordingly, the assets acquired, liabilities assumed and results of operations of the acquired businesses are included in our consolidated financial statements from the date of acquisition. These acquisitions and the application of the acquisition method of accounting affect comparability between periods.
We are subject to a number of challenges that may adversely affect our businesses. These challenges, which are discussed above before Part I of this report under the heading “Forward-Looking Statements” and in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” include:
Fluctuations in Commodity Prices and Production and Distribution Costs. We purchase raw materials, including agricultural products, oils, meat, poultry, ingredients and packaging materials from growers, commodity processors, other food companies and packaging suppliers located in U.S. and foreign locations. Raw materials and other input costs, such as fuel and transportation, are subject to fluctuations in price attributable to a number of factors. Fluctuations in commodity prices can lead to retail price volatility and intensive price competition, and can influence consumer and trade buying patterns. The cost of raw materials, fuel, labor, distribution and other costs related to our operations can increase from time to time significantly and unexpectedly.
We attempt to manage cost inflation risks by locking in prices through short-term supply contracts and advance commodities purchase agreements and by implementing cost saving measures. We also attempt to offset rising input costs by raising sales prices to our customers. However, increases in the prices we charge our customers may lag behind rising input costs. Competitive pressures also may limit our ability to quickly raise prices in response to rising costs.
We experienced moderate net cost increases for raw materials during fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018 and anticipate higher raw materials cost increases for fiscal 2021. We are currently locked into our supply and prices for a majority of our most significant raw material commodities (excluding, among others, maple syrup and oils) through fiscal 2021 and for most of our needs for oils through the first half of 2021.
In recent years, we have been negatively impacted by industry-wide increases in the cost of distribution, primarily driven by increased freight rates. We attempt to offset all or a portion of these increases through price increases
- 37 -
and cost savings initiatives. For example, despite higher rates for freight in 2019, we were able to offset a portion of the freight cost increase through pricing, which included both list price increases and trade spend optimization. And in 2018 and 2019, we benefited from our distribution re-alignment efforts which have helped to optimize both our shelf-stable and our frozen distribution networks. Freight rates increased significantly during the fourth quarter of 2020 and we expect freight rates to remain elevated in 2021.
We plan to continue managing inflation risk by entering into short term supply contracts and advance commodities purchase agreements from time to time, and, if necessary, by raising prices. To the extent we are unable to avoid or offset any present or future cost increases by locking in our costs, implementing cost saving measures or increasing prices to our customers, our operating results could be materially and adversely affected. In addition, if input costs begin to decline, customers may look for price reductions in situations where we have locked into purchases at higher costs. During the past three years, our cost saving measures and sales price increases have not been sufficient to fully offset increases to our raw material, ingredient and packaging and distribution costs.
Consolidation in the Retail Trade and Consequent Inventory Reductions. As customers, such as supermarkets, discounters, e-commerce merchants, warehouse clubs and food distributors, continue to consolidate and grow larger and become more sophisticated, our retail customers may demand lower pricing and increased promotional programs. These customers are also reducing their inventories and increasing their emphasis on private label products.
Changing Consumer Preferences and Channel Shifts. Consumers in the market categories in which we compete frequently change their taste preferences, dietary habits and product packaging preferences. In addition, the rapid growth of some channels and changing consumer preferences for these channels, in particular in e-commerce, which has expanded significantly following the outbreak of COVID-19, may impact our current operations or strategies more quickly than we planned for, create consumer price deflation, alter the buying behavior of consumers or disrupt our retail customer relationships. As a result of changing consumer preferences for products and channels, we may need to increase or reallocate spending on existing and new distribution channels and technologies, marketing, advertising and new product innovation to protect or increase revenues, market share and brand significance. These expenditures may not be successful, including those related to our e-commerce and other technology-focused efforts, and might not result in trade and consumer acceptance of our efforts. If we are unable to effectively and timely adapt to changes in consumer preferences and channel shifts, our products may lose market share or we may face significant price erosion, and our business, consolidated financial condition, results of operations or liquidity could be materially and adversely affected.
Consumer Concern Regarding Food Safety, Quality and Health. The food industry is subject to consumer concerns regarding the safety and quality of certain food products. If consumers in our principal markets lose confidence in the safety and quality of our food products, even as a result of a product liability claim or a product recall by a food industry competitor, our business could be adversely affected.
Fluctuations in Currency Exchange Rates. Our foreign sales are primarily to customers in Canada. Our sales to Canada are generally denominated in Canadian dollars and our sales for export to other countries are generally denominated in U.S. dollars. During fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, our net sales to customers in foreign countries represented approximately 7.8% and 7.7%, respectively, of our total net sales. We also purchase a significant majority of our maple syrup requirements from suppliers located in Québec, Canada. Any weakening of the U.S. dollar against the Canadian dollar could significantly increase our costs relating to the production of our maple syrup products to the extent we have not purchased Canadian dollars in advance of any such weakening of the U.S. dollar or otherwise entered into a currency hedging arrangement in advance of any such weakening of the U.S. dollar. These increased costs would not be fully offset by the positive impact the change in the relative strength of the Canadian dollar versus the U.S. dollar would have on our net sales in Canada. Our purchases of raw materials from other foreign suppliers are generally denominated in U.S. dollars. We also operate a manufacturing facility in Irapuato, Mexico for the manufacture of Green Giant frozen products and are as a result exposed to fluctuations in the Mexican peso. Our results of operations could be adversely impacted by changes in foreign currency exchange rates. Costs and expenses in Mexico are recognized in local foreign currency, and therefore we are exposed to potential gains or losses from the translation of those amounts into U.S. dollars for consolidation into our consolidated financial statements.
To confront these challenges, we continue to take steps to build the value of our brands, to improve our existing portfolio of products with new product and marketing initiatives, to reduce costs through improved productivity, to address consumer concerns about food safety, quality and health and to favorably manage currency fluctuations.
- 38 -
Update Regarding Impact and Expected Future Impact of COVID-19 on Our Company
Business Impact. Consistent with B&G Foods’ core values, the health and safety of our employees and the quality and safety of our products are our highest priorities. We have implemented a wide range of precautionary measures at our manufacturing facilities and other work locations in response to COVID-19. We have also been working closely with our supply chain partners and our customers to ensure that we can continue to provide uninterrupted service. Thanks to the tremendous efforts of our employees, especially those throughout our supply chain, our ability to serve our customers has not, to date, been materially impacted, although, as discussed below, we have faced supply chain constraints for certain of our products.
We continue to monitor the latest guidance from the CDC, FDA and other federal, state and local authorities regarding COVID-19 and will continue to support our employees and our communities and do our part to keep our nation supplied with food during this difficult time.
Precautionary measures that we have taken to protect our employees, customers, suppliers and other business partners, and to maintain our ability to supply food products, include, among many others, the following:
● the establishment of a COVID-19 task force consisting of our executives and other members of senior management;
● social distancing and the required wearing of face masks at all manufacturing locations and the installation of plexiglass barriers at spots where line workers must work in close proximity;
● enhanced sanitization procedures at all manufacturing and other work locations;
● screening of all employees, including temperature checks, before entering manufacturing facilities;
● quarantining (with pay) of employees who may have been exposed to COVID-19 or who are exhibiting any symptoms of COVID-19;
● manufacturing plant shutdowns for sanitization when necessary upon a COVID-19 positive test;
● the notification of manufacturing employees of any COVID-19 positive tests at their manufacturing location and the quarantining (with pay) of employees who may have had contact with the employee who tested positive;
● instituting a work-from-home policy for office workers, and reducing office capacity and implementing social distancing and other precautionary measures for those workers returning to the office; and
● constant communication with our customers and supply chain partners.
We also rewarded our dedicated employees at our manufacturing facilities by temporarily increasing compensation for our hourly employees, supervisors and managers from March 30, 2020 through February 15, 2021. This is in addition to the continued pay we provide to workers while in quarantine (as described in the bullet points above).
Financial Impact to Date. Due in part to general industry softness as well as reduced volumes resulting from our trade spend optimization efforts designed to reduce unprofitable trade spend during the non-holiday season, net sales in January and February 2020 were lower than in the prior year. However, we began to see a significant increase in net sales in the second half of March 2020 that more than offset the January and February declines as the COVID-19 pandemic reached the United States and consumers began pantry loading and increasing their at-home consumption as a result of increased social distancing and stay-at-home and work-from-home mandates and recommendations. As discussed more fully below, the increase in net sales continued during the remainder of the year. Increases in our net sales to supermarkets, mass merchants, warehouse clubs, wholesalers and e-commerce customers more than offset declines at foodservice customers (our net sales to foodservice customers represented approximately 13% of our overall net sales for fiscal 2019 and 9% for fiscal 2020). To date, we have spent approximately $13.5 million on COVID-19-related costs since the start of the pandemic. This includes our estimated costs to take the precautionary health and safety measures described above, to provide our manufacturing employees the temporary enhanced compensation described above and to continue to pay employees while they are in quarantine. Most of these costs impact our costs of goods sold and the remaining portion impacts our selling, general and administrative expenses.
As described in more detail below, the pandemic has to date overall had a positive impact on our operating results and therefore our net cash provided by operating activities, which increased to $281.5 million for fiscal 2020.
- 39 -
Expectations and Risk Factors in Light of the COVID-19 Pandemic. Increased customer and consumer demand resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, social distancing and stay-at-home and work-from-home mandates and recommendations has had a material positive impact on our company’s net sales, adjusted EBITDA, net cash provided by operating activities and net leverage in fiscal 2020. However, the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business will depend on many factors, including, among others, the duration of social distancing and stay-at-home and work-from-home mandates and recommendations and whether additional waves of COVID-19 will affect the United States and the rest of North America, our company’s ability to continue to operate our manufacturing facilities, maintain our supply chain without material disruption, and procure ingredients, packaging and other raw materials when needed despite unprecedented demand in the food industry, and the extent to which macroeconomic conditions resulting from the pandemic and the pace of the subsequent recovery may impact consumer eating and shopping habits. See Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” of this report for a discussion of certain of the challenges relating to the COVID-19 pandemic that could adversely affect our businesses.
Critical Accounting Policies; Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (GAAP) requires our management to make a number of estimates and assumptions relating to the reporting of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Some of the more significant estimates and assumptions made by management involve revenue recognition as it relates to trade and consumer promotion expenses; pension benefits; acquisition accounting fair value allocations; the recoverability of goodwill, other intangible assets, property, plant and equipment, and deferred tax assets; and the determination of the useful life of customer relationship and finite-lived trademark intangible assets. Actual results could differ significantly from these estimates and assumptions.
Our significant accounting policies are described more fully in note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report. We believe the following critical accounting policies involve the most significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition and Trade and Consumer Promotion Expenses
We offer various sales incentive programs to customers and consumers, such as price discounts, in-store display incentives, slotting fees and coupons. The recognition of expense for these programs involves the use of judgment related to performance and redemption estimates. Estimates are made based on historical experience and other factors. Actual expenses may differ if the level of redemption rates and performance vary from our estimates.
In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued authoritative guidance related to new accounting requirements for the recognition of revenue from contracts with customers. The core principle of the guidance is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled to in exchange for the goods or services.
We adopted this guidance and related amendments as of the first quarter of fiscal 2018, applying the full retrospective transition approach to all contracts. Based on our comprehensive assessment of the new guidance, including our evaluation of the five-step approach outlined within the guidance, we concluded that the adoption would not have a significant impact to our core revenue-generating activities. However, the adoption did result in a change in presentation of certain trade and consumer promotion expenses, specifically in-store display incentives, also referred to as marketing development funds.
We previously recorded in-store display incentives, or marketing development funds, within selling, general and administrative expenses in our consolidated statements of operations. Upon the adoption of the new guidance, many of these cash payments did not meet the specific criteria within the new guidance of providing a “distinct” good or service, and therefore, are required to be presented as a reduction of net sales. The impact of this change resulted in a reduction of net sales, gross profit and selling, general and administrative expenses during fiscal 2018, the first year of adoption, with no impact to net income.
- 40 -
Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets, such as property, plant and equipment, and intangible assets with estimated useful lives are depreciated or amortized over their respective estimated useful lives to their estimated residual values, and reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to estimated undiscounted net future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated undiscounted net future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. Recoverability of assets held for sale is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset or asset group to their fair value less estimated costs to sell. Estimating future cash flows and calculating the fair value of assets requires significant estimates and assumptions by management.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Our total assets include substantial goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets (trademarks). These assets are tested for impairment at least annually and whenever events or circumstances occur indicating that goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets might be impaired. We perform the annual impairment tests as of the last day of each fiscal year. The annual goodwill impairment testing is performed by comparing our company’s market capitalization with our company’s carrying value, including goodwill. If the carrying value of our company exceeds our market capitalization, an impairment charge is recognized for the difference, not to exceed the amount of goodwill. As of January 2, 2021, we had $644.7 million of goodwill recorded in our consolidated balance sheet. Our testing indicates that the implied fair value of goodwill is significantly in excess of the carrying value. Therefore, we believe that only significant changes in the cash flow assumptions would result in an impairment of goodwill.
We test our indefinite-lived intangible assets by comparing the fair value with the carrying value and recognize a loss for the difference. We estimate the fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets based on discounted cash flows that reflect certain third party market value indicators. Calculating our fair value for these purposes requires significant estimates and assumptions by management, including future cash flows consistent with management’s expectations, annual sales growth rates, and certain assumptions underlying a discount rate based on available market data. Significant management judgment is necessary to estimate the impact of competitive operating, macroeconomic and other factors to estimate the future levels of sales and cash flows.
We completed our annual impairment tests for fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 with no adjustments to the carrying values of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets. As of January 2, 2021, we had $1,697.3 million of indefinite-lived intangible assets recorded in our consolidated balance sheet. None of our indefinite-lived intangible assets had a book value in excess of their calculated fair values and the percentage excess of the aggregate calculated fair value over the aggregate book value was approximately 173.3%. However, materially different assumptions regarding the future performance of our businesses could result in significant impairment losses. For example, if future revenues and contributions to our operating results for certain of our brands continue to decline and do not achieve our expected future cash flows, this could result in impairment losses for those brands. In addition, any significant decline in our market capitalization, even if due to macroeconomic factors, could put pressure on the carrying value of our goodwill. A determination that all or a portion of our goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets are impaired, although a non-cash charge to operations, could have a material adverse effect on our business, consolidated financial condition and results of operations.
- 41 -
The table below sets forth the book value as of January 2, 2021 of the indefinite-lived trademarks for each of our brands whose fiscal 2020 net sales were equal to or exceeded 3% of our total fiscal 2020 net sales, for the recently acquired Crisco brand and for “all other brands” in the aggregate (in thousands):
(1) The spices & seasonings acquisition was completed on November 21, 2016. Includes trademark values for multiple brands acquired as part of the acquisition.
(2) The Clabber Girl acquisition was completed on May 15, 2019. Includes trademark values for multiple brands acquired as part of the acquisition.
All assumptions used in our impairment evaluations for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, such as forecasted growth rates and discount rate, are based on the best available market information and are consistent with our internal forecasts and operating plans. We believe these assumptions to be reasonable, but they are inherently uncertain. These assumptions could be adversely impacted by certain of the risks described in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” of this report.
Income Tax Expense Estimates and Policies
As part of the income tax provision process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our income taxes. This process involves estimating our current tax expenses together with assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items for tax and accounting purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities. We then assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income and to the extent we believe the recovery is not likely, we establish a valuation allowance. Further, to the extent that we establish a valuation allowance or increase this allowance in a financial accounting period, we include such charge in our tax provision, or reduce our tax benefits in our consolidated statements of operations. We use our judgment to determine our provision or benefit for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance recorded against our deferred tax assets.
There are various factors that may cause these tax assumptions to change in the near term, and we may have to record a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets. We cannot predict whether future U.S. federal, state and international income tax laws and regulations might be passed that could have a material effect on our results of operations. We assess the impact of significant changes to the U.S. federal, state and international income tax laws and regulations on a regular basis and update the assumptions and estimates used to prepare our consolidated financial statements when new regulations and legislation are enacted. We recognize the benefit of an uncertain tax position that we have taken or expect to take on the income tax returns we file if it is more likely than not that such tax position will be sustained based upon its technical merits.
See “U.S. Tax Act and U.S. CARES Act” below for a discussion of the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act that was signed into law on December 22, 2017, which we refer to as the “U.S. Tax Act,” as well as the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act that was signed into law on March 27, 2020, which we refer to as the “U.S. CARES Act,” and the impact both have had, and may have, on our business and financial results.
- 42 -
Pension Expense
We maintain four company-sponsored defined benefit pension plans covering approximately 34.9% of our employees. Our funding policy for company-sponsored defined benefit pension plans is to contribute annually not less than the amount recommended by our actuaries. The funded status of our pension plans is dependent upon many factors, including returns on invested assets and the level of certain market interest rates, employee-related demographic factors, such as turnover, retirement age and mortality, and the rate of salary increases. Certain assumptions reflect our historical experience and management’s best judgment regarding future expectations. Due to the significant management judgment involved, our assumptions could have a material impact on the measurement of our pension expenses and obligations. We review pension assumptions regularly and we may from time to time make voluntary contributions to our pension plans, which exceed the amounts required by statute. We made total contributions to our company-sponsored pension plans of $11.0 million and $5.0 million during fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, respectively. Changes in interest rates and the market value of the securities held by the plans could materially change, positively or negatively, the funded status of the plans and affect the level of pension expense and required contributions in fiscal 2021 and beyond.
Our discount rate assumption for our four company-sponsored defined benefit plans changed from 3.03% - 3.18% at December 28, 2019 to 2.23% - 2.46% at January 2, 2021. While we do not currently anticipate a change in our fiscal 2021 assumptions, as a sensitivity measure, a 0.25% decrease or increase in our discount rate would increase or decrease our pension expense by approximately $1.0 million to $1.1 million. Similarly, a 0.25% decrease or increase in the expected return on pension plan assets would increase or decrease our pension expense by approximately $0.4 million. During fiscal 2021 we expect to make contributions of approximately $5.5 million for our four company-sponsored defined benefit pension plans.
We also participate in a multi-employer defined benefit pension plan maintained by the labor union representing certain of our employees at our Portland, Maine facility. We make periodic contributions to this plan pursuant to the terms of a collective bargaining agreement. During fiscal 2021, we expect to make contributions of approximately $1.1 million for the multi-employer pension plan. In the event that we withdraw from participation in this plan or substantially reduce our participation in this plan (such as due to a workforce reduction), or if a mass withdrawal were to occur, applicable law could require us to make withdrawal liability payments to the plan, and we would have to reflect that liability on our balance sheet. The amount of our withdrawal liability would depend on the extent of this plan’s funding of vested benefits at the time of our withdrawal. Currently the plan is severely underfunded. Furthermore, our withdrawal liability could increase as the number of employers participating in this plan decreases.
For a more detailed description about our pension expense, the company-sponsored pension plans to which we contribute, and the multi-employer plan to which we contribute, which is in critical and declining status, see Note 12, “Pension Benefits,” to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Acquisition Accounting
Our consolidated financial statements and results of operations include an acquired business’s operations after the completion of the acquisition. We account for acquired businesses using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires that the assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recorded at the date of acquisition at their respective fair values. Any excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Transaction costs are expensed as incurred.
The judgments made in determining the estimated fair value assigned to each class of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, as well as asset lives, can materially impact our results of operations. Accordingly, for significant items, we typically obtain assistance from third party valuation specialists. Determining the useful life of an intangible asset also requires judgment as different types of intangible assets will have different useful lives and certain assets may even be considered to have indefinite useful lives. All of these judgments and estimates can materially impact our results of operations.
In May 2020, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) issued a final rule that amends the financial statement requirements for acquisitions and dispositions of businesses. The amendments primarily relate to disclosures required by Rule 3-05 and Article 11 of Regulation S-X. Among other things, the final rule modifies the tests provided in Rule 1-02(w) of Regulation S-X used to determine whether a subsidiary or an acquired or disposed business is significant and modifies the number of years of audited financial statements required for acquisitions with significance levels greater than specified percentages. We early adopted the rule in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 and we applied
- 43 -
the rule to our financial statement disclosure requirements for the Crisco acquisition. See Note 3, “Acquisitions and Divestitures,” to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
U.S. Tax Act and U.S. CARES Act
On December 22, 2017, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, which we refer to as the “U.S. Tax Act,” was signed into law. The U.S. Tax Act provides for significant changes in the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. The changes in the U.S. Tax Act are broad and complex and we continue to examine the impact the U.S. Tax Act may have on our business and financial results. The U.S. Tax Act contains provisions with separate effective dates but was generally effective for taxable years beginning after December 31, 2017.
Under FASB Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 740, Income Taxes, we are required to revalue any deferred tax assets or liabilities in the period of enactment of change in tax rates. Beginning on January 1, 2018, the U.S. Tax Act lowered the U.S. federal corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21% on our U.S. earnings from that date and beyond. The reduction in the corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21% was effective for our fiscal 2018 and subsequent years. Our consolidated effective tax rate was approximately 25.6% and 27.7% for fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, respectively. We also expect to realize a cash tax benefit for future bonus depreciation on certain business additions, which, together with the reduced income tax rate, we expect to reduce our cash income tax payments.
The U.S. Tax Act also limits the deduction for net interest expense (including the treatment of depreciation and other deductions in arriving at adjusted taxable income) incurred by a corporate taxpayer to 30% of the taxpayer’s adjusted taxable income. In fiscal 2019 this limitation resulted in an increase to our taxable income of $30.2 million, and we accordingly established a deferred tax asset of $7.4 million without a valuation allowance.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act, which we refer to as the “U.S. CARES Act,” was signed into law. The U.S. CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions related to net operating loss carryback periods, modifications to the interest deduction limitation and technical corrections to tax depreciation for qualified improvement property. The U.S. CARES Act increased the adjusted taxable income limitation from 30% to 50% for business interest deductions for tax years beginning in 2019 and 2020 and the limitation will revert back to 30% in future periods. This modification increased the allowable interest expense deduction and resulted in a net operating loss (NOL) for the year 2019. We were able to carryback the 2019 NOL and receive a tax refund of $7.2 million in fiscal 2020. The NOL carryback to the 2014 and 2015 tax years generated a refund of previously paid income taxes at an approximate 35% federal tax rate. This resulted in a benefit related to tax rate differential of $2.6 million in fiscal 2020, $2.3 million of which was recorded as a discrete item in the first quarter of 2020. We were not subject to an interest expense deduction limitation in fiscal 2020. See Note 10, “Income Taxes,” to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
The U.S. Treasury issued several regulations supplementing the U.S. Tax Act in 2018, including detailed guidance clarifying the calculation of the mandatory tax on previously unrepatriated earnings, application of the existing foreign tax credit rules to newly created categories and expanding details for application of the base erosion tax on affiliate payments. These regulations are to be applied retroactively and did not materially impact our 2019 or 2020 tax rates. See Note 10, “Income Taxes,” to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
- 44 -
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth the percentages of net sales represented by selected items for fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 reflected in our consolidated statements of operations. The comparisons of financial results are not necessarily indicative of future results:
As used in this section, the terms listed below have the following meanings:
Net Sales. Our net sales represents gross sales of products shipped to customers plus amounts charged to customers for shipping and handling, less cash discounts, coupon redemptions, slotting fees and trade promotional spending, including marketing development funds.
Gross Profit. Our gross profit is equal to our net sales less cost of goods sold. The primary components of our cost of goods sold are cost of internally manufactured products, purchases of finished goods from co-packers, a portion of our warehousing expenses plus freight costs to our distribution centers and to our customers.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Our selling, general and administrative expenses include costs related to selling our products, as well as all other general and administrative expenses. Some of these costs include administrative, marketing and internal sales force employee compensation and benefits costs, consumer advertising programs, brokerage costs, a portion of our warehousing expenses, information technology and communication costs, office rent, utilities, supplies, professional services, severance, acquisition/divestiture-related and non-recurring expenses and other general corporate expenses.
Amortization Expense. Amortization expense includes the amortization expense associated with customer relationships, finite-lived trademarks and other intangible assets.
Net Interest Expense. Net interest expense includes interest relating to our outstanding indebtedness, amortization of bond discount and amortization of deferred debt financing costs (net of interest income).
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt. Loss on extinguishment of debt includes costs relating to the retirement of indebtedness, including repurchase premium, if any, and write-off of deferred debt financing costs and unamortized discount, if any.
Other Income. Other income includes income or expense resulting from the remeasurement of monetary assets denominated in a foreign currency into U.S. dollars for financial reporting purposes and the non-service portion of net periodic pension cost and net periodic post-retirement benefit costs.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Certain disclosures in this report include non-GAAP financial measures. A non-GAAP financial measure is defined as a numerical measure of our financial performance that excludes or includes amounts so as to be different from the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP in our consolidated balance
- 45 -
sheets and related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income, changes in stockholders’ equity and cash flows.
Base Business Net Sales. Base business net sales is a non-GAAP financial measure used by management to measure operating performance. We define base business net sales as our net sales excluding (1) the net sales of acquisitions until the net sales from such acquisitions are included in both comparable periods and (2) net sales of discontinued or divested brands. The portion of current period net sales attributable to recent acquisitions for which there is no corresponding period in the comparable period of the prior year is excluded. For each acquisition, the excluded period starts at the beginning of the most recent fiscal period being compared and ends on the first anniversary of the acquisition date. For discontinued or divested brands, the entire amount of net sales is excluded from each fiscal period being compared. We have included this financial measure because our management believes it provides useful and comparable trend information regarding the results of our business without the effect of the timing of acquisitions and the effect of discontinued or divested brands.
The definition of base business net sales set forth above, as it relates to acquisitions, was modified during the third quarter of 2019 from the definition we had most recently used. Under our most recent prior definition of base business net sales, for each acquisition, the excluded period started at the beginning of the most recent fiscal period being compared and ended on the last day of the quarter in which the first anniversary of the date of acquisition occurred. Our management believes that it is more useful to measure base business net sales on a partial quarter basis based upon the actual period of comparable ownership instead of adjusting for an entire quarter.
A reconciliation of base business net sales to net sales for fiscal 2020 and 2019 follows (in thousands):
(1) For fiscal 2020, primarily includes $33.7 million of net sales from an additional seven and one-half months of Clabber Girl net sales and $27.8 million of net sales from one month of Crisco net sales. The Clabber Girl acquisition closed on May 15, 2019 and the Crisco acquisition closed on December 1, 2020.
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Before COVID-19 Expenses. EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA before COVID-19 expenses are non-GAAP financial measures used by management to measure operating performance. We define EBITDA as net income before net interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization and loss on extinguishment of debt. We define adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA adjusted for cash and non-cash acquisition/divestiture-related expenses, gains and losses (which may include third party fees and expenses, integration, restructuring and consolidation expenses, amortization of acquired inventory fair value step-up and gains and losses on the sale of assets); non-recurring expenses, gains and losses, including distribution restructuring expenses, severance and other expenses relating to the separation of our former chief executive officer in fiscal 2020 and a workforce reduction in fiscal 2019; gains and losses related to changes in the fair value of contingent liabilities from earn-outs; the non-cash accounting impact of our inventory reduction plan; intangible asset impairment charges and related asset write-offs; loss on product recalls, including customer refunds, selling, general and administrative expenses and the impact on cost of sales. We define adjusted EBITDA before COVID-19 expenses as adjusted EBITDA adjusted for COVID-19 expenses.
Management believes that it is useful to eliminate these items because it allows management to focus on what it deems to be a more reliable indicator of ongoing operating performance and our ability to generate cash flow from operations. We use EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA before COVID-19 expenses in our business operations to, among other things, evaluate our operating performance, develop budgets and measure our performance against those budgets, determine employee bonuses and evaluate our cash flows in terms of cash needs. We also present EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA before COVID-19 expenses because we believe they are useful indicators of our historical debt capacity and ability to service debt and because covenants in our credit agreement and our senior notes indentures contain ratios based on these measures. As a result, reports used by internal management during monthly operating reviews feature the EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA before COVID-19 expenses metrics. However, management uses these metrics in conjunction with traditional GAAP operating
- 46 -
performance and liquidity measures as part of its overall assessment of company performance and liquidity, and therefore does not place undue reliance on these measures as its only measures of operating performance and liquidity.
EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA before COVID-19 expenses are not recognized terms under GAAP and do not purport to be alternatives to operating income, net income or any other GAAP measure as an indicator of operating performance. EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA before COVID-19 expenses are not complete net cash flow measures because EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA before COVID-19 expenses are measures of liquidity that do not include reductions for cash payments for an entity’s obligation to service its debt, fund its working capital, capital expenditures and acquisitions and pay its income taxes and dividends. Rather, EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA before COVID-19 expenses are two potential indicators of an entity’s ability to fund these cash requirements. EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA before COVID-19 expenses are not complete measures of an entity’s profitability because they do not include certain costs and expenses and gains and losses described above. Because not all companies use identical calculations, this presentation of EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA before COVID-19 expenses may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies. However, EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA before COVID-19 expenses can still be useful in evaluating our performance against our peer companies because management believes these measures provide users with valuable insight into key components of GAAP amounts.
A reconciliation of EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA before COVID-19 expenses to net income and to net cash provided by operating activities for fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, along with the components of EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA before COVID-19 expenses, follows (in thousands):
(1) Loss on extinguishment of debt for fiscal 2019 includes the write-off of deferred debt financing costs of $1.2 million relating to the redemption of all outstanding borrowings under our 4.625% senior notes due 2021.
(2) Acquisition/divestiture-related and non-recurring expenses for fiscal 2020 of $17.2 million primarily includes $10.5 million of acquisition and integration expenses for the Crisco, Farmwise and Clabber Girl acquisitions, and $6.7 million of severance and other separation expenses primarily relating to the separation of our former chief executive officer in fiscal 2020 and a workforce reduction in fiscal 2019 and other non-recurring expenses. Acquisition/divestiture-related and non-recurring expenses for fiscal 2019 of $21.5 million primarily includes acquisition and integration expenses for the Clabber Girl acquisition, transition expenses for the Pirate Brands sale, and severance and other expenses primarily relating to a workforce reduction in fiscal 2019.
- 47 -
(3) Inventory reduction plan impact relates to our 2018 inventory reduction plan. For fiscal 2019, inventory reduction plan impact of $16.4 million includes the trailing non-cash accounting impact of the underutilization of our manufacturing facilities in 2018 as we reduced inventory during the implementation of the inventory reduction plan.
(4) For fiscal 2020, amortization of acquisition-related inventory step-up of $1.3 million primarily relates to the purchase accounting adjustments made to inventory acquired in the Crisco acquisition. For fiscal 2019, amortization of acquisition-related inventory step-up of $0.9 million relates to the purchase accounting adjustments made to inventory acquired in the Clabber Girl acquisition.
(5) COVID-19 expenses for fiscal 2020 of $13.5 million primarily include temporary enhanced compensation for our manufacturing employees; compensation that we continue to pay manufacturing employees while in quarantine (which is incremental to the compensation we pay to the manufacturing employees who produce our products while others are in quarantine); and expenses relating to other precautionary health and safety measures.
(6) Our divestiture of Pirate Brands during the fourth quarter of 2018 resulted in a gain on sale during 2018 of approximately $176.4 million. The gain on sale negatively impacted our income taxes for fiscal 2019 by approximately $73.9 million, which includes cash tax payments we made during fiscal 2019 of $44.7 million and a cash tax benefit we otherwise would have expected to receive of approximately $29.2 million. Excluding the negative tax impact of the gain on sale, our net cash provided by operating activities for fiscal 2019 would have been approximately $120.4 million.
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Diluted Earnings Per Share. Adjusted net income and adjusted diluted earnings per share are non-GAAP financial measures used by management to measure operating performance. We define adjusted net income and adjusted diluted earnings per share as net income and diluted earnings per share adjusted for certain items that affect comparability. These non-GAAP financial measures reflect adjustments to net income and diluted earnings per share to eliminate the items identified in the reconciliation below. This information is provided in order to allow investors to make meaningful comparisons of our operating performance between periods and to view our business from the same perspective as our management. Because we cannot predict the timing and amount of these items, management does not consider these items when evaluating our company’s performance or when making decisions regarding allocation of resources.
A reconciliation of adjusted net income and adjusted diluted earnings per share to net income for fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, along with the components of adjusted net income and adjusted diluted earnings per share, follows (in thousands):
(1) Loss on extinguishment of debt for fiscal 2019 includes the write-off of deferred debt financing costs and unamortized discount of $1.2 million (or $0.9 million, net of tax) relating to the redemption of all outstanding borrowings under our 4.625% senior notes due 2021.
(2) Acquisition/divestiture-related and non-recurring expenses for fiscal 2020 primarily includes acquisition and integration expenses for the Crisco, Farmwise and Clabber Girl acquisitions, and severance and other separation expenses primarily relating to the separation of our former chief executive officer in fiscal 2020 and a workforce reduction in fiscal 2019 and other non-recurring expenses. Acquisition/divestiture-related and non-recurring expenses for fiscal 2019 primarily includes acquisition and integration expenses for the Clabber Girl acquisition, transition expenses for the Pirate Brands sale, and severance and other expenses primarily relating to a workforce reduction in fiscal 2019.
- 48 -
(3) Inventory reduction plan impact relates to our 2018 inventory reduction plan. For fiscal 2019, inventory reduction plan impact of $16.4 million (or $12.4 million, net of tax) includes the trailing non-cash accounting impact of the underutilization of our manufacturing facilities in 2018 as we reduced inventory during the implementation of the inventory reduction plan.
(4) For fiscal 2020, amortization of acquisition-related inventory step-up of $1.3 million (or $1.0 million, net of tax) primarily relates to the purchase accounting adjustments made to inventory acquired in the Crisco acquisition. For fiscal 2019, amortization of acquisition-related inventory step-up of $0.9 million (or $0.7 million, net of tax) relates to the purchase accounting adjustments made to inventory acquired in the Clabber Girl acquisition.
(5) Interest expense for fiscal 2020 includes the accelerated amortization of deferred debt financing costs of $1.1 million (or $0.8 million, net of tax), resulting from our voluntary partial prepayment of tranche B term loans.
(6) Fiscal 2020 includes a $2.3 million tax benefit associated with the U.S. CARES Act, which was recorded during the first quarter of 2020.
(7) Tax true-ups for fiscal 2020 reflects $0.9 million of non-deductible compensation expenses related to the separation of our former chief executive officer in fiscal 2020 and $0.5 million for the impact of enacted state rate changes and other tax adjustments.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019
Net Sales. Net sales for fiscal 2020 increased $307.5 million, or 18.5%, to $1,967.9 million from $1,660.4 million for fiscal 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to materially increased net sales beginning in March (as compared to prior year) resulting from increased demand for our products due to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by supply chain constraints for certain of our products as a result of increased demand. Our net sales also benefited from acquisitions and from one extra reporting week in fiscal 2020 (which occurred in the third quarter) compared to fiscal 2019. Acquisitions benefited our net sales in fiscal 2020 by $63.0 million, which primarily includes $33.7 million of net sales from an additional seven and one-half months of Clabber Girl net sales and $27.8 million of net sales from one month of Crisco net sales. The Clabber Girl acquisition closed on May 15, 2019 and the Crisco acquisition closed on December 1, 2020. We estimate that the additional week in fiscal 2020 contributed approximately $35.0 million to our net sales.
Base business net sales for fiscal 2020 increased $244.5 million, or 14.7%, to $1,904.9 million from $1,660.4 million for fiscal 2019. The increase in base business net sales reflected an increase in unit volume of $209.8 million and an increase in net pricing (inclusive of the impact of our 2019 list price increases, the trade spend optimization program we initiated in 2019, and a temporarily lower trade spend environment in the industry during the first half of the year) and the impact of product mix of $35.8 million, or 2.2% of base business net sales, partially offset by the negative impact of foreign currency of $1.1 million.
Net sales of all Green Giant products in the aggregate (including Le Sueur) increased $112.2 million, or 21.3%, in fiscal 2020, as compared to fiscal 2019. Net sales of Green Giant shelf stable (including Le Sueur), increased $64.8 million, or 39.7%, for fiscal 2020. Net sales of Green Giant frozen increased $48.9 million, or 13.5%, for fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019.
See Note 16, “Net Sales by Brand,” to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report, for detailed information regarding total net sales by brand for fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 for each of our brands that equaled or exceeded approximately 3% of our fiscal 2020 or fiscal 2019 net sales and for all other brands in the aggregate.
- 49 -
The following table sets forth the most significant base business net sales increases and decreases by brand for fiscal 2020:
(1) Includes net sales of the Le Sueur brand.
(2) Includes net sales for multiple brands acquired as part of the spices & seasonings acquisition that we completed on November 21, 2016. Does not include net sales for Dash and our other legacy spices & seasonings brands.
(3) For fiscal 2020, includes net sales of Clabber Girl only from May 15, 2020 through January 2, 2021, as net sales prior to May 15, 2020 are not included in base business net sales. Clabber Girl was acquired on May 15, 2019. See Note 3, “Acquisitions and Divestitures,” to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report, for detailed information.
Gross Profit. Gross profit was $481.7 million for fiscal 2020, or 24.5% of net sales. Excluding the negative impact of $5.0 million of acquisition/divestiture-related expenses, the amortization of acquisition-related inventory fair value step-up and non-recurring expenses included in cost of goods sold during fiscal 2020, our gross profit would have been $486.7 million, or 24.7% of net sales. Gross profit was $383.1 million for fiscal 2019, or 23.1% of net sales. Excluding the negative impact of $22.0 million of acquisition/divestiture-related expenses, the amortization of acquisition-related inventory fair value step-up and non-recurring expenses included in cost of goods sold during fiscal 2019, which includes expenses related to the trailing non-cash accounting impact of our 2018 inventory reduction plan, our gross profit would have been $405.1 million, or 24.4% of net sales.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $25.5 million, or 15.8%, to $186.2 million for fiscal 2020 from $160.7 million for fiscal 2019. The increase was composed of increases in general and administrative expenses of $10.7 million, selling expenses of $8.2 million, consumer marketing expenses of $7.7 million and warehousing expenses of $2.0 million, partially offset by a decrease in acquisition/divestiture-related and non-recurring expenses of $3.1 million. Expressed as a percentage of net sales, selling, general and administrative expenses improved by 0.2 percentage points to 9.5% for fiscal 2020, compared to 9.7% for fiscal 2019.
Amortization Expense. Amortization expense increased $0.6 million to $19.1 million for fiscal 2020 from $18.5 million for fiscal 2019 due to the Crisco and Farmwise acquisitions completed in fiscal 2020.
Operating Income. As a result of the foregoing, operating income increased $72.6 million, or 35.6%, to $276.4 million for fiscal 2020 from $203.8 million for fiscal 2019. Operating income expressed as a percentage of net sales increased to 14.0% in fiscal 2020 from 12.3% in fiscal 2019.
Net Interest Expense. Net interest expense increased $3.5 million, or 3.6%, to $101.6 million for fiscal 2020 from $98.1 million in fiscal 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to the following factors: (1) additional interest expense of $1.5 million resulting from one extra week in the third quarter of 2020, (2) the accelerated amortization of $1.1 million of deferred debt financing costs resulting from our voluntary partial prepayment of tranche B term loans in the third quarter of 2020, and (3) an increase in average long-term debt outstanding during fiscal 2020 as compared to
- 50 -
fiscal 2019. Net interest expense is expected to increase in fiscal 2021 primarily as a result of incremental borrowings we made in the fourth quarter of 2020 to fund the Crisco acquisition and related fees and expenses.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt. We did not have any loss on extinguishment of debt for fiscal 2020. Loss on extinguishment of debt for fiscal 2019 includes the write-off of deferred deft financing costs of $1.2 million relating to the redemption of all outstanding borrowings under our 4.625% senior notes due 2021. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Debt” below.
Other Income. Other income for fiscal 2020 primarily includes the non-service portion of net periodic pension cost and net periodic post-retirement benefit costs of $2.6 million and the remeasurement of monetary assets denominated in a foreign currency into U.S. dollars of less than $0.1 million. Other income for fiscal 2019 includes the non-service portion of net periodic pension cost and net periodic post-retirement benefit costs of $1.2 million and the remeasurement of monetary assets denominated in a foreign currency into U.S. dollars of less than $0.1 million.
Income Tax Expense. Income tax expense increased $16.1 million to $45.4 million in fiscal 2020 from $29.3 million for fiscal 2019, primarily due to materially increased net sales, as described above. See “U.S. Tax Act and U.S. CARES Act” above for a discussion of the impact of the tax legislation on income tax expense.
Fiscal 2019 Compared to Fiscal 2018
For a discussion of fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018, please refer to our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K, Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, filed with the SEC on February 26, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary liquidity requirements include debt service, capital expenditures and working capital needs. See also, “Dividend Policy” and “Commitments and Contractual Obligations” below. We fund our liquidity requirements, as well as our dividend payments and financing for acquisitions, primarily through cash generated from operations and external sources of financing, including our revolving credit facility.
Cash Flows
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities. Net cash provided by operating activities increased $235.0 million to $281.5 million for fiscal 2020 from $46.5 million for fiscal 2019. The increase was largely due to higher net income, primarily attributable to the positive impact of increased base business unit volume on our net sales as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the addition of one extra reporting week in fiscal 2020, and increased net sales due to one month of net sales of Crisco and an extra seven and one-half months of net sales of Clabber Girl during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. The increase in net cash provided by operating activities was also due to the negative impact to income taxes of approximately $73.9 million in fiscal 2019 resulting from our divestiture of Pirate Brands in the fourth quarter of 2018, which included cash tax payments of $44.7 million made during the second quarter of 2019 and a cash tax benefit we otherwise would have expected to receive during the second quarter of 2019 of approximately $29.2 million. In addition, we experienced a positive impact to income taxes of approximately $7.2 million in fiscal 2020 as a result of the U.S. CARES Act in the form of a tax refund. The increase in net cash provided by operating activities also reflected favorable working capital comparisons in fiscal 2020 compared to the fiscal 2019, primarily comprised of inventories, trade accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities increased $444.2 million to $568.9 million for fiscal 2020 from $124.7 million for fiscal 2019. Net cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2020 includes the $539.3 million purchase price paid for the Crisco acquisition and net cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2019 includes the $82.4 million purchase price (net of cash acquired of $2.2 million) paid for the Clabber Girl acquisition. The increase in payments for acquisitions of businesses was partially offset by a reduction in capital expenditures from $42.4 million in fiscal 2019 compared to $26.7 million in fiscal 2020.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities increased $250.3 million from $328.0 million for fiscal 2020 from $77.7 million for fiscal 2019. The increase was primarily driven by net borrowings under our revolving credit facility of $235.0 million during fiscal 2020 compared to net repayments under our revolving credit facility of $50.0 million during fiscal 2019 and $34.7 million of payments for repurchases of common stock in fiscal 2019 compared to no payments for repurchases of common stock in fiscal 2020, partially offset
- 51 -
by lower net proceeds from issuance of long-term debt of $221.6 million in fiscal 2020 as compared to net proceeds from issuance of long-term debt of $300.0 million in fiscal 2019.
Cash Income Tax Payments. We made net cash tax payments of approximately $9.8 million (comprised of $17.4 million of cash tax payments less $7.6 million of cash tax refunds received, including a $7.2 million refund received as a result of the U.S. CARES Act, as discussed below) and $47.5 million during fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, respectively. The decrease was primarily attributable to $44.7 million of cash tax payments made in fiscal 2019 relating to the fiscal 2018 gain on sale of Pirate Brands. We believe that we will realize a benefit to our cash taxes payable from amortization of our trademarks, goodwill and other intangible assets for the taxable years 2021 through 2035. In fiscal 2020, our cash taxes were positively impacted by the U.S. CARES Act, which allowed us to carryback our 2019 net operating loss and receive a tax refund of $7.2 million in fiscal 2020. In fiscal 2019 our cash taxes were negatively impacted by the U.S. Tax Act’s limitations on the deductibility of interest expense. See “U.S. Tax Act and U.S. CARES Act” above for a discussion of the impact and expected impact of the U.S. CARES Act and the U.S. Tax Act on our cash income tax payments, including the impact the U.S. Tax Act had in fiscal 2019 and is expected to have in fiscal 2021 and beyond on our interest expense deductions. If there is a change in U.S. federal tax policy or, in the case of the interest deduction, a change in our net interest expense relative to our adjusted taxable income that eliminates, limits or reduces our ability to amortize and deduct goodwill and certain intangible assets or the interest deduction we receive on our substantial indebtedness, or otherwise that reduces any of these available deductions or results in an increase in our corporate tax rate, our cash taxes payable may increase further, which could significantly reduce our future liquidity and impact our ability to make interest and dividend payments and have a material adverse effect on our business, consolidated financial condition, results of operations and liquidity.
Dividend Policy
For a discussion of our dividend policy, see the information set forth under the heading “Dividend Policy” in Part II, Item 5 of this report.
Acquisitions
Our liquidity and capital resources have been significantly impacted by acquisitions and may be impacted in the foreseeable future by additional acquisitions. As discussed elsewhere in this report, as part of our growth strategy we plan to expand our brand portfolio with disciplined acquisitions of complementary brands. We have historically financed acquisitions by incurring additional indebtedness, issuing equity and/or using cash flows from operating activities. Our interest expense has over time increased as a result of additional indebtedness we have incurred in connection with acquisitions and will increase with any additional indebtedness we may incur to finance future acquisitions. Although we may subsequently issue equity and use the proceeds to repay all or a portion of the additional indebtedness incurred to finance an acquisition and reduce our interest expense, the additional shares of common stock would increase the amount of cash flows from operating activities necessary to fund dividend payments.
We financed the Crisco acquisition, completed in December 2020, with revolving loans under our existing credit facility, a portion of which we subsequently refinanced with add-on tranche B term loans. We financed the Farmwise acquisition, completed in February 2020, with cash on hand. We financed the Clabber Girl acquisition, completed in May 2019, with cash on hand and additional revolving loans under our credit facility. The impact of future acquisitions, whether financed with additional indebtedness or otherwise, may have a material impact on our liquidity and capital resources.
Debt
See Note 7, “Long-Term Debt,” to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report for a description of our senior secured credit agreement, including our revolving credit facility and tranche B term loans, our 5.25% senior notes due 2025, and our 5.25% senior notes due 2027. See also “-Acquisitions” above regarding the long-term debt incurred in connection with the Crisco acquisition.
Stock Repurchase Program
On March 11, 2020, our board of directors authorized an extension of our stock repurchase program from March 15, 2020 to March 15, 2021. In extending the repurchase program, our board of directors also reset the repurchase authority to up to $50.0 million. We did not repurchase any shares of common stock during fiscal 2020. Therefore, as of
- 52 -
January 2, 2021, we had $50.0 million available for future repurchases of common stock under the stock repurchase program.
Under the authorization, we may purchase shares of common stock from time to time in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions in compliance with the applicable rules and regulations of the SEC.
The timing and amount of future stock repurchases, if any, under the program will be at the discretion of management, and will depend on a variety of factors, including price, available cash, general business and market conditions and other investment opportunities. Therefore, we cannot assure you as to the number or aggregate dollar amount of additional shares, if any, that will be repurchased under the program. We may discontinue the program at any time. Any shares repurchased pursuant to the program will be retired.
See Note 12, “Pension Benefits,” to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report for disclosure relating to shares of our company’s common stock purchased by our defined benefit pension plans.
Future Capital Needs
On January 2, 2021, our total long-term debt of $2,334.1 million, net of our cash and cash equivalents of $52.2 million, was $2,281.9 million. Stockholders’ equity as of that date was $831.9 million.
Our ability to generate sufficient cash to fund our operations depends generally on our results of operations and the availability of financing. Our management believes that our cash and cash equivalents on hand, cash flow from operating activities and available borrowing capacity under our revolving credit facility will be sufficient for the foreseeable future to fund operations, meet debt service requirements, fund capital expenditures, make future acquisitions, if any, and pay our anticipated quarterly dividends on our common stock.
We expect to make capital expenditures of approximately $50.0 million in the aggregate during fiscal 2021. Our projected capital expenditures for fiscal 2021 primarily relate to productivity and cost saving initiatives, asset sustainability projects, information technology (hardware and software), and the Crisco integration.
Seasonality
Sales of a number of our products tend to be seasonal and may be influenced by holidays, changes in seasons or certain other annual events. In general our sales are higher during the first and fourth quarters.
We purchase most of the produce used to make our frozen and shelf-stable vegetables, shelf-stable pickles, relishes, peppers, tomatoes and other related specialty items during the months of June through October, and we generally purchase the majority of our maple syrup requirements during the months of April through August. Consequently, our liquidity needs are greatest during these periods.
Inflation
See “-General-Fluctuations in Commodity Prices and Production and Distribution Costs” above.
Contingencies
See Note 14, “Commitments and Contingencies,” to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2(s), “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Recently Issued Accounting Standards - Pending Adoption,” to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
As of January 2, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
- 53 -
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations and commitments principally include obligations associated with our outstanding indebtedness, future purchase obligations and future pension obligations as set forth in the following table as of January 2, 2021:
(1) Expected interest payments on long-term debt are based on principal amounts outstanding, scheduled maturity dates and interest rates at January 2, 2021. See Note 7, “Long-Term Debt,” to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 for further information as to our long-term debt interest obligations.
(2) See Note 13, “Leases” to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 for further information as to our operating lease obligations.
(3) For the purposes of this table, purchase obligations represent agreements to purchase goods or services (such as raw materials, commodities, packaging, other materials and supplies and co-manufacturing arrangements) that are enforceable and legally binding on B&G Foods and that specify all significant terms, including: fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. The purchase obligations in the above table do not represent our entire expected future purchases for goods and services, which are significantly higher than the amounts set forth above. The table does not include purchase obligations under contracts that may be cancelled by B&G Foods without material penalty. Any amounts reflected on our consolidated balance sheet as accounts payable and accrued liabilities are excluded from the purchase obligations set forth in the table above. Penalties, if any, related to molds and equipment based upon failure to meet minimum volume requirements are also excluded from the table because we are unable to determine whether such penalties will be incurred and, if incurred, over what time period they will be paid.
(4) We expect to make $6.6 million of defined benefit pension plan contributions during fiscal 2021, including $5.5 million for our four company-sponsored defined benefit pension plans and $1.1 million for the multi-employer defined benefit pension plan to which we contribute. We are unable to reliably estimate the timing of our aggregate annual pension contributions and contribution amounts beyond fiscal 2021. See Note 12, “Pensions,” to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 for further information as to our pension obligations.
Supplemental Financial Information about B&G Foods and Guarantor Subsidiaries
As further discussed in Note 7, “Long-Term Debt,” to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report, our obligations under our 5.25% senior notes due 2025 and 5.25% senior notes due 2027 are jointly and severally and fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a senior basis by all of our existing and certain future domestic subsidiaries, which we refer to in this section as the guarantor subsidiaries. Our foreign subsidiaries are not guarantors, and any future foreign or partially owned domestic subsidiaries will not be guarantors, of the 5.25% senior notes due 2025 or the 5.25% senior notes due 2027. In this section, we refer to these foreign subsidiaries and future foreign or partially owned domestic subsidiaries as the non-guarantor subsidiaries. See Note 7, “Long-Term Debt” to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
The senior notes and the subsidiary guarantees are our and the guarantor subsidiaries’ general unsecured obligations and are effectively junior in right of payment to all of our and the guarantor subsidiaries’ secured indebtedness and to all existing and future indebtedness and other liabilities of our non-guarantor subsidiaries; are pari passu in right of payment to all of our and the guarantor subsidiaries’ existing and future unsecured senior debt; and are senior in right of payment to all of our and the guarantor subsidiaries’ future subordinated debt.
Each guarantee contains a provision intended to limit the guarantor subsidiary’s liability to the maximum amount that it could incur without causing the incurrence of obligations under its guarantee to be a fraudulent transfer.
- 54 -
However, we cannot assure you that this provision will be effective to protect the subsidiary guarantees from being voided under fraudulent transfer laws.
A guarantor subsidiary’s guarantee will be automatically released: (1) in connection with any sale or other disposition of all or substantially all of the assets of that guarantor subsidiary (including by way of merger or consolidation) to a person or entity that is not (either before or after giving effect to such transaction) B&G Foods or a “restricted subsidiary” of B&G Foods under the applicable indenture, if the sale or other disposition complies with the asset sale provisions of the applicable indenture; (2) in connection with any sale or other disposition of all of the capital stock of that guarantor subsidiary to a person or entity that is not (either before or after giving effect to such transaction) B&G Foods or a “restricted subsidiary” of B&G Foods, if the sale or other disposition complies with the asset sale provisions of the applicable indenture; (3) if B&G Foods designates any “restricted subsidiary” that is a guarantor subsidiary to be an “unrestricted subsidiary” in accordance with the applicable provisions of the indenture; (4) upon legal defeasance, covenant defeasance or satisfaction and discharge of the applicable indenture; (5) if such guarantor subsidiary no longer constitutes a domestic subsidiary; or (6) if it is determined in good faith by B&G Foods that a liquidation, dissolution or merger out of existence of such guarantor subsidiary is in the best interests of B&G Foods and is not materially disadvantageous to the holders of the senior notes.
The following tables present summarized unaudited financial information on a combined basis for B&G Foods and each of the guarantor subsidiaries of the senior notes described above after elimination of (1) intercompany transactions and balances among B&G Foods and the guarantor subsidiaries and (2) investments in any subsidiary that is a non-guarantor (in thousands):
(1) Current assets includes amounts due from non-guarantor subsidiaries of $21.5 million and $30.9 million as of January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, respectively.
(2) Current liabilities includes amounts due to non-guarantor subsidiaries of $0.2 million and $0.0 million as of January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, respectively.