Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations, our expectations regarding the future performance of our business and the other non-historical statements in the discussion and analysis are forward-looking statements. See “Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors including those described in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. You should read the following discussion together with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto and other financial information included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our historical financial information may not be indicative of our future performance.
Company Overview
We are a leading national provider of professional workforce solutions and have completed a series of acquisitions including the acquisition of BG Personnel, LP and B G Staff Services Inc. in June 2010, substantially all of the assets of JNA Staffing, Inc. in December 2010, Extrinsic, LLC in December 2011, American Partners, Inc. in December 2012, InStaff in June 2013, D&W in March 2015, VTS in October 2015, Zycron in April 2017, Smart in September 2017, and LJK in December 2019, 100% of the equity of EdgeRock in February 2020, and substantially all of the assets of Momentum Solutionz in February 2021. We operate within three industry segments: Real Estate, Professional, and Light Industrial. We provide workforce solutions to client partners primarily within the United States of America. We now operate across 46 states and D.C., as well as 13 on-site locations.
The Real Estate segment provides office and maintenance field talent to various apartment communities and commercial buildings in 36 states and D.C., via property management companies responsible for the apartment communities' and commercial buildings' day-to-day operations. Our Real Estate segment operates through two divisions, BG Multifamily and BG Talent.
The Professional segment provides skilled field talent on a nationwide basis for information technology (“IT”) and finance, accounting, legal and human resource client partner projects on a national basis. Our Professional segment operates through various divisions including Extrinsic, American Partners, Donovan & Watkins, Vision Technology Services, Zycron, Smart Resources, L.J. Kushner & Associates, EdgeRock Technology Partners, and beginning in 2021, Momentum Solutionz.
The Light Industrial segment provides field talent primarily to manufacturing, distribution, logistics, and call center client partners needing a flexible workforce in 7 states. Our Light Industrial segment operates through our InStaff division.
Impact of COVID-19
We continue to observe the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on our consolidated operating results, our candidate and field talent supply chain, and our client partners demand in all segments. We expect that the social distancing measures, the changing operational status of our client partners, production levels at client partners facilities, and general business uncertainty will continue to effect demand in all our segments.
During this uncertain time, our critical priorities are the health and safety of our team members, field talent, candidates and client partners. Starting in March 2020, we took several cost containment and liquidity actions, which we do not believe have materially adversely impacted our internal controls, financial reporting systems or our operations.
Our business, results of operations, and financial condition have been, and may continue to be, adversely impacted in material respects by COVID-19 and by related government actions, non-governmental organization recommendations, and public perceptions, all of which have led and may continue to lead to disruption in global economic and labor markets. These effects have had a significant impact on our business, including reduced demand for our workforce solutions, early terminations or reductions in projects, and hiring freezes, and a shift of a majority of our workforce to remote operations, all of which have contributed to a decline in revenues and other significant adverse impacts on our financial results. Other potential impacts of COVID-19 may include continued or expanded closures or reductions of operations with respect to our client partners’ operations or facilities, the possibility our client partners will not be able to pay for our workforce solutions, or that they will attempt to defer payments owed to us, either of which could materially impact our liquidity, the possibility that the uncertain nature of the pandemic may not yield the increase in certain of our workforce solutions that we have historically observed during periods of economic downturn, and the possibility that various government-sponsored programs to provide economic relief may be inadequate. Further, we may continue to experience adverse financial impacts, some of which may be material, if we cannot offset revenue declines with cost savings through expense-related initiatives, human capital management initiatives, or otherwise. As a result of these observed and potential developments, we expect our business, results of operations, and financial condition to continue to be negatively affected.
Real Estate was strongly affected by COVID-19 when client partners immediately stopped non-emergency maintenance, which is our largest revenue source. Additional, during our high volume season, many client partners were forced into a virtual leasing model verses using onsite touring options. With many government actions requiring eviction moratoriums, our client partners’ response was to tighten all expenses.
We will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state, local authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our team members, field talent, client partners, and stockholders. The potential effects are not clear for any such alterations or modifications on our business, our client partners, candidates, vendors, or on our financial results.
Results of Operations
The following tables summarize key components of our results of operations for the periods indicated, both in dollars and as a percentage of revenues, and have been derived from our consolidated financial statements.
Fifty-two Week Fiscal Year Ended December 27, 2020 (Fiscal 2020) Compared with Fifty-two Week Fiscal Year Ended December 29, 2019 (Fiscal 2019)
Revenues:
Real Estate Revenues: Real Estate revenues decreased approximately $27.7 million (28.7%) due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic discussed above. The decrease was due to a 31.7% decrease in billed hours partially offset by a 4.1% increase in average bill rate. Revenue from new offices was $0.8 million.
Professional Revenues: Professional revenues increased approximately $15.1 million (12.2%), primarily from LJK and EdgeRock acquisitions, which contributed $36.1 million of new revenues. The remaining professional group decreased $21.1 million. Even with the overall increase, billed hours decreased 5.0% offsets by an increase of 17.7% in average bill rate and an increase in permanent placements of $1.2 million.
Light Industrial Revenues: Light Industrial revenues decreased approximately $3.8 million (5.1%) due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The decrease was due to a 11.8% decrease in billed hours partially offset by a 7.6% increase in average bill rate.
Gross Profit:
Gross profit represents revenues from workforce solutions less cost of services expenses, which consist of payroll, payroll taxes, payroll-related insurance, field talent costs, and reimbursable costs.
Overall, our gross profit decreased approximately $4.5 million (5.5%). As a percentage of revenue, gross profit has remained consistent at 27.4%, primarily due to higher gross profits across our Professional segment.
We determine spread as the difference between bill rate and pay rate.
Real Estate Gross Profit: Real Estate gross profit decreased approximately $11.1 million (30.1%) consistent with the decrease in revenue, which was partially offset by a 2.2% increase in average spread.
Professional Gross Profit: Professional gross profit increased approximately $7.3 million (22.3%) consistent with the increase in revenue, primarily from LJK and EdgeRock acquisitions, which contributed $12.2 million of gross profit and an overall increase of 19.5% in average spread.
Light Industrial Gross Profit: Light Industrial gross profit decreased approximately $0.7 million (6.2%) in line with the decreased revenue, which was partially offset by an increase of 6.0% in the average spread.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses: Selling, general and administrative expenses increased approximately $4.4 million (7.8%), primarily related from LJK and EdgeRock acquisitions, which contributed $9.5 million of new expense that was partially offset by reduced compensation costs from the decline in gross profit and by many of our actions taken starting in March related to the COVID-19 pandemic to reduce actual and planned operating costs as detailed in the following table.
Depreciation and Amortization: Depreciation and amortization charges increased approximately $0.1 million (2.9%). The increase in depreciation and amortization is primarily due to the Professional segment with increases related to the 2019 LJK and 2020 EdgeRock acquisitions that are partially offset by decreases related to the 2015 VTS and 2015 D&W Talent acquisitions.
Impairment loss: As a result of the certain business developments and changes in our long-term projections, we calculated the quantitative impairment test of the finance and accounting group, within the Professional segment, using the relief from royalty method for the indefinite-lived intangible assets and residual method for the definite-lived intangible assets by asset group. We recognized a $3.7 million trade name impairment loss and a $3.5 million client partner list impairment loss within the Professional segment.
Interest Expense, net: Interest expense, net was flat due to the increased borrowings on the Term Loan related to the EdgeRock acquisition that was partially offset by decreases in the Revolving Facility, deferred financing fees, and unused fee.
Income Taxes: Income tax expense decreased $3.8 million (88.1%) primarily due to lower pre-tax 2020 income and intangible impairment losses, which were partially offset by non-deductible fees related to the 2020 EdgeRock transaction.
Fifty-two Week Fiscal Year Ended December 29, 2019 (Fiscal 2019) Compared with Fifty-two Week Fiscal Year Ended December 30, 2018 (Fiscal 2018)
Revenues:
Real Estate Revenues: Real Estate revenues increased approximately $9.5 million (11.0%) due to our continued geographic expansion plan and overall growth in existing offices. The increase was due to a 5.1% increase in billed hours and a 5.1% increase in average bill rate. Revenue from new offices provided approximately $2.5 million of the increase. Revenues from the commercial buildings group contributed $0.8 million of the increase.
Professional Revenues: Professional revenues increased approximately $4.0 million (3.4%). The increase was due to an increase of 8.3% in average bill rate that was offset by a decrease in permanent placements of $0.1 million and a 5.7% decrease in billed hours.
Light Industrial Revenues: Light Industrial revenues decreased approximately $6.1 million (7.6%). The decrease was due to a 10.8% decrease in billed hours partially offset by a 3.5% increase in average bill rate.
Gross Profit:
Gross profit represents revenues from workforce solutions less cost of services expenses, which consist of payroll, payroll taxes, payroll-related insurance, field talent costs, and reimbursable costs.
Overall, our gross profit increased approximately $4.1 million (5.3%). As a percentage of revenue, gross profit has increased to 27.4% from 26.7%, primarily due to higher gross profits across our Real Estate and Professional segments.
We determine spread as the difference between bill rate and pay rate.
Real Estate Gross Profit: Real Estate gross profit increased approximately $4.0 million (12.1%) consistent with the increase in revenue. The increase in gross profit was due primarily to 5.0% increase in average spread.
Professional Gross Profit: Professional gross profit increased approximately $1.3 million (4.2%) consistent with the increase in revenue. The increase in gross profit was due to 9.3% increase in average spread.
Light Industrial Gross Profit: Light Industrial gross profit decreased approximately $1.2 million (10.1%) consistent with the decrease in revenue which was partally offset by an increase of 2.2% in the average spread.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses: Selling, general and administrative expenses increased approximately $5.1 million (10.1%) primarily related to various costs associated with our revenue growth and geographic expansion including increased headcount, commissions and bonuses as detailed in the following table.
Depreciation and Amortization: Depreciation and amortization charges decreased approximately $0.2 million (4.4%). The decrease in depreciation and amortization is primarily due to fully amortized intangible assets in the Light Industrial segment related to the 2013 InStaff acquisition and in the Professional segment related to the 2015 D&W acquisition.
Interest Expense, net: Interest expense, net decreased $1.3 million (44.9%) primarily due to a May 2018 offering of common stock which proceeds were used to pay down existing indebtedness and the decrease in contingent consideration discounts related to the 2017 Zycron and Smart acquisitions.
Income Taxes: Income tax expense increased $0.4 million (11.5%) primarily due to a May 2018 option cancellation agreement with a former senior executive and the share-based compensation exercises that are deductible for tax purposes that resulted in a reduced 2018 effective rate, which was partially offset by higher pre-tax 2018 income.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our working capital requirements are primarily driven by field talent payments, tax payments and client partner accounts receivable receipts. Since receipts from client partners lag payments to field talent, working capital requirements increase substantially in periods of growth.
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash generated from operations and borrowings under our credit agreement with BMO Harris Bank, N.A. (“BMO”), that provides for a revolving credit facility maturing July 16, 2024 (the “Revolving Facility”). Our primary uses of cash are payments to field talent, team members, related payroll liabilities, operating expenses, capital expenditures, cash interest, cash taxes, dividends and contingent consideration and debt payments. We believe that the cash generated from operations, together with the borrowing availability under our Revolving Facility, will be sufficient to meet our normal working capital needs for at least the next twelve months, including investments made, and expenses incurred, in connection with opening new markets throughout the next year. Our ability to continue to fund these items may be affected by general economic, competitive and other factors, many of which are outside of our control. If our future cash flow from operations and other capital resources are insufficient to fund our liquidity needs, we may be forced to obtain additional debt or equity capital or refinance all or a portion of our debt.
While we believe we have sufficient liquidity and capital resources to meet our current operating requirements and expansion plans, we may elect to pursue additional growth opportunities within the next year that could require additional debt or equity financing. If we are unable to secure additional financing at favorable terms in order to pursue such additional growth opportunities, our ability to pursue such opportunities could be materially adversely affected.
During this period of uncertainty of volatility related to COVID-19, we will continue to monitor our liquidity, particularly payments from our client partners.
A summary of our working capital, operating, investing and financing activities are shown in the following table:
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities consists of net income adjusted for non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization, share-based compensation expense, intangible impairment losses, interest expense on contingent consideration payable, gain on contingent consideration, loss on extinguishment of debt, and the effect of working capital changes. The primary drivers of cash inflows and outflows are accounts receivable, accrued payroll and expenses, and other current and long-term liabilities.
During Fiscal 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $22.3 million, an increase of $4.3 million compared with $18.0 million for Fiscal 2019. This increase is primarily attributable to the non-cash impact of intangible impairment losses, additional other long-term liabilities that includes the deferred employer FICA, and payments on accounts receivable, additional income taxes payable, which were partially offset by lower net income, reduced deferred income taxes, payments on accrued payroll and expenses, reduced prepaid expenses and other current assets, payments on accounts payable, and loss on extinguishment of debt in Fiscal 2019.
During Fiscal 2019, net cash provided by operating activities was $18.0 million, a decrease of $0.5 million compared with $18.4 million for Fiscal 2018. This decrease is primarily attributable to higher net income, the timing of payments on operating assets and liabilities, net deferred tax assets, which was partially offset by contingent consideration adjustments.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities consists primarily of cash paid for businesses acquired and capital expenditures.
In Fiscal 2020, we paid net $22.0 million in connection with the 2020 EdgeRock and 2019 LJK acquisitions and we made capital expenditures of $2.1 million mainly related to software and computer equipment purchased in the ordinary course of business and for the IT roadmap. In Fiscal 2019, we paid $7.5 million in connection with the LJK acquisition, excluding the hold back paid in 2020, and we made capital expenditures of $2.2 million mainly related to software and computer equipment purchased in the ordinary course of business and for the IT roadmap project. In Fiscal 2018, we made capital expenditures of $0.9 million mainly related to furniture and fixtures and computer equipment purchased in the ordinary course of business.
Financing Activities
Cash flows from financing activities consisted principally of borrowings and payments under our credit agreement, payment of dividends, and contingent consideration paid.
For Fiscal 2020, we borrowed $22.5 million on our Term Loan, as defined below, to fund the EdgeRock acquisition and pay down the Revolving Facility, we reduced $14.4 million on our Revolving Facility, paid $5.2 million in cash dividends on our common stock, and paid down $1.1 million on the Term Loan.
For Fiscal 2019, we paid $12.3 million in cash dividends on our common stock, paid down $10.1 million on the term loan with Texas Capital Bank, National Association (“TCB”), and we paid $2.7 million of contingent consideration related to the Zycron acquisition. We borrowed $9.7 million on our Revolving Facility and borrowed $7.5 million on our Term Loan in connection with the LJK acquisition.
For Fiscal 2018, we paid $13.8 million in principal payments on the term loan with TCB, paid $10.9 million in cash dividends on our common stock, reduced our revolving credit facility by $10.7 million, paid $3.3 million related to Option Cancellation Agreement, and paid $1.0 million of contingent consideration related to the VTS and Zycron acquisitions. We received net proceeds from the issuance of the common stock of $22.2 million and used the net proceeds to reduce outstanding indebtedness under our credit agreement with TCB and cancel outstanding options pursuant to the Option Cancellation Agreement, as noted above.
Credit Agreements
On July 16, 2019, we entered into a Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”), maturing July 16, 2024, with BMO, as administrative agent, lender, letters of credit issuer, and swing line lender. The Credit Agreement provides for the Revolving Facility permitting us to borrow funds from time to time in an aggregate amount up to $35 million. The Credit Agreement also provided for a term loan commitment (the “Term Loan”) permitting us to borrow funds from time to time in an aggregate amount not to exceed $30 million with principal payable quarterly, based on an annual percentage of the original principal amount as defined in the Credit Agreement all of which has been funded. We may from time to time, with a maximum of two, request an increase in the aggregate Term Loan commitment by $40 million, with minimum increases of $10 million. Our obligations under the Credit Agreement are secured by a first priority security interest in substantially all our tangible and intangible property. The Credit Agreement bears interest either at the Base Rate plus the Applicable Margin plus the Applicable Margin or LIBOR (as such terms are defined in the Credit Agreement). We also pay an unused commitment fee on the daily average unused amount of Revolving Facility and Term Loan.
The Credit Agreement contains customary affirmative covenants and negative covenants, including certain limitations on our ability to pay cash dividends. We are subject to a maximum Leverage Ratio and a minimum Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio as defined in the Credit Agreement.
In April 2020, we entered into a pay-fixed/receive-floating interest rate swap agreement with BMO that reduces the floating interest rate component on the Term Loan obligation. The $25.0 million notional amount was effective on June 3, 2020 and designed as a cash flow hedge on the underlying variable rate interest payments against a fixed interest rate that terminates on June 1, 2023. In accordance with cash flow hedge accounting treatment, we have determined that the hedge is perfectly effective using the change-in-variable-cash-flow method.
On December 13, 2019, we borrowed $7.5 million on the Term Loan in conjunction with the closing of the LJK acquisition. On February 3, 2020, we borrowed $18.5 million on the Term Loan in conjunction with the closing of the EdgeRock acquisition. On April 6, 2020, the Company borrowed the remaining $4.0 million on the Term Loan and the proceeds were used to pay down the Revolving Facility. We borrowed $20 million under the Revolving Facility to pay off our existing indebtedness with TCB and our credit agreement with TCB (and related ancillary documentation) was terminated on July 16, 2019 in connection with such repayment. We recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt of approximately $0.5 million related to the unamortized deferred finance fees. On February 8, 2021, the Company borrowed $3.8 million on the Revolving Facility in conjunction with the closing of the Momentum Solutionz acquisition, as described in Note 19 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our cash contractual obligations as of December 27, 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Letter of Credit
In March 2020, in conjunction with the 2020 EdgeRock acquisition, we entered into a standby letter of credit arrangement, which expires December 31, 2024, for purposes of protecting a lessor against default on lease payments. As of December 27, 2020, we had a maximum financial exposure from this standby letter of credit totaling $0.1 million, all of which is considered usage against our Revolving Facility.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We have identified the policies listed below as critical to our business and the understanding of our results of operations. For a detailed discussion of the application of these and other accounting policies, see Note 2 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP, requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, allowances for credit losses on accounts receivable, impairment of goodwill and intangible assets, lease liability and continent consideration obligations related to acquisitions, contingencies, litigation, income taxes, share-based compensation option expense. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experiences and on various other factors believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. However, these estimates and assumptions may change in the future based on actual experience as well as market conditions.
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to have a significant impact on our economy as a result of measures designed to stop the spread of the virus. In light of the currently unknown ultimate duration and severity of COVID-19, we face a greater degree of uncertainty than normal in making the judgments and estimates needed to apply our significant accounting policies. As COVID-19 continues to develop, management may make changes to these estimates and judgments over time, which could result in meaningful impacts to our financial statements in future periods. Actual results and outcomes may differ from management’s estimates and assumptions.
Revenue Recognition
We derive our revenues from three segments: Real Estate, Professional, and Light Industrial. We provide workforce solutions and placement services. Revenues are recognized when promised workforce solutions are delivered to client partners, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. Revenues as presented on the consolidated statements of operations represent workforce solutions rendered to client partners less sales adjustments and allowances. Reimbursements, including those related to out-of-pocket expenses, are also included in revenues, and the related amounts of reimbursable expenses are included in cost of services.
We record revenue on a gross basis as a principal versus on a net basis as an agent in the presentation of revenues and expenses. We have concluded that gross reporting is appropriate because we (i) have the risk of identifying and hiring qualified field talent, (ii) have the discretion to select the field talent and establish their price and duties and (iii) we bear the risk for services that are not fully paid for by client partners.
Workforce solution revenues - Field talent revenues from contracts with client partners are recognized in the amount to which we have a right to invoice, when the services are rendered by our field talent.
Contingent placement revenues - Any revenues associated with workforce solutions that are provided on a contingent basis are recognized once the contingency is resolved, as this is when control transferred to the client partner, usually when employment candidates start their employment.
Retained search placement revenues - Any revenues from these workforce solutions are recognized based on the contractual amount for services completed to date which best depicts the transfer of control of services, which is less than 1% of consolidated revenues.
We estimate the effect of placement candidates who do not remain with our client partners through the guarantee period (generally 90 days) based on historical experience. Allowances, recorded as a liability, are established to estimate these losses. Fees to client partners are generally calculated as a percentage of the new worker’s annual compensation. No fees for placement workforce solutions are charged to employment candidates. These assumptions determine the timing of revenue recognition for the reported period.
Payment terms in our contracts vary by the type and location of our client partner and the workforce solutions offered. The term between invoicing and when payment is due is not significant.
Intangible Assets
We hold intangible assets with indefinite and finite lives. Intangible assets with indefinite useful lives are not amortized. Intangible assets with finite useful lives are amortized over their respective estimated useful lives, ranging from three to ten years, based on a pattern in which the economic benefit of the respective intangible asset is realized.
Identifiable intangible assets recognized in conjunction with acquisitions are recorded at fair value. Significant unobservable inputs are used to determine the fair value of the identifiable intangible assets based on the income approach valuation model whereby the present worth and anticipated future benefits of the identifiable intangible assets are discounted back to their net present value.
We capitalize purchased software and internal payroll costs directly incurred in the modification of software for internal use. Software maintenance and training costs are expensed in the period incurred.
We evaluate the recoverability of intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that an intangible asset’s carrying amount may not be recoverable. We annually evaluate the remaining useful lives of all intangible assets to determine whether events and circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining period of amortization. We considered the current and expected future economic and market conditions surrounding COVID-19 and its impact on each of the reporting units. Further, during second quarter 2020, we assessed the current market capitalization, forecasts and the current carrying value in the 2020 impairment test. As a result of the certain business developments and changes in our long-term projections, we concluded a triggering event had occurred that required an interim impairment assessment to be performed. The qualitative assessment thresholds were met on all reporting units except the finance and accounting group, within the Professional segment. We calculated the quantitative impairment test of the finance and accounting group using the relief from royalty method for the indefinite-lived intangible assets and residual method for the definite-lived intangible assets by asset group (see Note 6 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements). We determined that there were no impairment indicators for these assets in Fiscal 2019 and 2018.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the difference between the enterprise value/cash paid less the fair value of all recognized net asset fair values including identifiable intangible asset values in a business combination. We review goodwill for impairment annually during the fourth quarter or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. We considered the current and expected future economic and market conditions surrounding COVID-19 and its impact on each of the reporting units. As a result of the certain business developments and changes in our long-term
projections, during second quarter 2020, we concluded a triggering event had occurred that required an interim impairment assessment to be performed. The qualitative assessment thresholds were met on all reporting units except the finance and accounting group. We calculated the quantitative impairment test of the finance and accounting group using the discounted cash flow method and concluded there was no goodwill impairment loss. Based on annual testing, the Company has determined that there was no goodwill impairment in Fiscal 2020, 2019 or 2018.
We first evaluate qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not (that is, a likelihood of more than 50 percent) that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill. If after qualitatively assessing the totality of events or circumstances, we determine that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then further testing is unnecessary. If after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, we then estimate the fair value of the reporting unit and compare the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill, as discussed below.
In assessing whether it is more likely than not that an indefinite-lived intangible asset is impaired, we assess relevant events and circumstances that could affect the significant inputs used to determine the fair value.
The quantitative impairment test for an indefinite-lived intangible asset consists of a comparison of the fair value of the asset with its carrying amount. If the carrying amount of an intangible asset exceeds its fair value, a reporting unit shall recognize an impairment loss in an amount equal to that excess.
The quantitative goodwill impairment test involves a two-step process. In the first step,we compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, goodwill is not impaired and no further testing is required. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying value, we must perform the second step of the impairment test to measure the amount of impairment loss. In the second step, the reporting unit's fair value is allocated to all of the assets and liabilities of the reporting unit, including any unrecognized intangible assets, in a hypothetical analysis that calculates the implied fair value of goodwill in the same manner as if the reporting unit was being acquired in a business combination. If the implied fair value of the reporting unit's goodwill is less than the carrying value, the difference is recorded as an impairment loss.
Contingent Consideration
We have obligations, to be paid in cash, related to our acquisitions if certain future operating and financial goals are met. The fair value of this contingent consideration is determined using expected cash flows and present value technique. The fair value calculation of the expected future payments uses a discount rate commensurate with the risks of the expected cash flow. The resulting discount is amortized as interest expense over the outstanding period using the effective interest method.
Leases
We lease all their office space through operating leases, which expire at various dates through 2025. Many of the lease agreements obligate us to pay real estate taxes, insurance and certain maintenance costs, which are accounted for separately. Certain of our lease arrangements contain renewal provisions from 3 to 10 years, exercisable at our option. Our lease agreements do not contain any material residual value guarantees or material restrictive covenants.
We determine if an arrangement is an operating lease at inception. Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the balance sheet. All other leases are recorded on the balance sheet as right-of-use assets and lease liabilities for the lease term.
Right of use lease assets and lease liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term and include options to extend or terminate the lease when they are reasonably certain to be exercised. The present value of lease payments is determined primarily using the incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at lease commencement date. Our operating lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term and is recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses.
Financial Instruments
We use fair value measurements in areas that include, but are not limited to, interest rate swap agreements used to mitigate interest rate risk, and the allocation of purchase price consideration to tangible and identifiable intangible assets and contingent consideration. The carrying values of cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivables, prepaid expenses, accounts payable, accrued liabilities, and other current assets and liabilities approximate their fair values because of the short-term nature of these instruments. The carrying value of bank debt approximates fair value due to the variable nature of the interest rates under the credit agreement with BMO that provides for the revolving credit facility and term loan and current rates available to us for debt with similar terms and risk. The fair value on the interest rate swap is based on quoted prices from BMO.
Share-Based Compensation
We recognize compensation expense in selling, general and administrative expenses over the service period for options or restricted stock that are expected to vest and records adjustments to compensation expense at the end of the service period if actual forfeitures differ from original estimates.
Income Taxes
The current provision for income taxes represents estimated amounts payable or refundable on tax returns filed or to be filed for the year. We recognizes any penalties when necessary as part of selling, general and administrative expenses. As of December 27, 2020, goodwill of $31.6 million, which is limited annually, is expected to be deductible for tax purposes.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded for the estimated future tax effects of temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and amounts are classified net as noncurrent in the consolidated balance sheets. Deferred tax assets are also recognized for net operating loss and tax credit carryovers. The overall change in deferred tax assets and liabilities for the period measures the deferred tax expense or benefit for the period. Effects of changes in enacted tax laws on deferred tax assets and liabilities are reflected as adjustments to tax expense in the period of enactment. As of December 27, 2020, we have a $6.5 million net operating loss carry forward from the 2020 EdgeRock acquisition with no expiration date.
When appropriate, we will record a valuation allowance against net deferred tax assets to offset future tax benefits that may not be realized. In determining whether a valuation allowance is appropriate, we consider whether it is more likely than not that all or some portion of our deferred tax assets will not be realized, based in part upon management’s judgments regarding future events and past operating results. We believe that it is more likely than not that all deferred tax assets will be realized and thus, believes that a valuation allowance is not required as of December 27, 2020 or December 29, 2019.
We follow the guidance of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 740, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes. ASC Topic 740 prescribes a more-likely-than-not measurement methodology to reflect the financial statement impact of uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements and their potential effect on our results of operations and financial condition, refer to Note 2 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.