ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
GENERAL
Management’s discussion and analysis is intended to assist in understanding the financial condition and results of operations of the Company. The information in this section should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying Notes contained in this Form 10-K.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Company is focused on providing core banking products and services, including customized and innovative banking and lending solutions, designed to cater to the unique needs of its diverse communities, businesses and entrepreneurs through over 50 locations throughout Maine, New Hampshire and Vermont. Through over 500 dedicated professionals, the Company is committed to servicing and building enduring relationships by providing a higher standard of banking. The Company offers a variety of financial products and services designed around our target clients in order to serve all of their banking and financial needs. The Company continues to focus on three main initiatives designed to improve its franchise and profitability on an ongoing basis: attracting noninterest-bearing deposits and reducing our cost of deposits, optimizing the balance sheet to focus on higher-margin products while managing credit risk, and appropriately managing down expenses to the size and complexity of the business. Through these efforts, the Company continues to transform its franchise into a relationship-focused business bank within its footprint.
Financial Highlights
Bar Harbor Bankshares recorded 2020 net income of $33 million, or $2.18 per diluted share, compared to $23 million, or $1.45 per diluted share, in 2019. Adjusted income (non-GAAP measure) in 2020 was $35 million, or $2.26 per diluted share, and $30 million, or $1.91 per diluted share, for the same period of 2019. Non-recurring expenses in 2020 included swap termination costs and profitability initiative costs while 2019 included acquisition, conversion and balance sheet optimization costs.
Non-interest income reached record levels in 2020 driven by mortgage banking income, gains on sold securities and other fee income. The Company sold fixed rate residential mortgage production in the secondary market in lieu of taking interest rate and credit risk on the balance sheet, producing $7 million in fee revenue. The Company also took advantage of unrealized gains in the securities portfolio by selling certain investments for a net gain of $5 million. Customer service fees increased 12% on an expanded customer base from the prior year acquisition and a significant number of organic accounts opened throughout 2020. Additionally, the Company’s continued focus on commercial customers generated higher derivative and treasury income in 2020, and produced cross-sell opportunities within the retail and wealth management lines.
Wealth management remains a significant contributor to fee income in 2020; increasing 11% and serving as a foundation for deepening customer relationships with $2.3 billion in assets under management. During the year the Company consolidated leadership and combined operations onto a common platform in its wealth management business. This consolidation allowed for unified policies under one environment driven by best practices.
In 2020, the Company maintained its earning assets through commercial loan growth of $212 million or 17% through its strategy to grow variable rate loans. Non-maturity deposits grew $445 million or 25% through new accounts and the impacts of government stimulus. Excess liquidity generated from deposits was used to further delever the Company’s balance sheet by reducing wholesale funding $520 million or 49%. The reduction in wholesale funding consisted of repayments of $195 million in senior borrowings and maturities of $325 million in brokered deposits. These collective actions reduced the Company’s overall loan to deposit ratio to 88% at year-end 2020 compared to 98% in the prior year.
The Company maintains a strong capital position; building tangible equity excluding security adjustments (non-GAAP measure) in 2020 to a higher level than before the branch acquisition in the fourth quarter of 2019. The Company furthered its return on capital programs in 2020 in the form of stock purchases and dividend payments. Stock repurchases during the year totaled 720 thousand shares at a cost of $13.9 million. An additional 61 thousand shares remain available to be repurchased before the plan expires in 2021. The Company distributed regular cash dividends on its common stock in the aggregate amount of $13 million representing a payout ratio of 40%.
Return on assets in 2020 was 0.88% compared to 0.62% in 2019, while adjusted return on assets (non-GAAP measure) was 0.92% in 2020 compared to 0.82% in 2019. In a similar trend, return on equity was 8.17% in 2020 from 5.82% in 2019 and adjusted return on equity (non-GAAP measure) was 8.48% in 2020 from 7.65% in 2019.
COVID-19 Pandemic
On March 13, 2020, a national emergency was announced related to the COVID-19 pandemic, which has since been extended. The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in significant economic uncertainties that have had, and could continue to have, an adverse impact on the Company's operating income, financial condition and cash flows. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will impact the Company's operations and financial results during 2021 cannot be reasonably or reliably estimated at this time. The Company has taken careful measures in an effort to ensure the safety of its employees and customers. That includes restricting nonessential employee travel, expanding remote access availability, distancing work stations, professional cleaning of its facilities, and signs and distancing reminders for customers in the banking centers. Further, the Company remains committed to providing uninterrupted and reliable banking service and has business continuity plans and protocols in place to ensure critical operations are able to continue without disruption. See further discussion in Item 1A - Risk Factors of this Form 10-K.
Credit Quality
The Company has experienced continuous positive trends in credit quality in 2020. Disciplined risk management has guided the Company through volatility created by the pandemic while also allowing the Company to focus on long-term goals. The Company had low levels of non-performing assets at 0.33% and past dues at 0.58% by year end 2020 including a 34% decrease in commercial loan delinquencies.
Starting in the second quarter 2020, the Company began stress testing the loan portfolio in addition to normal migration analysis. The stress testing of commercial loans included the most affected industries by COVID-19 within the Company’s footprint, specifically hospitality. However, the Company’s customers in the hospitality industry benefited from a better than expected summer tourism season for Northern New England. Testing results throughout the year affirm the Company’s risk-based credit philosophy with no significant risk-rating downgrades or changes to reserves.
Paycheck Protection Program Loans
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic the CARES Act went into law on March 27, 2020, which provides assistance for American workers, families and small businesses. The Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP"), established by the CARES Act and implemented by the Small Business Administration ("SBA") provides small businesses with funds to pay payroll costs, pay interest on mortgages, rent, and utilities and are 100% guaranteed by the SBA. PPP loans have a two year term, carry an interest rate at 1% and earn an amortizing SBA fee between 1 to 5% depending of the size of the loan. These loans are recorded on the Company’s balance sheet as commercial and industrial loans. In 2020, the Company obtained SBA approvals on approximately $132 million with $5 million of fees on 1,900 PPP loans. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had an outstanding balance of loans totaling $54 million and $1 million of deferred fees. The Company expects the majority of remaining forgiveness to occur by the end of the second quarter 2021.
On December 27, 2020, the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 ("CAA") was signed into law, which extended certain provisions of the CARES Act and provided additional funding. The CAA extended the PPP application period to March 31, 2021 and permits eligible companies to obtain a second PPP loan with a maximum amount of $2.0 million. This second round of loans carry similar terms and conditions as the first round and lenders are eligible for the same range of SBA processing fees. The Company plans to continue the PPP program into the first quarter of 2021.
Loan Modifications
Also in response to the COVID-19 pandemic the Company has supported its customers through loan deferrals. Under the CARES Act and the CAA Act, banks may deem that loan modifications do not result in troubled debt restructurings if they are (1) related to COVID-19; (2) executed on a loan that was not more than 30 days past due as of December 31, 2019; and (3) executed between March 1, 2020, and the earlier of (A) 60 days after the date of termination of the COVID-19 national emergency declaration by the President of the United States or (B) January 1, 2022. Additionally, other short-term modifications made on a good faith basis in response to COVID-19 to borrowers who were current prior to any relief are not troubled debt restructurings under ASC Subtopic 310-40 and federal banking agencies' interagency guidance.
Over the course of the year the Company modified over 800 loans totaling about $400 million, which were mostly temporary principal deferrals with normal interest accruals. The loans modified under deferment plans are still accruing interest and all contractual principal and interest is expected to be collected. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had 69 COVID-19 modified loans totaling $69 million.
CECL
In 2020, the Company implemented the CECL methodology and ran it concurrently with the historical incurred method. Under a provision provided by the CARES Act of 2020, the Company elected to delay the adoption of the CECL standard. On December 27, 2020, the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 was signed into law. This law extended relief for troubled debt restructurings and provided for further delay of the current expected credit losses adoption under the CARES Act to January 1, 2022, with early adoption permitted. The Company elected to remain on the incurred loan loss methodology for 2020 and will adopt the CECL standard during the first quarter of 2021, effective January 1, 2021. Had the Company adopted CECL at year end 2020, the loan loss reserve as a percentage of total loans would have been 95 basis points compared to 74 basis points reported under the incurred loss model. The 95 basis points may change in the first quarter of 2021 based primarily on any changes in economic forecasts.
COMPARISON OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AT DECEMBER 31, 2020 AND 2019
Summary
The Company offers a competitive mix of loan and deposit products to serve the retail and commercial markets in its footprint. Loans and investment securities are the Company’s primary earning assets and net interest income from these products is its primary revenue source. Funding of the Company’s earning assets is achieved through its management of liabilities, attempting to provide stable and flexible sources of funding within well-defined credit, investment, interest rate and liquidity guidelines. The Company’s objective is to optimize its balance sheet position and enhance profitability with controlled risk. The Company maintains adequate liquidity under both prevailing and forecasted economic conditions achieved primarily through an appropriate mix of deposits and borrowed funds. Total assets were $3.7 billion in 2020, remaining steady with 2019.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company maintains cash vaults and teller drawers to service customers along with transactional cash accounts to service the needs of the Company and its subsidiaries that are non-interest bearing. Interest-bearing deposits are maintained with other banks such as the Federal Reserve Bank, Federal Home Loan Bank, and other correspondent banks. These accounts are used to fund reserve requirements, debt service on senior borrowings, and serve as collateral for correspondent bank relationships. In addition, these accounts hold any excess liquidity used to fund higher earning assets. The Company continuously monitors cash levels to ensure compliance with applicable regulatory requirements, including liquidity and reserve requirements.
Total cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020 were $226 million, compared to $57 million at December 31, 2019. The increase in cash and cash equivalent balances of $169 million between periods was driven by unanticipated extensive growth in non-maturity deposits from new accounts and government stimulus outpacing the growth in other earning assets. The biggest portion of the growth is in Federal Reserve balances reflected in interest bearing deposits with other banks that grew by $168 million. The average earning yield on interest bearing deposits in 2020 is 0.15% compared to 0.96% in 2021, which reduces net interest margin 16 basis points and one basis point, respectively from excess liquidity.
Securities
The Company maintains a relatively high quality and liquid securities portfolio primarily consisting of US Government-sponsored enterprises and US Government agency mortgage-backed securities, obligations of states and political subdivisions, corporate bonds, and to a much lesser extent other asset backed securities and non-agency mortgage securities. The securities portfolio is managed in accordance with achieving the Company’s asset-liability objectives which includes managing liquidity, funding, capital, and structural interest rate risks. Investments are evaluated within this framework and policy guidelines which have been established by the Company’s Board of Directors. The Company continuously evaluates and monitors the securities portfolio tied to credit, liquidity, duration, suitability and other metrics. Included in the Company’s total securities is FHLB stock which is a non-marketable equity security and, therefore, is reported at cost.
Securities in 2020 decreased $85 million as the Company focused on meeting overall asset-liability objectives when interest rates increase from their current low levels. Securities activity during the year included purchases of $216 million offset by maturities, calls and pay downs of $152 million and sales of $153 million. The proceeds from sales and amortizing securities supported asset-liability objectives to increase liquidity, reduce prepayment and reinvestment risk, and improve risk adjusted returns.
The Company monitors our securities portfolio to ensure adequate credit support. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has identified no credit impairment. There is no current intent to sell securities with a fair value below amortized cost at December 31, 2020, and it is more likely than not that the Company will not be required to sell such securities prior to the recovery of their amortized cost basis. We consider the lowest credit rating and industrial analysis for identification of potential credit impairment.
In 2020, the Company sold securities of $153 million with a net gain of $5 million. The sales strategy took advantage of favorable market conditions with attractive prices allowing the Company to sell securities projected to have sub-optimal returns and lower liquidity profiles at sizable gains. The Company was then able to repurchase more liquid securities with reduced prepayment risk and improved risk adjusted returns. The execution of the fourth quarter trades led to slight increase in profitability metrics and availability to pledge additional securities with the FHLB. Although the sales generating realized gains the Company still improved December 31, 2020 unrealized gains, net of tax to $10 million compared to $6 million at December 31, 2019.
The weighted average yield on the Company’s securities portfolio was 2.96% in 2020 compared to 3.42% in the prior year. The weighted average life of the securities portfolio at December 31, 2020 was estimated to be 4.8 years, with a duration of approximately 4.3 years. These metrics compare with an estimated weighted average life of 5.0 years, with a duration of approximately 3.6 years for the portfolio at December 31, 2019.
Loans Held For Sale
Held for sale loans increased by $18 million to $24 million at December 31, 2020 from $6 million at December 31, 2019 as a result of strong mortgage refinancing demand in response to the low interest rate environment. This asset category is subject to a high degree of variability depending on, among other things, recent mortgage loan rates and the timing of loan sales into the secondary market. In 2020, the Company’s strategy was to sell most of its residential mortgage originations on the secondary market. Proceeds from sales totaled $223 million in 2020, $63 million in 2019 and $58 million in 2018.
Loans
The Company’s loan portfolio is comprised of the following segments: commercial real estate, commercial and industrial, residential real estate, and consumer loans. Commercial real estate loans include multi-family, commercial construction and land development, and other commercial real estate classes. Commercial and industrial loans include loans to commercial businesses and tax exempt entities including PPP loans to small businesses. Residential real estate loans consist of mortgages for 1-4 family housing. Consumer loans include home equity loans, lines of credit and auto and other installment lending.
During 2020 total loans decreased $72 million to $2.6 billion. Given the current economic environment, the Company selectively grew total commercial loans to $1.5 billion or at a pace of 17%. Commercial and industrial loans grew 18%
during the year, and 2% excluding PPP loans as the Company closely monitored risk associated with growth prospects in the portfolio. Commercial loan growth was offset by a decline in residential loan balances of $221 million or 20% as the Company strategically moved a majority of production to the secondary market platform to generate fee income. Residential loan production was led by refinancing activity given the lower interest rate environment and originations totaled $246 million in 2020 compared to $67 million in 2019.
The Company offered PPP loans in an effort to assist its business partners and communities. The Company will continue the program with the second round of PPP loans authorized by the new stimulus bill in 2021. The Company originated over 1,900 first-round PPP loans totaling $132 million, of which many have been submitted for forgiveness by the SBA. The remaining first round PPP loans total $54 million with an associated $1 million of deferred fees not yet recognized in income and are expected to be forgiven by the end of the second quarter 2021. The Company also offered borrowers COVID-19 loan modifications consisting mostly of temporary deferrals with normal interest accruals. The modifications totaled over 800 loans or about $400 million over the course of the year.
The Company’s loan portfolio remains diverse among many different industries over several geographies. However, commercial loans represent 60% of the total portfolio and typically involve larger balances and gives rise to concentration risk.
All commercial loans are assigned Standard Industrial Classification codes, North American Industry Classification System codes, and state and county codes. The following table summarizes the major industries of the Company’s commercial loan portfolio as of December 31, 2020:
The largest concentrations in the commercial loan portfolio are commercial real estate and hospitality representing 42% and 18%, respectively. Concentrations are managed through a serious of loan policy limits and stringent underwriting requirements to minimize exposures. Loan policy limits are based on Tier 1 Risk Based Capital (TRBC) as computed in quarterly regulatory reporting. At December 31, 2020, none of these TRBC thresholds were exceeded. In regard to stringent underwriting requirements the Company has established minimum thresholds for loan to value ratios, debt service coverage rations, and requirements for personal guarantees. The Company also performs a borrower revenue/margin sensitively analysis on current financials to determine the impact of decreases in borrower revenues on cash flow and ability to cover debt service.
Allowance for loan losses
The determination of the allowance for loan losses is a critical accounting estimate. The Company’s methodologies for determining the loan loss allowance are discussed in Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The year-end 2020 allowance for loan losses increased to $19 million from $15 million in 2019 largely due to commercial loan growth and increased qualitative economic factors associated with the pandemic. The allowance for loan losses to total loans ratio expanded at year-end 2020 to 0.74% from 0.58% at year-end 2019. As noted above the Company has adopted CECL as of January 1, 2021 which will result in a higher allowance coverage ratio. Non-accruing loans in 2020 decreased primarily due to $2 million in commercial and residential payoffs during the fourth quarter.
Due to the impacts of the pandemic the Company began and expanded quarterly stress testing of its commercial loan portfolio throughout 2020. Fourth quarter testing covered 54% of the portfolio including the top 50 relationships, all criticized loans greater than $1.0 million, hospitality loans greater than $250 thousand, all loans over $150 thousand with a pandemic modification and any seasonal payment, restaurant, or 2021 maturing term loans greater than $500 thousand. Results of the stress testing led to no significant downgrades or changes to reserves.
Other Assets
The Company identifies on its balance sheet premises and equipment, other real estate owned, goodwill, other intangible assets, bank-owned life insurance, net deferred tax assets and other assets consisting of derivative fair values, right of use asset, community investments, and receivables. These collective assets totaled $333 million at the end of 2020 compared to $303 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily from the $26 million gross up of the fair value in customer loan derivatives and $3 million in community limited partnership investments made during 2020 reflected in the cash flow from investing activities. Community limited partnership investments provide affordable loans or equity funding typically for multifamily or residential real estate in qualified community reinvestment areas, some of which may involve low income housing tax credits. Partnerships can also include loans for commercial purposes used in economic development in qualified community reinvestment areas.
Deposits
The Company views its customer relationships as key to building its core funding platform. The Company offers competitive deposit products with local convenience including accounts with cash-back rewards. Historically, the Company’s deposit market experiences some seasonality, with lower deposits in the winter and spring months and higher deposits in the summer and autumn months.
Total deposits increased $210 million to $2.9 billion in 2020 from $2.7 billion in 2019. Non-maturity deposits grew by $445 million or 25%, with the Company’s retail team opening 13,250 new accounts for the year and impacts of government stimulus. Time deposits decreased $235 million given a $325 million reduction in brokered deposits offset by $90 million of growth in customer time deposits. Lower interest rates and the divergence in brokered deposit spreads provided an opportunity to lock into favorable rates with longer maturities in early 2020. The Company improved its loan-to-deposit ratio to 88% at year-end from 98% at the end of 2019 primarily as a result of deposit growth and residential loan sales.
Borrowings
Borrowed funds provide a means to help manage balance sheet interest rate risk, given the Company’s ability to select desired amounts, terms and maturities on a daily basis. Senior borrowings principally consist of advances from the FHLB and, to a lesser extent, securities sold under agreements to repurchase. Advances from the FHLB are secured by stock in the FHLB, investment securities, certain commercial real estate loans, and blanket liens on qualifying mortgage loans and home equity loans. Subordinated borrowings consist of notes issued to accredited investors and provides a stable source of funding and capital to the Company. Contingency lines of credit are also maintained with the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and a correspondent bank.
At December 31, 2020 total borrowings were $336 million with a weighted average rate of 1.41% compared to $531 million with a weighted average rate of 2.11% at year-end 2019. Prior to the pandemic the Company’s borrowings strategy centered around managing seasonal drops in core deposit funding while neutralizing fixed rate asset growth which involved locking into favorable rates on longer maturities. As a result 2020 long-term borrowings increased by $59 million with a
weighted average rate of 2.37% at December 31, 2020 compared to 2.87% at December 31, 2019. Following the onset of the pandemic the Company changed strategy to leverage funds from strong core deposit growth to offset maturing short-term borrowings. Overall borrowings decreased $195 million or 37% from year-end 2019 primarily as excess liquidity was used to pay down borrowings. Short-term borrowings were reduced during the year by $254 million to $93 million with a weighted average rate of 0.44% compared to 1.73% at December 31, 2019.
Derivative Financial Instruments and Hedging Activities
The Company utilizes derivative instruments to minimize fluctuations in earnings and cash flows caused by interest rate volatility. The notional balance of derivative financial instruments increased to $877 million at the end of 2020 from $580 million at year-end 2019. The increase is primarily due to $300 million in customer loan derivatives sold on commercial loans with matching hedges using a national bank counterparty. The net fair value of total derivatives was a net asset of $52 thousand at the end of 2020 compared to a net liability of $743 thousand at year-end 2019.
Cash flow hedges reflected a new $25 million notional amount hedge on wholesale funding in April 2020. Based on direct and indirect events resulting from COVID-19 pandemic, the Company determined that $50 million of wholesale funding was no longer necessary. A hedge the Company placed in March 2019 with a $50 million notional amount and fixed rate of 2.46% was terminated in October 2020. As a result of the termination a $4 million loss recognized in acquisition, conversion, and other expenses as a result of the reclassification of the unrealized loss from other comprehensive income.
Stockholders’ Equity
Total equity was $411 million at year-end 2020, compared with $396 million at year-end 2019. The Company’s book value per share increased $2.10 to $27.58 from year-end 2019. The increase was primarily due to strong net income of $33 million and a $7 million improvement in other comprehensive income offset by $13 million in dividends and $14 million in stock repurchases. The Company evaluates changes in tangible book value, a non-GAAP financial measure that is a commonly used valuation metric in the investment community, which parallels some regulatory capital measures. Tangible book value per share increased to $19.05 per share at year-end 2020 up from $17.30 per share at year-end 2019.
During 2020 and 2019, the Company declared and distributed regular cash dividends on its common stock in the aggregate amount of $13 million for both periods. The Company’s 2020 dividend payout ratio amounted to 40%, compared with 59% in 2019. Total cash dividends paid in 2020 was $0.88 per common share of stock, compared with $0.86 in 2019.
On March 12, 2020, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase plan (the “Plan”). Under the terms of the Plan, the Company is authorized to repurchase up to 5% of its outstanding common stock, representing approximately 781,000 shares. The Plan is authorized for twelve months expiring on March 20, 2021 and authorized based on the strength of the Company’s balance sheet and capital position, and the Company’s belief in the intrinsic value of the Company’s common stock. Given the current market for bank stock prices, the Company believes this program is another tool to enhance long-term shareholder value. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has purchased 720,043 shares.
The Company and the Bank remained well-capitalized under regulatory guidelines at period end as further described in Note 13 - Shareholders’ Equity and Earnings Per Common Share on the Consolidated Financial Statements.
COMPARISON OF OPERATING RESULTS FOR THE YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 AND 2019
Summary
Net income in 2020 was $33 million compared to $23 million in 2019. The non-GAAP measure of adjusted earnings in 2020 was $35 million compared to $30 million in 2019 and included acquisition, conversion and other expense charges of $6 million and $8 million, respectively. Net income and adjusted earnings benefited from an expanded net interest margin and higher non-interest income.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is the principal component of the Company’s income stream and represents the difference or spread between interest generated from earning assets and the interest expense paid on deposits and borrowed funds. Fluctuations
in market interest rates as well as volume and mix changes in earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities can materially impact net interest income.
Net interest income for 2020 was $99 million compared with $90 million in 2019 primarily due to a lower cost of funds resulting from increased liquidity from growth in non-maturity deposits. The net interest margin expanded to 2.97% in 2020 compared to 2.77% in the prior year. Purchase loan accretion contributed 11 and 10 basis points to the margin in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Cost of deposits and borrowings also benefited from the Federal Reserve rate cuts in 2020 and changes in other key indexes in response to the pandemic. In total cost of funds decreased 65 basis points to 0.96% compared to 1.61% in 2019 due to the shift in funding sources to core deposits. Total interest-bearing deposit rates improved to 0.78% compared to 1.27% in 2019 from growth in core deposits and reductions in time deposits during 2020. Borrowing costs improved to 1.75% from 2.61% in 2019, on reduced borrowing levels and interest rates.
The yield on earning assets was 3.87% compared to 4.14% in 2019 reflecting loan originations and repricing of variable rate products in a lower interest rate environment. Both securities yields and loan yields dropped 22 basis points to 3.20% and 4.16%, respectively for 2020. The 2020 adjusted net interest margin (non-GAAP measure), which excludes PPP loans was 2.93% compared to 2.77% for 2019, which included a drag of 16 basis points and one basis point, respectively from excess liquidity reflected in interest-bearing deposits with other banks.
Loan Loss Provision
The level of the allowance is a critical accounting estimate, which is subject to uncertainty. The provision for loan losses is a charge to earnings in an amount sufficient to maintain the allowance for loan losses at a level deemed adequate by the Company. The provision was $6 million in 2020 compared to $2 million in 2019. Credit quality metrics improved with decreases in non-accruing and past due loans. Overall credit quality remains strong, the increase in the provision is indicative of commercial loan growth and higher economic adjustments reflecting elevated risk from COVID-19.
Non-Interest Income
Non-interest income are fees that are fundamental to the Company’s profitability through revenue diversification in the forms of trust and treasury management services, customer service fees, customer loan derivatives, and secondary market mortgage sales.
Non-interest income in 2020 increased to $43 million from $29 million in 2019 driven primarily by increases in mortgage banking income and gains on sold securities. The $5 million increase in mortgage banking income is associated with secondary market sales of $223 million compared to $63 million in 2019. The Company took advantage of unrealized gains in the securities portfolio in 2020 by selling certain investments for a net gain of $5 million. Customer loan derivative income also contributed to non-interest income as demand for these products remained strong within the commercial loan pipeline throughout the year. Customer services fees increased by over $1 million to $11 million resulting from expanded operations into Central Maine offset by impacts of the pandemic on these services. Wealth management income grew over $1 million to $13 million in 2020. The increase reflects a full year of having assets under management acquired in the fourth quarter of 2019 totaling $218 million.
Non-Interest Expense
Non-interest expense was $95 million in 2020 compared to $90 million in 2019. The increase is primarily a result of a $4 million higher salary and benefit expense due to the expanded branch model and wealth management business. Salary and benefit expense was also impacted by larger accruals for incentives on improved performance metrics and post-retirement plan costs based on lower discount rates. Additionally, occupancy and equipment costs increased by $3 million based on the expanded footprint in central Maine. Operating expenses remained controlled as the efficiency ratio (non-GAAP) improved to 61.71% in 2020 from 64.95% in 2019. Non-recurring expenses in 2020 primarily consisted of a $4 million loss on termination of a $50.0 million swap on wholesale borrowings and a $1 million loss on extinguishment of debt on longer-term and higher cost FHLB borrowings. The remaining represents costs for profitability initiatives including trust system conversion and consolidation. Non-recurring expenses in 2019 included a $3 million loss on interest rate cap terminations, $3 million related to the branch acquisition, and $2 million related to branch optimization and other strategic initiatives.
Income Tax Expense
The amount of federal and state income tax expense is influenced by the amount of pre-tax income, the amount of tax-exempt income and the amount of other nondeductible expenses. Income tax expense was $8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with $4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The effective tax rate increased to 20.2% in 2020 from 15.7% in 2019, reflecting the higher level of taxable income and lower level of non-tax advantaged income in 2020. This reflects higher income in 2020 from the Company’s expanded customer base in the state of Maine along with higher core deposits that carry a lower cost of funds.
COMPARISON OF OPERATING RESULTS FOR THE YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019 AND 2018
Summary
Net income in 2019 was $23 million compared to $33 million in 2018 and included acquisition, restructuring and other expense charges of $8 million and $2 million, respectively. The non-GAAP measure of adjusted earnings in 2019 was $30 million compared to $35 million in 2018. Net income and adjusted earnings in 2019 benefited from expanded yields on earning assets and non-interest income growth, offset by higher cost of funds. Results for 2019 include operations from the branch acquisition as of the October 25, 2019 effective date.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income for 2019 was $90 million compared with $91 million in 2018. Interest income was $135 million, up 6% from $127 million in 2018 as average earning assets grew $70 million. The net interest margin was 2.78% in 2019 compared to 2.87% in the prior year. Purchase loan accretion contributed 10 and 11 basis points to the margin in 2019 and 2018, respectively. Yields expanded across all loan categories as variable rate products in the first half of 2019 repriced to higher rates driven by the 2018 short-term hikes. The 2019 yield on securities improved by 19 basis points reflecting the benefit of portfolio remix strategies and associated security sales in the second half of 2019. These improvements in interest from earning assets were offset by a higher cost of interest bearing liabilities, especially in the first half of 2019, which was also driven by short-term rate hikes in late 2018. While the cost of interest bearing liabilities increased 30 basis points to 1.61% on a year-over-year basis, the same costs improved to 1.42% in the fourth quarter due to executing deleveraging strategies associated with the branch acquisition and securities sales.
Loan Loss Provision
The level of the allowance is a critical accounting estimate, which is subject to uncertainty. The provision for loan losses is a charge to earnings in an amount sufficient to maintain the allowance for loan losses at a level deemed adequate by the Company. The provision was $2 million in 2019 compared to $3 million in 2018. The decrease is primarily due to lower charge-offs in 2019 as compared to prior year reflecting continued improvement in credit quality.
Non-Interest Income
Non-interest income for 2019 increased to $29 million from $28 million in 2018 driven primarily by customer loan derivative income, which increased to $2 million in 2019 compared to $860 thousand in 2018. The increase in these fees is attributable to the Company’s continued focus on the complexity of the financial needs of its customers and related commercial loan growth in 2019. Customer service fees also contributed to the overall increase in non-interest income growing by $589 thousand in 2019. The increase is due to higher transaction volume principally from the deposit base obtained through the branch acquisition. Trust and investment management fee income in 2019 was relatively flat with 2018. However, assets under management increased to $2.0 billion in 2019 compared to $1.7 billion in 2018 primarily due wealth management accounts that were obtained through the branch acquisition.
Non-Interest Expense
Non-interest expense was $90 million in 2019 compared to $76 million in 2018. The increase in 2019 includes $3 million related to the branch acquisition, a $3 million reclassification of losses on the interest rate cap derivative from other comprehensive income and $3 million related to branch optimization and other strategic review expenses. Salary and employee benefits expenses increased by $4 million due to postretirement benefit revaluations on lower discount rates and an increase in full time equivalent employees (“FTEs”). FTEs totaled 531 at the end of 2019 compared with 445 at the end of 2018, which includes employees from the branch acquisition.
Income Tax Expense
The effective tax rate decreased to 15.7% in 2019 from 18.7% in 2018 due to a higher proportion of tax-advantaged income to taxable income, which was driven by overall lower net income in 2019 as compared to 2018.
Expected Replacement of London Interbank Offered Rate
The Alternative Reference Rates Committee continues its work in finding suitable replacements for LIBOR. It is expected that a transition away from the widespread use of LIBOR to alternative reference rates and other potential interest rate benchmark reforms will occur beginning potentially in 2022. Although the full impact of such reforms and actions, together with any transition away from LIBOR remains unclear, the Company is preparing to transition from the LIBOR to an alternative reference rate.
The Company’s transition plan includes a number of key steps, including engagement with central bank and industry working groups and regulators, active client engagement, internal operational readiness, and risk management, among other things, to promote the transition to alternative reference rates. The Company is identifying on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet references to LIBOR, determining appropriate language to replace the LIBOR index language, and determining disclosures necessary for customers, with appropriate procedures and schedules to complete the LIBOR transition.
However, there is a number of unknown factors regarding the transition from LIBOR or interest rate benchmark reforms that could impact the Company’s business, including, for example, the pace of the transition to replacement or reformed rates, the specific terms and parameters for and market acceptance of the alternative reference rates, prices of and the liquidity of trading markets for products based on the alternative reference rates, and ability to transition to and develop appropriate systems and analytics for one or more alternative reference rates.
For a further discussion of the various risks the Company faces in connection with the expected replacement of LIBOR and reform of interest rate benchmarks on operations, see Item 1A of this Form 10K - “Risk Factors,” paragraph for “Reforms to London Interbank Offered Rate ("LIBOR") and other indices, and related uncertainty, may adversely affect our business, financial condition or results of operations.”
LIQUIDITY AND CASH FLOWS
Liquidity is measured by the Company’s ability to meet short-term cash needs at a reasonable cost or minimal loss. The Company seeks to obtain favorable sources of liabilities and to maintain prudent levels of liquid assets in order to satisfy varied liquidity demands. Besides serving as a funding source for maturing obligations, liquidity provides flexibility in responding to customer initiated needs. Many factors affect the Company’s ability to meet liquidity needs, including variations in the markets served by its network of offices, its mix of assets and liabilities, reputation and credit standing in the marketplace, and general economic conditions.
The Bank actively manages its liquidity position through target ratios established under its Asset Liability Management Policy. Continual monitoring of these ratios, by using historical data and through forecasts under multiple rate and stress scenarios, allows the Bank to employ strategies necessary to maintain adequate liquidity. The Bank’s policy is to maintain a liquidity position of at least 4% of total assets. A portion of the Bank’s deposit base has been historically seasonal in nature, with balances typically declining in the winter months through late spring, during which period the Bank’s liquidity position tightens.
The Bank maintains a liquidity contingency plan approved by the Bank’s Board of Directors. This plan addresses the steps that would be taken in the event of a liquidity crisis, and identifies other sources of liquidity available to the Company. Company management believes that the level of liquidity is sufficient to meet current and future funding requirements. However, changes in economic conditions, including consumer savings habits and availability or access to the brokered deposit market could potentially have a significant impact on the Company’s liquidity position.
The Company believes the existing cash and cash equivalents (including an interest-bearing deposit at the FRB Boston), securities available for sale and cash flows from operating activities will be sufficient to meet anticipated cash needs for at least the next twelve months. Future working capital needs will depend on many factors, including the rate of business and revenue growth. To the extent cash and cash equivalents, securities available for sale and cash flows from operating activities are insufficient to fund future activities, the Company may need to raise additional funds through debt arrangements or public or private debt or equity financings. The Company also may need to raise additional funds in the event it is determined in the future to effect one or more acquisitions of banks or businesses. If additional funding is required, the Company may not be able to obtain debt arrangements or to effect an equity or debt financing on terms acceptable to the Company or at all.
Capital Resources
Consistent with its long-term goal of operating a sound and profitable organization, at December 31, 2020, the Company maintained its strong capital position and continued to be a “well-capitalized” financial institution according to applicable regulatory standards. Management believes this to be vital in promoting depositor and investor confidence and providing a solid foundation for future growth.
The Company’s liquidity position remains strong. During the quarter we initiated pandemic-specific liquidity stress tests to analyze potential impacts from payment deferrals, unanticipated use of committed lines of credit, as well as the possibility of required servicer advances on sold loans. At December 31, 2020, available same-day liquidity totaled approximately $1.1 billion, including cash, borrowing capacity at FHLB and the Federal Reserve Discount Window and various lines of credit. Additional sources of liquidity include cash flows from operations, wholesale deposits, cash flow from the Company's amortizing securities and loan portfolios. The Company had unused borrowing capacity at the FHLB of $511.9 million, unused borrowing capacity at the Federal Reserve of $81.1 million and unused lines of credit totaling $71.9 million, in addition to over $200.0 million in unencumbered, liquid investment portfolio assets. The Company has also utilized the Federal Reserve's Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility to provide liquidity to fund PPP loans.
Contractual Obligations
The Company is a party to certain contractual obligations under which it is obligated to make future payments. These principally include borrowings from the FHLB, consisting of short-term and long-term fixed rate borrowings, and collateralized by all stock in the FHLB; a blanket lien on qualified collateral consisting primarily of loans with first and second mortgages secured by one-to-four family properties; and certain pledged investment securities. The Company has an obligation to repay all borrowings from the FHLB.
In the normal course of conducting its banking and financial services business, and in connection with providing products and services to its customers, the Company has entered into a variety of traditional third-party contracts for support services. Examples of such contractual agreements include, but are not limited to: services providing core banking systems, ATM and debit card processing, trust services software, accounting software and the leasing of T-1 telecommunication lines and other technology infrastructure supporting the Company’s network.
The following table summarizes the Company’s contractual obligations at December 31, 2020:
EFFECTS OF INFLATION
Inflation and changing prices have not had a material effect on the Company’s business, and the Company does not expect that they will materially affect the business in the foreseeable future. Any impact of inflation on cost of revenue and
operating expenses, especially employee compensation costs, may not be readily recoverable in the price of the Company product offerings.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
The Company is a party to certain off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on the Company’s financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that may be material to investors.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company’s off-balance sheet arrangements were limited to customer obligations, in the normal course of business to meet customer’s financing needs. These financial arrangements include commitments to extend credit, unused or unadvanced loan funds, and letters of credit. The Company uses the same lending policies and procedures to make such commitments as it uses for other lending products. Customers’ creditworthiness is evaluated on a case-by-case basis.
Commitments to originate loans, including unused or unadvanced loan funds, are agreements to lend to a customer provided there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require the customer to pay a fee. Since many of the commitments are expected to expire without being fully drawn upon, the total commitment amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements.
Standby letters of credit are conditional commitments issued by the Company to guarantee the performance of a customer to a third party. Standby letters of credit generally become payable upon the failure of the customer to perform according to the terms of the underlying contract with the third party, while commercial letters of credit are issued specifically to facilitate commerce and typically result in the commitment being drawn on when the underlying transaction is consummated between the customer and a third party. The contractual amount of these letters of credit represents the maximum potential future payments guaranteed by the Company. Typically these letters of credit expire if unused; therefore the total amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. For further detail see Note 12 - Other Commitments, Contingencies and Off-Balance Sheet Activities of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
IMPACT OF NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Please refer to the notes on Recently Adopted Accounting Principles and Future Application of Accounting Pronouncements in Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
APPLICATION OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES, AND RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
The Company’s significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP and practices generally applicable to the financial services industry requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, and to disclose contingent assets and liabilities. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Management has identified the Company’s most critical accounting policies as related to:
● Allowance for Loan Losses
● Acquired Loans
● Income Taxes
● Goodwill and Identifiable Intangible Assets
● Determination of Other-Than-Temporary Impairment of Securities
● Fair Value of Financial Instruments