Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and Notes thereto in Part II, Item 8 of this Report. You should also bear in mind the Risk Factors set forth in Part I, Item 1A, any of which could materially and adversely affect the Company’s business, operating results, financial condition and the actual results of the matters addressed by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion.
In March 2019, the SEC amended its rules to modernize and simplify certain reporting requirements for public companies. As part of this change, registrants may exclude discussion of the earliest of the three years in Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A). For further discussion and analysis regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, refer to Part II, Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 filed with the SEC on March 2, 2020.
COVID-19 Pandemic Update
In late 2019, there was an outbreak of a new strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) first identified in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China, which has since spread globally. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic. Further, the COVID-19 outbreak has resulted in government authorities around the world implementing numerous measures to try to reduce the spread of COVID-19, such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, “shelter-in-place,” “stay-at-home,” total lock-down orders, business limitations or shutdowns and similar orders. As a result, the COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains and workforce participation, and created significant volatility and disruption of financial markets. In an effort to first and foremost protect the health and safety of our employees, we also took proactive action to adopt social distancing policies at our locations globally, including working from home for certain employees, limiting the number of employees attending meetings, reducing the number of people in our locations at any one time, and significantly limiting employee travel.
Benchmark provides critical infrastructure products and essential services in each of our locations. However, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the related responses from government authorities, the Company’s operations were impacted worldwide starting in the first quarter of 2020. These impacts began with a shut-down of the Company’s manufacturing facilities in Suzhou, China early in the first quarter of 2020 (which ramped back to full capacity by mid-March). However, the disruptive impacts caused by the COVID-19 pandemic have since affected our operations in all other regions. For example, starting in mid-March, our Penang, Malaysia operation, which includes our largest precision machining facility, was significantly disrupted. As a result, our Penang, Malaysia operation had been operating at approximately 30% of capacity through the end of the first quarter of 2020, at approximately 50% of capacity through April of 2020 and subsequently ramped to full production capacity within a couple of weeks thereafter. Our California operations experienced significant disruptions through April 2020 due to “shelter-in-place” and “stay-at-home” orders and ordinances. Also, our operations in Tijuana and Guadalajara, Mexico have experienced significant disruptions due to similar “shelter-in-place” and “stay-at-home” orders and ordinances. We resumed operations in Tijuana and Guadalajara during the middle of May of 2020, ramped production in phases during 2020, and are currently nearing full capacity.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, our revenue during 2020 was negatively impacted primarily as a result of operational inefficiencies relating to reduced productivity levels throughout our facilities and supply chain constraints, which affected our ability to support customer demand. Additionally, the COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted our 2020 results due to increased direct costs associated with labor expenses and personal protective equipment for our employees, as well as under absorption of fixed costs.
While our manufacturing and engineering services operations have essentially returned to pre-COVID-19 productivity levels, the COVID-19 pandemic continues to affect the Company’s operations into 2021.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) was enacted in the United States in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act among other things, permits NOL carryovers and carrybacks to offset 100% of taxable income for taxable years beginning before 2021, and contains modifications on the limitation of business interest for tax years beginning in 2019 and 2020. The Company has evaluated the impact of these provisions and has determined these provisions did not have any impact on the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition, the CARES Act allows for employee retention tax credits to be taken in U.S. payroll tax filings and allows for the deferral of the employer portion of social security taxes with 50% to be paid at
the end of calendar years 2021 and 2022, respectively. Accordingly, the Company has deferred the payment of the employer portion of social security taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 until the end of 2021 and 2022, respectively. The Company has also determined it is entitled to employee retention credits and has filed for the credits in the second quarter payroll tax reports pursuant to the guidance provided by the Internal Revenue Service. The amount of credits has been recorded in operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020.
International authorities in various jurisdictions have also allowed for cash grants, delay of tax filings, and delay of tax payments for future quarters. We have taken advantage of these benefits by delaying our tax filings and respective tax payments in various jurisdictions.
In response to uncertainties related to the impact of the COVID-19 virus, we have taken a series of actions to lower our cost structure and reduce capital expenditures. On April 29, 2020, the Company announced a temporary 10% salary reduction for all executive officers (including our named executive officers) effective April 27, 2020 through December 31, 2020 and the Company’s Board of Directors approved a temporary 10% reduction in their quarterly cash compensation effective April 27, 2020 through December 31, 2020. Other senior leaders in the Company took a 7% salary reduction through September 29, 2020. Additional cost reduction actions in our U.S. factories consisted of employees taking rotating time off depending on factory loading levels. Cost reduction actions in our non-U.S. locations depend on local law requirements. Additionally, we have reduced other discretionary expenses, such as travel. We also implemented actions to conserve our cash and cash equivalents such as reduced planned capital expenditures, deferred certain planned investments, temporarily suspended our share repurchase activity, and deferred payroll and income tax payments in accordance with the CARES Act. Finally, we continue to focus on certain other procedures to manage potential risks related to working capital such as closely monitoring the financial stability, payment terms and credit limits of our customers.
We continue to monitor the rapidly evolving situation and guidance from international and domestic authorities, including federal, state and local public health authorities, and may take additional actions based on their recommendations. In these circumstances, there may be developments outside our control requiring us to adjust our operating plan. As such, the exact extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, financial condition and results of operations, is currently unknown and will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain, continuously evolving and cannot be predicted. This includes, but is not limited to, the duration and spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, its severity, the actions to contain the virus or treat its impact, including the availability of vaccinations and the rate of inoculations, and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume which may not return fully to pre-pandemic levels.
Accordingly, our current results and financial condition discussed herein may not be indicative of future operating results and trends. See “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Report for additional risks we face due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Ransomware Incident
During the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2019, some of the Company’s systems were affected by a ransomware incident that encrypted information on its systems and disrupted customer and employee access to its applications and services. The Company immediately took steps to isolate the impact and implemented measures to prevent additional systems from being affected, including taking its network offline as a precaution. In connection with this incident, third party consultants and forensic experts were engaged to assist with the restoration and remediation of the Company’s systems and, with the assistance of law enforcement, to investigate the incident. The Company has found no evidence that customer or employee data was exfiltrated from its network.
The Company restored connectivity and resumed operations quickly following the ransomware incident. However, fourth quarter 2019 operations were adversely affected by the inefficiencies caused by taking the network offline for a period of time. As a result, the Company’s fourth quarter 2019 revenue was also adversely affected as the Company was unable to fulfill a portion of customer demand during the quarter.
In 2019, ransomware incident related costs incurred totaled $7.7 million, net of estimated insurance recoveries of $5.0 million. These costs were primarily comprised of the certain employee related expenses and various third party consulting services, including forensic experts, legal counsel and other IT professional expenses.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company collected $6.6 million of insurance recoveries. Further insurance recoveries will be recorded when considered probable.
2020 OVERVIEW
Sales for 2020 were $2.1 billion, a 9% decrease from sales of $2.3 billion in 2019. During 2020, sales to customers in our various industry sectors fluctuated from 2019 as follows:
•
Industrials decreased by 18%,
•
A&D decreased by 2%,
•
Medical increased by 11%,
•
Semi-cap increased by 33%,
•
Computing decreased by 53%, and
•
Telecommunications decreased by 26%.
The overall revenue decrease was due primarily to lower demand from pandemic impacted customers in commercial aerospace, oil and gas industrials, and elective medical sectors (as discussed below). Higher-value market revenues were up 3% year-over-year from strength in the Semi-Cap and Medical sectors. Traditional market revenues were down as a result of program transitions and the completion of a legacy contract with a large Computing customer discussed further below.
Our sales depend on the success of our customers, some of which operate in businesses associated with rapid technological change and consequent product obsolescence. Developments adverse to our major customers or their products, or the failure of a major customer to pay for components or services, including in each case as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, can adversely affect us. A substantial percentage of our sales are made to a small number of customers, and the loss of a major customer, if not replaced, would adversely affect us. Sales to our ten largest customers represented 41% and 38% of our sales in 2020 and 2019, respectively. In 2020, sales to Applied Materials represented 12% of our sales. In 2019, no single customer represented 10% or more of our sales.
As part of our ongoing process to review contracts that are marginal and dilutive to our gross margin, we made the decision to not renew a legacy contract with a large Computing customer that was to expire at the end of 2019. During the second quarter of 2019, we completed the final build out of this legacy contract and in the third quarter had an immaterial amount of revenue from this contract as the transition was completed.
We experience fluctuations in gross profit from period to period. Different programs contribute different gross profits depending on the type of services involved, location of production, size of the program, complexity of the product and level of material costs associated with the various products. Moreover, new programs can contribute relatively less to our gross profit in their early stages when manufacturing volumes are usually lower, resulting in inefficiencies and unabsorbed manufacturing overhead costs. In addition, a number of our new program ramps remain subject to competitive constraints that can exert downward pressure on our margins. During periods of low production volume, we generally have idle capacity and reduced gross profit. Gross profit can also be impacted by other situations, such as the ransomware incident experienced in 2019.
We have undertaken initiatives to restructure our business operations with the intention of improving utilization and reducing costs. During 2020, we recognized $13.2 million of restructuring and other costs due in part to expenses associated with various site closures and restructuring activities. In addition, we incurred $5.7 million and $1.0 million in costs related to asset impairments in the Americas and Asia, respectively.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table presents the percentage relationship that certain items in our consolidated statements of income bear to sales for the periods indicated. The financial information and the discussion below should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and Notes thereto in Part II, Item 8 of this Report.
2020 Compared With 2019
Sales
As noted above, sales decreased 9% in 2020. The percentages of our sales by sector were as follows:
Industrials. 2020 sales decreased 18% to $373.1 million from $453.6 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to softer demand from customers in the oil and gas industry partially related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic with additional impacts from the commercial and building infrastructure markets.
Aerospace and Defense. 2020 sales decreased 2% to $423.6 million from $431.9 million in 2019 primarily due to the decline of the commercial aerospace sector related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Medical. 2020 sales increased 11% to $498.5 million from $448.2 million in 2019 primarily due to higher demand and program ramps from new and existing programs including programs used in the fight against COVID-19 partially offset by lower demand for elective medical programs.
Semiconductor Capital Equipment. 2020 sales increased 33% to $369.0 million from $277.8 million in 2019. The increase was primarily due to higher demand with existing programs across our customer base.
Computing. 2020 sales decreased 53% to $171.3 million from $361.2 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to our planned exit of a legacy Computing contract that was completed in 2019.
Telecommunications. 2020 sales decreased 26% to $217.7 million from $295.4 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to program transitions.
Our international operations are subject to the risks of doing business abroad. See Item 1A for factors pertaining to international sales, fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and a discussion of potential adverse effects in operating results associated with the risks of doing business abroad. During 2020 and 2019, 52% and 47%, respectively, of our sales were from international operations.
Gross Profit
Gross profit decreased 5.6% to $175.0 million for 2020 from $185.5 million in 2019. Gross margin decreased to 8.5% in 2020 from 8.8% in 2019 primarily due to lower revenues and the disruptive impacts caused by COVID-19 driven by reduced productivity levels throughout our facilities, increased direct costs associated with labor expenses and personal protective equipment for our employees and under absorption of fixed costs.
Selling, General and Administrative (SG&A) Expenses
SG&A decreased to $122.2 million in 2020 from $126.7 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in the provision to accounts receivable for doubtful accounts, partially offset by the increase in variable compensation and higher than expected COVID-19 related expenses. During 2020 and 2019, the provisions to accounts receivable for doubtful accounts (net of recoveries) were $2.2 million and $8.6 million, respectively.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets was $9.1 million in 2020 and $9.5 million in 2019.
Restructuring Charges and Other Costs
During 2020, we recognized $13.2 million of restructuring and other costs due primarily to expenses associated with announced site closures, reduction in force and other restructuring activities. In addition, we incurred $5.7 million and $1.0 million in costs related to asset impairments in the Americas and Asia, respectively. During 2019, we recognized $8.5 million of restructuring charges in connection with the announced closure of two facilities and other reductions in workforce of certain facilities primarily in the Americas. In addition, we incurred $4.6 million in charges primarily related to our CEO transition and our 2019 proxy activity. See Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Report for additional information on our restructuring charges.
Ransomware Incident Related Costs, Net
During the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2019, ransomware incident related costs incurred totaled $7.7 million, net of estimated insurance recoveries of $5.0 million. These costs were primarily comprised of certain employee related expenses and various third party consulting services including forensic experts, legal counsel and other IT professional expenses. During 2020, we collected $6.6 million of insurance recoveries. Further insurance recoveries will be recorded when considered probable.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased to $8.4 million during 2020 from $6.7 million during 2019 due to higher outstanding amounts on our revolving credit facility during 2020 and increased interest rates based on our higher debt leverage ratio as defined in our credit agreement.
Interest Income
Interest income decreased to $1.2 million in 2020 from $3.8 million in 2019 due to lower invested cash equivalents and lower interest rates.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense of $3.2 million in 2020 represented an 18.3% effective tax rate for 2020, compared with $3.8 million for 2019 representing an effective tax rate of 14.1%. The higher effective tax rate in 2020 is the result of the mix of profits in our foreign and U.S. jurisdictions with a higher amount of foreign earnings being taxed in the U.S. from the Global Intangible Low Tax Income calculation method.
We have been granted certain tax incentives, including tax holidays, for our subsidiaries in Malaysia and Thailand that will expire at various dates, unless extended or otherwise renegotiated, through 2021 in Malaysia and 2028 in Thailand. See Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Report.
Net Income
We reported a net income of $14.1 million, or $0.38 per diluted share for 2020, compared with a net income of $23.4 million, or $0.60 per diluted share, for 2019. The net decrease of $9.3 million in 2020 is primarily the result of items discussed above.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We have historically financed our organic growth and operations through funds generated from operations and occasional borrowings under our revolving credit facility. Cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash totaled $396.0 million at December 31, 2020 and $364.0 million at December 31, 2019, of which $207.3 million and $197.8 million, respectively, were held outside the U.S. in various foreign subsidiaries. During 2020 and 2019, we repatriated $25.0 million and $52.1 million, respectively, of foreign earnings to the U.S.
Cash provided by operating activities was $120.4 million in 2020. The cash provided by operations during 2020 consisted primarily of $14.1 million of net income, adjusted for $48.8 million of depreciation and amortization, a $13.6 million decrease in accounts receivable, an $18.3 million decrease in contract assets, a $46.6 million increase in advance payments from customers, partially offset by a $10.8 million increase in inventories, a $15.6 million decrease in accounts payable, and a $1.6 million decrease in income tax liabilities, net. Working capital was $0.7 billion at both December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
We purchase components only after customer orders or forecasts are received, which mitigates, but does not eliminate, the risk of loss on inventories. Supplies of electronic components and other materials used in operations are subject to industry-wide shortages. In certain instances, suppliers may allocate available quantities to us. If shortages of these components and other material supplies used in operations occur, vendors may not ship the quantities we need for production, and we may be forced to delay shipments, which can increase backorders and impact cash flows.
Cash used in investing activities was $34.4 million in 2020 primarily due to purchases of additional property, plant and equipment totaling $34.6 million. The purchases of property, plant and equipment were primarily for machinery and equipment in the Americas and Asia.
Cash used in financing activities was $57.5 million in 2020. Principal payments on the credit agreement and finance lease obligations totaled $117.5 million and $1.4 million, respectively, borrowings under the credit agreement and finance leases totaled $110.0 million and $0.9 million, respectively, share repurchases totaled $25.2 million, dividends paid totaled $23.0 million, and we received $1.0 million from the exercise of stock options.
Under the terms of our $650.0 million credit agreement (Credit Agreement), in addition to the $150.0 million Term Loan facility, we have a $500.0 million five-year revolving credit facility to be used for general corporate purposes, both with a maturity date of July 20, 2023. The Credit Agreement includes an accordion feature pursuant to which total commitments under the facility may be increased by an additional $275.0 million, subject to satisfaction of certain conditions. As of December 31, 2020, we had $136.9 million in borrowings outstanding under the Term Loan facility and $3.7 million in letters of credit outstanding under our revolving credit facility. $496.3 million remains available for future borrowings under the revolving credit facility. See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Report for more information regarding the terms of the Credit Agreement.
The Credit Agreement contains certain financial covenants related to interest coverage and debt leverage, and certain customary affirmative and negative covenants, including restrictions on our ability to incur additional debt and liens, pay dividends, repurchase shares, sell assets and merge or consolidate with other persons. Amounts due under the Credit Agreement could be accelerated upon specified events of default, including a failure to pay amounts due, breach of a covenant, material inaccuracy of a representation, or occurrence of bankruptcy or insolvency, subject, in some cases, to cure periods. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all of these covenants and restrictions.
Our operations, and the operations of businesses we acquire, are subject to certain foreign, federal, state and local regulatory requirements relating to environmental, waste management, health and safety matters. We believe we operate in substantial compliance with all applicable requirements and we seek to ensure that newly acquired businesses comply or will comply substantially with applicable requirements. To date, the costs of compliance and workplace and environmental remediation have not been material to us. However, material costs and liabilities may arise from these requirements or from new, modified or more stringent requirements in the future. In addition, our
past, current and future operations, and the operations of businesses we have or may acquire, may give rise to claims of exposure by employees or the public, or to other claims or liabilities relating to environmental, waste management or health and safety concerns.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents, including restricted cash, totaling $396.0 million and we have $496.3 million available for borrowings under the Credit Agreement. During the next 12 months, we believe our capital expenditures will approximate $45 million to $50 million, principally for machinery and equipment to help increase our production capacity to support anticipated revenue growth and our ongoing business around the globe.
On March 6, 2018, our Board of Directors approved an expanded stock repurchase program granting us the authority to repurchase up to $250 million in common stock in addition to the $100 million approved on December 7, 2015. On October 26, 2018, the Board of Directors authorized an additional $100 million shares for repurchase above our existing program. On February 19, 2020, the Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of an additional $150 million of the Company’s common stock. As of December 31, 2020, we had $204.2 million remaining under the share repurchase authorization to purchase additional shares. We are under no commitment or obligation to repurchase any particular amount of common stock.
The Company began declaring and paying quarterly dividends during the first quarter of 2018. In February 2020, the Board of Directors approved a quarterly dividend increase, raising the quarterly dividend from $0.15 to $0.16 per common share. During 2020 and 2019, cash dividends paid totaled $23.0 million and $23.3 million, respectively. On December 11, 2020, the Company declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.16 per share of the Company’s common stock to shareholders of record as of December 30, 2020. The dividend of $5.8 million was paid on January 13, 2021. The Board of Directors currently intends to continue paying quarterly dividends. However, the Company’s future dividend policy is subject to the Company’s compliance with applicable law, and depending on, among other things, the Company’s results of operations, financial condition, level of indebtedness, capital requirements, contractual restrictions, restrictions in the Company’s debt agreements, and other factors that the Board of Directors may deem relevant, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Dividend payments are not mandatory or guaranteed; there can be no assurance that the Company will continue to pay a dividend in the future.
Management believes that our existing cash balances and funds generated from operations will be sufficient to permit us to meet our liquidity requirements over the next 12 months. Management further believes that our ongoing cash flows from operations and any borrowings we may incur under our revolving credit facility will enable us to meet operating cash requirements in future years. If we consummated significant acquisitions in the future, our capital needs would increase and could possibly result in our need to increase available borrowings under our Credit Agreement or access public or private debt and equity markets. There can be no assurance, however, that we would be successful in raising additional debt or equity on acceptable terms.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Report. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to accounts receivable, inventories, revenue recognition, income taxes, long-lived assets, stock-based compensation and contingencies and litigation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates. We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue is recognized when a contract exists and when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring control of a product or service to the customer. A contract exists when it has approval and commitment from both parties, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are identified, the contract has commercial substance and collectability of consideration is probable. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer. For the Company, the arrangement with the customer is generally
documented through a master agreement which outlines the general terms and conditions of the arrangement and a specific purchase commitment from the customer.
Our performance obligations are satisfied over time as work progresses or at a point in time. The determination of how our performance obligations are satisfied requires judgment and is assessed on a contract by contract basis. Under the majority of our contracts, our performance obligations are satisfied over time as work progresses since the customer controls all of the work-in-progress as products are being built. For these contracts, the selection of the method to measure progress towards completion requires judgment and is based on the nature of the products or services to be provided. We use a cost-based input measurement of progress because is best represents the transfer of assets to the customer. For our other contracts, revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of the product or service, which is generally upon shipment or delivery pending on the terms of the underlying contract. Revenue from design, development and engineering services is generally recognized over time as the services are performed.
Generally, there are no subjective customer acceptance requirements or further obligations related to goods of services provided. Our contracts with customer do not allow for a general right of return.
Income Taxes
We estimate our income tax provision in each of the jurisdictions where we operate, including estimating exposures related to uncertain tax positions. We must also make judgments regarding the ability to realize our deferred tax assets. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that we believe is more likely than not to be realized. Our valuation allowance as of December 31, 2020 of $19.0 million primarily relates to deferred tax assets from our foreign and U.S. state net operating loss tax carryforwards of $19.1 million.
Differences in our future operating results as compared to the estimates utilized in the determination of the valuation allowances could result in adjustments in valuation allowances in future periods. For example, a significant increase in our operations in the United States, future accretive acquisitions in the United States and any movement in the mix of profits from our international operations to the United States would result in a reduction in the valuation allowance and would increase income in the period such determination was made. Alternatively, significant economic downturns in the United States generating additional operating loss carryforwards and potential movements in the mix of profits to international locations would result in an increase in the valuation allowance and would decrease income in the period such determination was made. In addition, any significant prolonged economic downturns in some of our foreign locations would generate operating loss carryforwards and an increase in the valuation allowance, respectively.
On December 22, 2017, the SEC staff issued Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 118 (SAB 118), which provides guidance on accounting for the tax effects of the U.S. Tax Reform. SAB 118 provided a measurement period that would not extend beyond one year from the U.S. Tax Reform enactment date for companies to complete their accounting of the impact on income taxes. Until the accounting was complete, companies could record provisional estimates. As a result of the U.S. Tax Reform, we recorded provisional amounts in relation to the accounting of the transition tax in 2017. We have finalized our accounting for SAB 118 as of December 31, 2018 within the measurement period. See Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Report.
We are subject to examination by tax authorities for different periods in various U.S. and foreign tax jurisdictions. During the course of such examinations, disputes may occur as to matters of fact and/or law. In most tax jurisdictions the passage of time without examination will result in the expiration of applicable statutes of limitations, thereby precluding the taxing authority from examining the relevant tax period(s). We believe that we have adequately provided for our tax liabilities.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and Goodwill
Long-lived assets, such as property, plant, and equipment and purchased intangibles subject to amortization, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. The recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated undiscounted future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount that the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset.
Goodwill is tested for impairment on an annual basis, at a minimum, and whenever events and circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may be impaired. Circumstances that may lead to impairment include unforeseen
decreases in future performance or industry demand or the restructuring of our operations as a result of a change in our business strategy. We perform a qualitative assessment to determine if goodwill is potentially impaired. If the qualitative assessment indicates that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, or if we elect not to perform a qualitative assessment, then we would be required to perform a quantitative impairment test for goodwill. This process involves determining the fair values of the reporting units and comparing those fair values to the carrying values, including goodwill, of the reporting unit. An impairment loss would be recognized to the extent that the carrying amount exceeds the asset’s fair value. For purposes of performing our goodwill impairment assessment, our reporting units are the same as our operating segments as defined in Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Report. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had goodwill of approximately $192.1 million, respectively, associated with our Americas and Asia business segments.
Based on our qualitative assessments of goodwill as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we concluded that it was more likely than not that the fair value of our Americas and Asia business segments were greater than their carrying amounts, and therefore no further testing was required.
Changes in economic and operating conditions that occur after the annual impairment analysis or an interim impairment analysis, and that impact these assumptions, may result in a future goodwill impairment charge.
Recently Enacted Accounting Principles
See Note 1(r) to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Report for a discussion of recently enacted accounting principles.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
We have certain contractual obligations that extend beyond 2021 under lease obligations and debt arrangements. Non-cancelable purchase commitments do not typically extend beyond the normal lead-time of several weeks. Purchase orders beyond this time frame are typically cancelable. We do not use off-balance sheet financing techniques other than traditional operating leases, and we have not guaranteed the obligations of any entity that is not one of our wholly owned subsidiaries. The total contractual cash obligations in existence at December 31, 2020 due pursuant to contractual commitments are:
(1)
U.S federal income tax on deemed mandatory repatriation is payable over 5 years pursuant to the U.S. Tax Reform. See Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Report.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any significant off-balance sheet arrangements. See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Report.