ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
GENERAL
This discussion is intended to assist readers in understanding the financial condition and results of operations Berkshire Hills Bancorp, Inc. (“Berkshire” or the “Company"), the changes in key items in the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements (“financial statements”) from year to year and the primary reasons for those changes.
The objectives of this section are:
•To provide a narrative explanation of the Company’s financial statements that enables investors to see the company through the eyes of management;
•To enhance the financial disclosure and provide the context within which financial information should be analyzed; and
•To provide information about the quality of, and potential future variability of, the Company’s earnings and cash flow.
This discussion includes the following sections:
•Summary of recent events and strategic initiatives
•Comparison of Financial Condition at December 31, 2020 and 2019
•Comparison of Operating Results for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
•Comparison of Operating Results for the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
•Liquidity and Cash Flows
•Capital Resources
•Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
•Discussion of accounting policies and pronouncements
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Company’s financial statements and the notes thereto appearing in Item 8 of this document. In the following discussion, income statement comparisons are against the previous year and balance sheet comparisons are against the previous fiscal year-end, unless otherwise noted. Operating results discussed herein are not necessarily indicative of the results for the year 2021 or any future period. In management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations, certain reclassifications have been made to make prior periods comparable. Tax-equivalent adjustments are the result of increasing income from tax-advantaged loans and securities by an amount equal to the taxes that would be paid if the income were fully taxable based on a 26% marginal rate (including state income taxes net of federal benefit). In the discussion, unless otherwise specified, references to earnings per share and "EPS" refer to diluted earnings per common share, including the dilutive impact of the convertible preferred shares.
Berkshire is a Delaware corporation headquartered in Boston and the holding company for Berkshire Bank (“the Bank”) and Berkshire Insurance Group, Inc. Established in 1846, the Bank operates as a commercial bank under a Massachusetts trust company charter.
BE FIRST CULTURE & CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY
Berkshire Bank is a purpose and values-driven community bank. We believe that everyone, from every neighborhood, should be able to bank with dignity. We're committed to providing an ecosystem of socially responsible financial solutions to meet our customers’ needs, engaging with communities to ensure access and upward economic mobility, addressing racial equity and fostering a workplace culture where everyone belongs. Our Be FIRST values of Belonging, Focusing, Inclusion, Respect, Service, and Teamwork guide us as we evolve and navigate our environment to create long-term sustainable value for our stakeholders.
The spirit and work ethic that began 175 years ago when Berkshire Bank first opened its doors to meet the working class and entrepreneurs’ financial needs is still at the core of our company today. As the COVID-19 pandemic ravaged communities and shuttered businesses, we answered the call to assist our neighbors. We ensured our employees, customers, and communities' health, safety, and economic resiliency was the priority. We created the You FIRST employee assistance fund to help employees impacted by unexpected financial hardships. We assisted small businesses and consumers with loan forbearances and government assistance programs and we launched a
fund to assist black and brown owned businesses most impacted by the pandemic. We also faced the stark reality that systematic racism continues to exist throughout the country. While many companies that had been on the sidelines stepped-up, Berkshire leaned in and responded with continued focus, commitment, and intentionality.
We continue to build on our Be FIRST Commitment, our roadmap for purpose-driven, socially responsible community banking. Our strong foundation of governance systems, including our Corporate Responsibility & Culture Committee of our Board of Directors, Diversity & Inclusion Employee Committee, Responsible & Sustainable Business Policy, and Social & Environmental Responsibility Risk Management practices collectively integrate social, environmental, cultural, and reputational considerations through all aspects of the company. Berkshire Bank continues to offer services to the underbanked through the Reevx Labs™ platform at reevxlabs.com.
We engage directly with our stakeholders and populate several communications channels with strategic content including our Corporate Responsibility website www.berkshirebank.com/csr, annual report, and proxy statement to highlight our commitment to disclosure, transparency and socially responsible performance. Our annual Corporate Responsibility Report, which is aligned with Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (“SASB”) commercial bank disclosure topics, details the company's environmental, social, governance, and cultural programs as well as our progress on The Be FIRST Commitment. We are also incredibly proud to be recognized for our leadership and performance, including local, regional, national, and international awards. Among these honors The North American Inspiring Workplaces Award, Communitas Award for Leadership in Corporate Social Responsibility, Listing in the Bloomberg Gender-Equality Index and achieving a perfect score in the Human Rights Campaign Corporate Equality Index.
SUMMARY
The emergence of the COVID-19 global pandemic dominated the Company’s activities and results in 2020. Berkshire adjusted its business model to manage pandemic related impacts to its operations, its customers, and its operating profitability. The Company’s markets became a national and global disease hotspot early in the pandemic, in the second quarter. Government authorities shut down much societal and economic activity in March. Conditions improved in the third quarter, but another wave of disease incidence slowed further improvement, and economic conditions remained stressed through year-end. During the year, unprecedented federal fiscal and monetary stimulus was deployed nationally. The Federal Reserve Board of Governors lowered short-term interest rates by approximately 1.50% in the first quarter, and further actions by the Federal Reserve resulted in rates coming down across all maturities, resulting in a parallel downward rate shock of approximately 1.50%. Following an unprecedented economic contraction in the second quarter, the economy had partially recovered by the end of 2020.
The rollout of vaccinations and further federal and monetary support were expected to gradually further normalize conditions in 2021.
The Bank initially closed its branches except for drive-through tellers, and most back-office staff moved to work from home status. The Bank was able to resume most branch activities in the third quarter, while back-office staff continue to telecommute. Business activities shifted during this period to provide expedited support for supporting stimulus programs and servicing the needs of customers and communities arising from the emergency conditions. Numerous programs were developed to provide support and assistance to the Bank’s staff and communities, including granting of loan payment modifications pursuant to government guidelines and the origination of commercial Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) SBA guaranteed loans to support employment during the shutdown. Branch access restrictions were reintroduced in the fourth quarter and some government restrictions were resumed due to worsening public health.
Changes in the Company’s financial condition and results were primarily due to the pandemic and the related changes in financial market conditions and economic expectations. Due to these downturns, the Company recorded large non-cash charges for goodwill impairment and the current expected credit loss provision during the year. These charges resulted in losses for the first and second quarters, but did not materially affect most regulatory capital measures, cash flows, or liquidity. Among the most significant financial impacts from the pandemic were the following:
•Goodwill impairment: In the second quarter, the Company recorded a $554 million noncash expense representing the full impairment and write-off of the carrying value of goodwill due to the impact of the COVID-19 disease on economic and financial market conditions resulting in a lower fair value of the Company’s equity.
•Credit Loss Provision: A $65 million noncash credit loss provision expense was recorded in the first half of 2020 primarily representing projected pandemic related current expected credit losses in future periods under the new Current Expected Credit Losses (“CECL”) accounting standard. The full year provision was $76 million.
•Reduced Revenue: Net revenue from continuing operations decreased year-over-year by 15% due primarily to compression of the net interest margin resulting from the near zero interest rate policy implemented by the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, and reflecting the Company’s asset sensitive interest rate risk profile. The margin change also reflected a change in asset mix from loans and into lower yielding short-term investments and investment securities.
•Loan Modifications: Short-term loan payment deferrals were granted in accordance with terms established by bank regulators to lessen borrower hardship. Initial payment deferrals totaled $1.6 billion. The balance of active and in-process deferrals declined to $350 million at year-end.
•Balance Sheet Changes: A pandemic related deposit surge was primarily invested in short-term investment reserves held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. The Company originated $708 million in PPP loans to support employment, and these loans partially offset reductions in other loan categories due to reduced economic activity, liquidity from government stimulus, and accelerated prepayments. Demand deposits increased as borrowers stored liquidity resulting from government stimulus and reduced economic activity. Total equity decreased but most regulatory capital ratios improved, and measures of liquidity improved due to reduced usage of wholesale funding and due to higher short-term investment balances.
Reflecting the above activity, the Company recorded a loss of $569 million, or $11.33 per share for the first six months of 2020. This loss was a result of noncash charges for goodwill impairment and the provision for current expected credit losses on loans. Results returned to profitability in the second half of the year, with second half earnings totaling $36 million, or $0.73 per share. Full year results were a loss of $533 million, or $10.60 per share.
In conformance with the industry guidelines issued by the Federal Reserve at the outset of the pandemic, the Company ceased repurchases of common stock in the first quarter, and let its outstanding repurchase authorization expire at the end of the first quarter. Also, the Company reduced its shareholder dividend by 50% in the third quarter of 2020. This reduction was made to better align the dividend payout and dividend yield with the reduced level of operating earnings in the current environment.
In October 2020, the Company announced the launch of best-in-class digital account opening technology. This platform provides benefits to the customer experience, to revenue generation, and to the Company’s operating efficiency. The company also enhanced its customer experience by upgrading its call center and rolling out its e-signature platform. These enhanced capabilities are significantly more valuable in today’s environment as a result of the customer needs and accelerated digital transformation resulting from the pandemic.
Also in October 2020, the Company announced a strategic goal to pursue expense management initiatives, due in part to the long-term revenue impacts of the near zero interest rate environment. Expense management also recognizes long-term changes in customer behaviors and the Bank’s operating model based on the accelerated transition to the digital economy resulting from the pandemic. In December 2020, as part of these initiatives, the Company announced a branch optimization plan. The Company announced that it had entered into an agreement for the sale of its 8 Mid-Atlantic branches, including the transfer of more than $600 million in deposits and $300 million in loans. Additionally, the Company announced a plan to consolidate 16 branches in its New England/New York footprint. Both of these initiatives are targeted for completion in the first half of 2021. The Company expects to recognize a net gain on the sale of the Mid-Atlantic branches, as well as charges in conjunction with the branch consolidations.
In addition to reshaping the branch office network, the Company is pursuing possibilities for identifying and releasing surplus corporate real estate, and making other operational adjustments to its business model. The Company also plans to formalize cost save opportunities arising from work from home as well as changes in procurement processes in the current environment. The Company’s goal is to streamline its business model in its core markets and leverage organic growth around that foundation. Two critical enablers are the technology that the Company has invested in and its personalized banking services program, MyBanker. Berkshire has been successfully deploying these mobile personal bankers for a number of years to bring service to customers where and when they need it and they remain integral to the distinctive customer experience that the Bank is developing as a 21st century community bank.
On August 10, 2020, the Company announced that, pursuant to a separation agreement, Richard M. Marotta had stepped down from his position as President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company and CEO of the Bank, as well as from his role as a Director to pursue new opportunities. Working within its leadership succession planning process, the Board appointed Sean A. Gray, to serve as Acting President and CEO for the Company. The Board initiated a CEO search process to consider a national search for candidates inside and outside of Berkshire. The Board established a working committee to oversee the search process and retained the firm of Spencer Stuart as its executive search consulting firm. On January 25, 2021 the Board announced the appointment of Nitin J. Mhatre as President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company and the Bank effective January 29, 2021. With the appointment of Mr. Mhatre, Mr. Gray resumed his ongoing duties as President and Chief Operating Officer of Berkshire Bank and Senior Executive Vice President of Berkshire Hills Bancorp, Inc.
Mr. Mhatre is a senior banking executive with 25 years of community and global banking experience. Most recently, as Executive Vice President, Community Banking at Webster Bank, Mr. Mhatre was a member of Webster Bank's executive team and led its consumer and business banking businesses. In this role, he was responsible for profitable growth of the Community Banking segment at the $31 billion bank and led a diverse team of more than 1,500 employees. Previously, he spent more than 13 years at Citi Group in various leadership roles across consumer-related businesses globally. Mr. Mhatre served on the Board of the Consumer Bankers Association headquartered in Washington D.C. since 2014 and was Chairman of the Board from 2019 to 2020. He also serves on the Board of Junior Achievement of Southwest New England headquartered in Hartford, CT.
The Board and management team are fully aligned on the Company's long-term strategic direction. That strategy focuses on improving core operating performance with a relationship banking model that serves Berkshire’s communities and clients in its footprint. Berkshire’s brand name and franchise in its markets, its differentiated customer service and culture, and its purpose-based values are all targeted to support meaningful improvement in shareholder returns. The Company has five current key initiatives:
•Optimizing Berkshire’s branch footprint through the announced branch sales and consolidations
•Rationalizing the balance sheet to maintain strong liquidity and capital metrics and support improved profitability and shareholder return
•Further implementing digitization and automation to improve customer engagement and operational efficiencies
•Focusing on core products and services to enhance customer relationships and the customer experience while exiting non-strategic products & business lines
•Continuing proactive management of asset quality through the pandemic cycle
Berkshire continues to pursue its ongoing transformation into an innovative 21st century community bank, which has gained heightened relevance to stakeholders and the Company’s long-term opportunity as a result of this year’s events. Guided by its Be FIRST principles, the Company continues to foster a more inclusive, innovative and supportive culture, which is positioning Berkshire to deliver a differentiated and compelling community banking experience to everyone in its communities, including those who have been traditionally underbanked. Following its principles, the Company’s COVID-19 response included:
COMPARISON OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AT DECEMBER 31, 2020 AND DECEMBER 31, 2019
Summary: The major balance sheet changes were the result of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impacts on the economy and federal fiscal and monetary policy. Total loans decreased and demand deposits increased due to the slowdown in economic activity, resulting in less credit demand and the accumulation of customer liquidity - both of which benefited from federal stimulus. The funds from loan payoffs were primarily invested into short and long-term investments and demand deposit growth was primarily used to reduce wholesale funding sources and for short-term investments. The Company’s operating focus was on meeting customer needs and further strengthening its capital and liquidity in the face of unknown pandemic impacts on its markets.
Anticipated higher credit losses from the economic impacts of the pandemic resulted in higher loan loss provisions in the first half of the year, although traditional metrics of loan performance did not begin to significantly worsen until the fourth quarter. Loan performance was aided by loan modifications and SBA guaranteed PPP loans which were implemented pursuant to federal bank supervisory guidelines in an unprecedented response to supporting the economy and financial system.
The long-term impacts of the pandemic drove bank stock prices sharply lower, and in the second quarter the Company wrote-off the full $554 million balance of goodwill which had been accumulated over the past decade principally from bank acquisitions when stock prices were higher. This was the principal reason for the $378 million, or 3%, decrease in total assets to $12.8 billion in 2020. Excluding this write-off, total assets increased by $176 million, or 1%, due to demand deposit growth invested into short-term investments. Largely due to this impairment charge, shareholders’ equity decreased by $571 million, or 32%, to $1.19 billion. The goodwill impairment charge was non-cash and had no material impact on the Company’s tangible equity or regulatory capital metrics, which improved continuously through the year due to the reduction in risk weighted assets resulting from the proportional shift from loans to investments. Book value per common share measured $23.37 at period-end and the non-GAAP measure of tangible book value per share measured $22.68 per share.
The Company's goal is to provide a strong foundation for supporting growth in its customer accounts and revenue drivers across its major markets and business lines based on improvement in forecasted public health and market conditions. The majority of the $633 million of year-end PPP loans is expected to be forgiven by the SBA in 2021, contributing to a potential decrease in total loans during the year 2021. The sale of the Mid-Atlantic branches is also expected to result in a decrease in interest bearing assets and liabilities.
Investments: Due to loan runoff and deposit growth, total short-term investments increased by $992 million in 2020, and total investment securities increased by $454 million. Most short-term investments were held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. The increase in investment securities was concentrated in Available for Sale ("AFS") agency mortgage-backed securities and agency commercial mortgage-backed securities. There have been accelerated prepayments of mortgage related securities as a result of the low interest rate environment. The Company purchased $894 million in AFS securities in 2020, accepting lower yields in order to maintain and increase the size of the portfolio. In the current environment of low interest rates, a generally flat yield curve, and low credit spreads, the Company has been judicious about redeploying short-term investments into longer term structures while also maintaining balance sheet flexibility due to the general uncertainties of the current environment. The fourth quarter securities portfolio yield decreased year-over-year by 0.62% to 2.69%, reflecting ongoing rolldown of asset yields due to low rates.
The Company managed down the size of the corporate bond portfolio and has carefully monitored its exposure to credit risk in corporate and municipal obligations during the pandemic induced recession. At period-end, there were no delinquent or non-accruing debt securities. The Company liquidated most of its portfolio of corporate equity securities during the fourth quarter. These securities were a component of its capital gains management strategy related to tax credit investments; this strategy was no longer operative in 2020. The remaining equity securities at year-end were primarily bond mutual funds targeted toward Community Reinvestment Act eligible investments. The Company recorded $8 million in net securities losses during 2020 primarily due to the decline in the value of bank stocks which were a significant component of its equities portfolio. The portfolio of investment securities had
an unrealized gain of $68 million, or 3.2%, at period-end due to the gain in debt security fair values resulting from the decrease in interest rates.
Loans: Total loans decreased by $1.42 billion, or 15%, to $8.08 billion in 2020. During the year, the Company originated $708 million in commercial PPP loans, of which $633 million remained outstanding at year-end. The Company also reclassified $301 million in loans to assets held for sale, due to the pending agreement for the sale of the Mid-Atlantic branches. Excluding these loans and the PPP loans, total loans decreased by $1.80 billion, or 18%. This included a 5% reduction in commercial real estate, a 39% reduction C&I loans, a 30% reduction in residential mortgages, and a 26% reduction in consumer balances. In the commercial markets, borrower demand decreased significantly due to the pandemic and the Company adjusted its business solicitation during the height of the economic shutdowns, while focusing its resources on the operational demands of supporting the PPP program and managing requests for loan modifications pursuant to government guidelines in support of its markets. Slower business activity led many borrowers to reduce C&I borrowings and to instead build liquidity. The Company curtailed business solicitation in certain COVID-19 sensitive industries, and trimmed its exposure to commercial wholesale and participation balances, while also allowing non-relationship exposures to runoff. The Company continued to see activity in its commercial lending channels and it remained disciplined in its selection, pricing, and underwriting processes. Based on market activity and forecast market conditions, the Company is targeting to grow its middle market commercial business, with a focus on asset based lending and small business banking, and selected opportunities in commercial real estate. The Company expects overall commercial borrowing demand to improve as pandemic conditions subside and forecast economic growth emerges.
The decrease in residential mortgages reflected heightened loan prepayments and refinancings due to the drop in interest rates. Additionally, the Company focused on completing the disposition of discontinued national mortgage banking operations, and also the supply of secondary market mortgages from area correspondent banks decreased as all banks coped with higher runoff. Home equity loans outstanding decreased due to reduced borrowing demand and the portfolio of indirect auto loans continued to runoff in accordance with the Company’s strategy. The fourth quarter yield on the loan portfolio decreased year-over-year by 0.90% to 3.62% in 2020 from 4.52% in 2019. This decrease reflected pandemic related impacts, including the decrease in market interest rates, higher prepayments of higher yielding loans, and the effect of the lower yielding PPP loans. Loans repricing within one year totaled $3.8 billion, or 46% of total loans at year-end 2020.
The majority of PPP loans were originated in the second quarter to existing borrowers to provide payroll support during the pandemic shutdown. These loans bear interest at 1% and most were primarily written with two year maturities. They are guaranteed by the SBA and most are expected to be repaid by the SBA as loans are forgiven. The PPP fees received from the SBA approximated 3% of the loan amounts. At year-end, the Company had a balance of $13 million in net deferred PPP loan fees paid by the SBA which is being amortized into net interest income based on the approximate two year expected lives of the loans. The unamortized deferred balance is recognized in net interest income at the time each loan is forgiven. The Company originated $708 million of PPP loans in 2020, of which $633 million remained outstanding at year-end. With the issuance of additional forgiveness guidelines around year-end, the Company expects that the majority of PPP loans will be forgiven in the first half of 2021.
Based on its experience with borrowers during the pandemic, the Company has thoroughly assessed its commercial loan portfolio to determine the most significant sensitive industries based on exposure, risk rating, and use of federally supported lending and loan modification programs. The Company has focused on hospitality, Firestone (specialty equipment lending), restaurants, and nursing/assisted living facilities, which collectively totaled $868 million at year-end. The Company has evaluated the loans in these industries and has expanded its review of other commercial loans to broaden the scope and frequency of risk assessments. The Company initially identified a larger group of borrowers as potentially COVID-19 sensitive, including retail, arts and entertainment, medical, and construction. Based on its experience during the year, the Company has narrowed its focus of COVID-19 sensitivity to the four groups mentioned above. The Company views these COVID-19 sensitive loans as generally conforming to its longstanding financial disciplines for loan/value, debt service coverage, and recourse in conformity with customary industry practices. Based on its longstanding disciplines, the Company believes its exposures within these industries are reasonably diversified and structured to accomplish overall risk management objectives. The
Company also monitors its outstanding loans to small business borrowers. Loans with balances of $1 million or less totaled $773 million at year-end. Some smaller balance commercial loans are monitored primarily based on payment status, with less availability of current borrower financial information. Small businesses and SBA borrowers have benefited from various government support programs and may be more vulnerable in future periods if government support programs are not continued.
Asset Quality: Most asset performance measures remained within risk ranges viewed by the Company as moderate during the first nine months of 2020, including charge-offs, delinquencies, non-accruals, and troubled debt restructurings. Some measures moved adversely in the fourth quarter as pandemic impacts on loan performance emerged more clearly, particularly in COVID sensitive commercial industries. It is anticipated that some measures will remain elevated in 2021 as some borrowers experience impairment of their liquidity and capital resulting from accumulating economic impacts of the pandemic. Due to loan payment modifications granted pursuant to government guidelines, many borrowers did not make a full year of scheduled loan payments during 2020 but continued to accrue interest and were not reported as delinquent at year-end.
Asset quality benefited in 2020 from the PPP loans, which are intended to support payrolls and therefore support business operations and employment despite the contraction in the economy. Other federal stimulus measures included one-time payments issued to most taxpayers and supplemental unemployment insurance. Monetary actions drove interest rates to near zero, reducing debt service costs and supporting asset values in the public equities and credit markets. Under year-end legislation approved by Congress, further fiscal economic support was approved for disbursement in 2021.
Additionally, federal bank regulatory authorities encouraged banks to work with affected borrowers to provide loan payment modifications to protect liquidity and support solvency. Forbearances made before year-end in accordance with CARES Act guidelines are not reported as delinquencies and are not required to be analyzed as troubled debt restructurings. In 2020, loans with conforming loan modifications totaled $1.6 billion, with the majority of modifications consisting of payment deferrals to commercial customers. The Bank was initially proactive in reaching out to commercial customers to offer conforming modifications within regulatory guidelines. Most initial deferrals were 90 day deferrals of principal and interest payments, with deferred payments often added to the end of the loan term. While the majority of customers returned to scheduled payments during the year, some customers were provided additional deferrals during the year. In the fourth quarter, the majority of commercial loans receiving additional deferrals beyond 2020 agreed to pay current period interest during the deferral period. In most cases, commercial customers requesting further deferrals were individually underwritten, negotiated, and approved. Many in the hospitality segment and the Firestone segment were provided with fourth quarter deferrals beyond 90 days to reflect seasonal and specialty operations. Many hospitality modifications included interest reserves established by project sponsors. At year-end, loans with payment deferrals (including in-process deferrals) totaled $350 million, of which $331 million were commercial loans. Year-end deferrals measured 4.7% of total loans excluding PPP loans.
In part because of the loan deferral program, accruing delinquent loans did not increase during the year, reaching a quarterly low of 0.34% of total loans at year-end 2020, compared to 0.54% at year-end 2019. The deferral periods for the majority of deferred loans were scheduled to expire in the first four months of 2021. Under revised legislation passed by Congress at year-end 2020, banks can continue to provide qualifying loan modifications including payment deferrals throughout 2021 without reporting these loans as delinquent or as troubled debt restructurings. Under accounting principles, loans cannot be maintained as accruing interest if the bank does not expect to collect the full contractual amount of principal and interest from a borrower. Non-accruing loans remained little changed during the first nine months of the year, but increased to 0.80% of total loans as of year-end 2021, compared to 0.42% at the start of the year. This increase was largely due to two commercial relationships which were identified as substandard prior to the pandemic. One of these was a purchased credit deteriorated credit to a nursing/assisted living facility acquired in the 2019 bank merger, and one was a hospitality relationship in a market that became overbuilt. During the fourth quarter, the Company sold $22 million in hospitality loans which deteriorated during the pandemic.The Company continues to evaluate potential opportunities to sell deteriorated loans. Net loan charge-offs totaled $38 million in 2020 and $33 million in 2019. Charge-offs in 2020 included $12 million in hospitality loans written down in the fourth quarter due to pandemic related weaknesses. Charge-offs in 2019 included a $16 million charge in the third quarter for one commercial relationship with alleged fraud.
During 2020, the Company identified certain commercial segments which were determined to be COVID-19 sensitive. The Company refined this group during the year. The two primary segments deemed COVID-19 sensitive were hospitality loans and loans in the Company’s Firestone Financial specialty equipment lending group. Borrowers in both of these segments were more at risk of significant revenue declines due to mandated reductions in travel and social activity. Hospitality loans totaled $301 million and Firestone loans totaled $246 million at year-end. These two segments accounted for $225 million of the $331 million in total commercial active and in process deferrals at year-end 2020. They accounted for $158 million of the $338 million in year-end commercial criticized assets. For the hospitality loans, 91% of the year-end deferrals were scheduled for current interest payments and many of these were supported by interest reserve accounts. For the Firestone loans, the business lines with the most demonstrated COVID-19 risk were fitness ($71 million year-end balance) and location based entertainment such as bowling alleys and family oriented arcades ($44 million year-end balance). Together, these business lines comprised 68% of the Firestone deferrals and 58% of the Firestone criticized loans. Most of the borrowers in the hospitality and Firestone segments were expected to be able to resume operations and scheduled debt service if public health and social conditions allowed more normal revenue production to resume in the first half of 2021. Non-accruing loans to these segments totaled $18 million at year-end.
Year-end criticized loans increased in 2020 to $359 million, or 2.8% of total assets, compared to $237 million or 1.8% at year-end 2019. This increase was mainly due to the impact of the pandemic on the commercial loan portfolio. Approximately half of the $331 million in commercial deferred loans was rated criticized at year-end, and the pandemic impacts on these loans were the main driver of the growth in total criticized loans. For similar reasons, classified loans (which are those criticized loans rated substandard or lower) increased to $250 million from $162 million, including growth in non-accruing loans to $65 million from $40 million. Loans rated as criticized before the pandemic remained criticized despite any deferrals they may have been granted. The Company has traditionally viewed its potential problem loans as those loans from business activities which are rated as classified and continue to accrue interest. These loans have a possibility of loss if weaknesses are not corrected. Accruing classified loans totaled $185 million at year-end 2020. Due to the circumstances of the pandemic, the Company also views deferred special mention loans as having elevated risk of becoming substandard due to uncertainties related to public health. These loans totaled $49 million at year-end 2020.
Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans: The Company implemented the Current Expected Credit Losses (“CECL”) accounting standard on January 1, 2020. The standard changed the basis of loss recognition from incurred to expected, and expanded the covered financial instruments. The allowance for credit losses on loans replaces the previous allowance for loan losses. The allowance balance increased by $63 million from $64 million at year-end 2019 to $127 million at year-end in 2020.
The allowance increased by $25 million to $89 million on January 1, 2020 due to the adoption of CECL. The Company established a $15 million reserve related to loan credit marks, and the amortized cost basis of purchased credit deteriorated loans was increased by this same $15 million amount. The remaining implementation increase was due to the recognition of additional expected losses over the life of the loan portfolio compared to those already incurred under the previous method. The allowance measured 0.94% of total loans at the adoption of CECL.
Excluding the impact of purchased credit deteriorated loans, the allowance measured 0.78% of total loans. The Company viewed this as its reasonable supportable estimate of expected credit losses over the expected future life of the portfolio. The estimate is based on a methodology which considers historic loss rates for loans by collateral type and includes components for the impact of forecast economic conditions on loss rates, as well as an evaluation of qualitative factors including current period loan performance metrics and consideration of the benefit of expected future government support in reducing possible loss rates. The economic forecast utilizes third party base case projections and estimates credit loss impacts for the next seven quarters. The allowance does not include reserves for interest receivable. An allowance for losses on credit commitments is included in other liabilities, and measured $8 million at year-end 2020.
The allowance increased by $38 million from January 1, 2020 to $127 million at December 31, 2020. The allowance at year-end measured 1.58% of total loans and 1.71% of total loans excluding the PPP and mid-Atlantic loans. The 0.77% increase from 0.94% at the date of CECL adoption primarily reflected the projected economic
impacts of the pandemic on estimated future loan losses and was driven both by the changed economic outlook and by the qualitative impact of the emergence of higher non-accruing loans. At year-end, the economic baseline expected confirmed COVID-19 cases to reach 47 million in 2021, with the daily case rate peaking in December 2020 and abating by September 2021. GDP was projected to increase by 4.1% in 2021 after declining by 3.5% in 2020. Unemployment was expected improve to 6.9% in 2021, supported by a $2.8 trillion federal deficit spending projection. The 0.77% increase in the allowance from the CECL adoption date is equivalent to approximately $60 million in net loan losses as the Company’s general estimate of future pandemic related loan losses in addition to the annual net loan loss rate when the economy is healthy. If conditions were to remain unchanged, the Company would anticipate that charge-offs would reduce the balance of the allowance as they emerge, and that the ratio of the allowance to total loans would move towards the level before the emergence of the pandemic. Future loan loss provisions could result from adverse changes in conditions or from loan portfolio growth. No allowance is provided for PPP loans which are guaranteed by the SBA. Additionally, no allowance is provided on the loans held for sale as part of the pending mid-Atlantic branch sale.
Goodwill and Other Assets: The sustained decrease in the price of the Company’s stock in the first half of 2020 was a basis for triggering an analysis of goodwill for impairment. Additionally, the annual impairment analysis was scheduled for the second quarter. Berkshire’s stock price was $11.02 at midyear, compared to $32.88 at year-end 2019. A goodwill impairment analysis was completed according to Accounting Standards Codification Section 350. Based on this analysis, the Company recorded a $554 million impairment charge during the second quarter to fully write-off the carrying balance of goodwill. This analysis was based on an estimate of the fair value of the company’s equity as one reporting unit. Fair value was estimated based on an income approach and a market approach, which were equally weighted in the analysis. Both valuation approaches supported a conclusion of full impairment. The goodwill balance had resulted primarily from a series of bank acquisitions which consisted primarily of an exchange of shares recorded based on stock market valuations at the time of acquisition. Over this time, bank stocks were generally valued at a premium to the net fair value of assets, resulting in the recording of goodwill for these premiums. Due to the pandemic recession and federal monetary actions reducing interest rates, the outlook for banking industry earnings contracted in 2020, and a number of bank stocks were trading at a discount to book value at midyear. The impairment analysis concluded that the fair value of the Company’s equity was lower than its carrying value, indicating a goodwill impairment.
The assets held for sale at year-end 2020 consisted mainly of the loans and fixed assets tied to the pending agreement for the sale of the Mid-Atlantic branches. This sale is targeted to be completed in the first half of 2021. The carrying amount of Other Assets increased by $98 million primarily due to the increased net fair value of commercial loan interest rate swaps and related economic hedges, reflecting the market value changes resulting from the pandemic impact on market interest rates.
Deposits: Total deposits decreased by $120 million, or 1%, to $10.2 billion in 2020. Due to the pending agreement for the sale of the Mid-Atlantic branches, the Company reclassified $617 million in deposits as liabilities held for sale. Adjusting for this reclassification, total deposits increased by $497 million, or 5%. This included a $302 million increase in the year-end balance of payroll deposits, which fluctuate daily. Total brokered deposit balances decreased by $597 million to $611 million in 2020 as the Company continued to reduce wholesale funding with proceeds from loan runoff and demand deposit growth. There was growth in demand deposits, as customers maintained higher liquidity during the pandemic, including the impacts of federal support and lower spending. Additionally, some funds shifted from higher rate maturing time deposits into money market balances as customers focused on shorter maturities due to the low and relatively flat yield curve. The cost of deposits decreased to 0.47% in the fourth quarter of 2020 from 1.11% in the fourth quarter of 2019. This reflected the pronounced decrease in short-term market interest rates, together with the unusual growth in demand deposit balances and the reduction in higher cost brokered time deposits.
Borrowings and Other Liabilities: Total borrowings decreased by $256 million, or 31%, in 2020 as part of the Company’s strategy to deleverage and reduce reliance on higher cost wholesale funding sources. Including brokered deposits, total wholesale funding sources decreased by $854 million, or 43%, to $1.18 billion during 2020. The fourth quarter cost of borrowings decreased to 2.50% from 2.77%, while the fourth quarter cost of all funds decreased to 0.60% from 1.23%. As previously noted, the Mid-Atlantic deposits were reclassified as held for sale, and total liabilities held for sale related to this pending transaction measured $630 million at year-end 2020. The Company expects to settle this sale with loans and cash from short-term investments.
Derivative Financial Instruments: The $3.9 billion period-end notional balance of derivative financial instruments was down slightly from $4.1 billion at the start of the year. This notional balance includes $1.7 billion in interest rate swaps with commercial loan customers and an equal balance of offsetting back to back swaps with national financial counterparties. The Company also has $0.3 billion in risk participations with dealer banks related to interest rate swaps where another bank is the lead. The estimated net fair value of the derivative financial instruments increased from approximately zero to $94 million due to the higher value of fixed rate customer swaps as a result of the decrease in interest rates. This asset is included in other assets on the balance sheet. The Company delivered cash to the clearing house as a result of its increased obligation to national swap counterparties which is reported as a use of cash from financing activities in the cash flow statement.
Shareholders' Equity: Total shareholders’ equity decreased by $571 million, or 32%, to $1.19 billion in 2020 due to the income impact of the noncash charges of $554 million for goodwill impairment and $76 million for credit loss provision expense recorded during that time. The balance of retained earnings decreased from $361 million to ($233) million. The $41 million year-end 2019 balance of preferred stock was converted to common equity in accordance with the terms these securities, resulting in the issuance of 522 thousand common shares from treasury stock, which decreased to $31 million from $70 million.
The ratio of equity to assets stood at 9.3% at period-end, and the non-GAAP measure of tangible equity to tangible assets stood at 9.0%. The Company uses the non-GAAP measure of tangible equity which excludes goodwill and intangible assets and which is an important focus for the investment community. Tangible equity decreased by $6 million, or 1%, to $1.15 billion for the year.
All of the Company's measures of regulatory capital in relation to risk weighted assets improved during the year due to the runoff of non-PPP related loans and the zero risk weighting assigned to PPP loans because of the SBA guarantee, as well as due to the lower risk ratings of investments. The Company conducts equity stress analyses, including severe adverse pandemic loan loss scenarios based on forecasts provided by third parties. The Company believes that its capital is well cushioned above the Well Capitalized metrics in all of the adverse modeling scenarios based on the assumptions utilized. The Company’s total risk based capital ratio measured 16.1% at year-end 2020, compared to the 10% Well Capitalized standard for banks. The Company’s Tier 1 capital ratio stood at 14.1% at that date, compared to the 8% Well Capitalized standard for banks.
The Company repurchased $53 million of common stock in 2019. The Company’s plan had been to continue repurchasing shares to return capital to shareholders which was released by the balance sheet restructuring. The repurchase plan was suspended in the first quarter of 2020 as the pandemic emerged, and the existing authorization for share repurchases was allowed to expire at its March 31, 2020 maturity. During the first quarter, the Company filed a universal securities shelf registration for the routine purpose of renewing the shelf registration that expired in November 2019. The Company increased its quarterly dividend by $0.01 to $0.24 per share in the first quarter before the pandemic, in line with previous annual dividend increases. The Company decreased its dividend to $0.12 per share in the third quarter, to better align the dividend payout and dividend yield with its operating earnings as a result of the pandemic. Due to the loss recorded in 2020, any dividends intended by the Bank’s board of directors are presently subject to regulatory approval by the Massachusetts Banking Department and any shareholder dividends intended by the Company’s board of directors are subject to non-objection by the Federal Reserve.
The change in retained earnings due to the operating loss and the common dividend accounted for most of the net change in equity. The Company recorded a $19 million benefit to equity from other comprehensive income which mostly offset a $24 million reduction in equity due to the adoption of CECL. The other comprehensive income benefit was due to after-tax unrealized gains in the bond portfolio due to lower interest rates. The CECL adoption impact on equity was principally due to the increase in the allowance for credit losses on loans on the date of adoption due to the recognition of expected future losses in addition to incurred losses, as well as the increase in the allowance to offset the increase in the gross carrying value of purchased credit deteriorated loans.
COMPARISON OF OPERATING RESULTS FOR THE YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 AND 2019
Summary: Revenue and expense included the SI Financial operations acquired on May 17, 2019. Additionally, due to the COVID-19 pandemic Berkshire reported losses in the first half of 2020 due to non-cash charges of $554 million for goodwill impairment and $65 million for the provision for credit losses. As a result, many categories of revenue and expense are not directly comparable year-over-year for the first half of the year. Parts of this discussion focus on the second half of the year, where year-over-year results are more comparable and less affected by the merger and the pandemic.
Reflecting the above activity, the Company recorded a loss of $569 million, or $11.33 per share for the first six months of 2020. This loss was a result of noncash charges for goodwill impairment and the provision for credit losses on loans. Results returned to profitability in the second half of the year, with second half earnings totaling $36 million, or $0.73 per share. For the year, the Company lost $533 million, or $10.60 per share. In 2019, the Company recorded earnings for the year of $97 million, or $1.97 per share. For the second half of 2019, the Company’s earnings were $48 million, or $0.95 per share.
The Company calculates the non-GAAP financial measure of adjusted earnings to focus on earnings related to ongoing operations and excluding items described in the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures which was set forth in an earlier section of this report. Second half adjusted earnings were $40 million, or $0.80 per share, in 2020 compared to $59 million, or $1.15 per share in 2019. Adjusting items after-tax in the second half of 2020 totaled $4 million and were primarily related to the loss on discontinued operations and the CEO separation. Adjusting items for the second half of 2019 totaled $11 million after-tax and were primarily related to merger and restructuring expense.
The decrease in earnings and adjusted earnings was primarily due to pandemic related impacts on net interest income, which declined sequentially over the last five quarters to $76 million in the fourth quarter of 2020, compared to $91 million in the fourth quarter of 2019. The return on assets decreased to 0.48% from 0.78% for these respective periods. The return on equity decreased to 5.2% from 5.9%; this measure was impacted in 2020 by the write-off of goodwill, which measured 31% of equity at year-end 2019.
The Company has established a provision for credit losses on loans which it views as adequate to cover its reasonable estimate of expected credit losses, including pandemic related losses, based on forecast conditions at year-end. It is anticipated that net loan charge-offs will remain elevated in 2021 as predicted losses emerge and are recorded. Loan loss provision expense may be modest unless health and economic expectations change adversely. PPP loans are expected to contribute to net interest income in the first half of 2021 but this benefit is expected to decline in the second half of 2021. Benefits from the Company’s branch initiatives are initially expected to mostly be offset by pandemic related loan workout costs and strategic investments in core operations. The Company benefited from an income tax credit in 2020 due to the large pandemic credit loss provision in the first half of the year.
Revenue: Revenue was adversely impacted by the pandemic in 2020, including the impact of lower business volumes, fee waivers, and tighter margins. Net revenue from continuing operations decreased by $66 million, or 15%, to $383 million in 2020. Revenue in 2020 included a full year of revenue from SI Financial operations acquired in May 2019. The full year decrease included a $48 million decrease in net interest income, a $7 million decrease in fee income, and a $12 million adverse swing in net securities gains/losses. Second half revenue decreased by $37 million, or 16% to $196 million; this comparison fully includes acquired operations in both periods.
Net Interest Income: Net interest income from continuing operations decreased by $48 million, or 13% in 2020. This was the result of a 14% decrease in the net interest margin to 2.72% from 3.17%. The fourth quarter 2020 net interest margin was 2.61%. Quarterly net interest income peaked at $97 million in the third quarter of 2019, including the first full quarter of benefit from the acquired SI Financial operations. Net interest income decreased to $91 million in the fourth quarter of 2019 and then decreased sequentially in 2020 to $76 million in the final quarter.
The margin was under pressure coming into 2020 due to the anticipated loss of purchased loan accretion income, including the impact of the CECL accounting standard. The Company’s interest rate risk profile is asset sensitive, and is structurally sensitive both to the decrease in interest rates and to the low and relatively flat yield curve. The approximate 1.50% decrease in short-term interest rates resulting from the Federal Reserve Bank’s near zero interest rate policy response to the pandemic was adverse to the Company’s net interest margin. Additionally, the Company took on higher cost funds at the start of the pandemic to further strengthen liquidity in the national emergency as part of its risk management protocol. Also, the decline in higher yielding loans has reduced this yield as the primary source of interest revenue.
Based on conditions at year-end, the Company is targeting that PPP loans will support net interest income in the first half of 2021, including the recognition of deferred revenues as these loans are forgiven. The Company expects that the majority of these loans will be forgiven in the first half of 2021 and that earning assets will decrease in the second half of the year. The sale of the Mid-Atlantic deposits and loans is also expected to contribute to a decrease in earning assets. Excluding the impact of PPP loans, the Company is targeting that, based on rate conditions at year-end, there will be further roll down of deposit costs in 2021 due to maturities of higher rate time deposits and of promotional rates previously offered on targeted money market deposits. The Company’s goal is that these lower costs will more than offset the margin impact of asset yields continuing to price down in the current low interest rate environment. Any margin benefit in the second half is not expected to offset the impact of lower earning assets, and therefore there may be continued pressure on net interest income in the second half of 2021.
Non-Interest Income: Fee income decreased year-over-year $7 million, or 9% due to pandemic impacts on deposit and loan fees. Deposit related fees decreased by $3 million, or 11%, due to a decrease in overdraft fee income totaling $4 million or 33%. This decrease was due to pandemic impacts which resulted in less consumer spending and higher household liquidity. Additionally, overdraft fees and other deposit fees reflected increased fee waivers, which were granted programmatically by the Company as part of its support to its communities during initial lockdowns. The $8 million, or 31%, decrease in loan related fees included a $4 million reduction in commercial swap fee income due to lower demand, along with impacts from market value adjustments to the carrying value of commercial loan swaps. Other pandemic related market value adjustments affecting 2020 results related to charges against mortgage servicing rights and fair valued loans. The Company has $54 million in contractual balances on taxi medallion loans which are carried at a $2 million fair value. Recoveries on these assets are included in other income. Other non-interest income also includes securities gains/losses, which the Company does not view as related to its ongoing operations. The $10 million net securities loss in the first quarter of 2019 was due to the impact of the stock market selloff on the carrying value of equity securities. Non-interest income is net of charges totaling $4 million in 2020 and $6 million in 2019 for amortization of tax credit investments, which was more than offset by income tax expense credits of $5 million and $8 million in those respective years.
Provision for Credit Losses: In adopting the CECL accounting model, the Company moved from an incurred loss methodology to an expected loss methodology. Due to the emergence of the pandemic, the Company recorded future expected pandemic losses as provision expense against current period operations. Accordingly, provision expense increased year-over-year to $76 million from $35 million. The provision in 2019 included a component recognizing the incurred expense related to a $16 million charge-off in a fraud related commercial situation. The provision expense in 2020 was primarily due to the emergence of expected future loan losses as described in the earlier discussion of the Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans.
Non-Interest Expense: Total non-interest expense increased by $550 million to $840 million in 2020 from $290 million in 2019. This was due to the $554 million second quarter write-off of goodwill described in the earlier discussion of financial condition. Second half non-interest expense increased by 2% to $145 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The Company utilizes the non-GAAP financial measure of adjusted non-interest expense to assess its expenses related to ongoing operations. These adjustments in 2020 were primarily related to the CEO separation, and in 2019 they were primarily related to merger and restructuring charges.
Second half adjusted non-interest expense increased by $7 million, or 6%, to $139 million. This included a $2 million increase in FDIC insurance premium expense due to credits received in the second half of 2019. Technology
spending increased by $3 million to enhance the Company’s technology infrastructure. Additionally, expenses in the second half of 2020 included $3 million in charges related to a lending operations project which was completed during the period. Full time equivalent staff in continuing operations at year-end totaled 1,505, compared to 1,550 positions at the start of the year. The Company has announced strategic initiatives for the sale and consolidation of branches in the first half of 2021. The Company expects to recognize a noncore net gain on the sale of these operations and non-core charges in conjunction through these consolidations.
Income Tax Expense: Income taxes are discussed in a note to the financial statements; this note is important to an understanding of the results of operations. The Company recorded a tax benefit of $27 million in 2020 compared to a tax expense of $21 million in 2019. The Company recorded a $20 million benefit on 2020 continuing operations, resulting in a 4% benefit from the loss on continuing operations. The $20 million dollar benefit included a $15 million benefit from the $59 million deductible portion of goodwill related expense, as well as from $3.5 million in tax credit benefits. The tax rate on 2020 adjusted earnings was 8% due to the lower earnings. In 2019, the Company’s effective tax rate was 18% on pre-tax income from continuing operations. The Company received tax benefits at an effective rate of 26% on pre-tax losses of $27 million and $6 million on discontinued operations in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Discontinued Operations: The Company completed the exit from its discontinued national mortgage banking operations in the final quarter of 2020. These operations recorded losses of $20 million and $4 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The losses included write-downs of related mortgage servicing rights which reflected the impact of higher mortgage prepayments as well as lower market pricing for the subject rights. Other factors contributing to the loss in 2020 were severance, contract, and hedge termination costs. Discontinued operations are excluded from the Company’s measure of adjusted income.
Total Comprehensive Income: Total comprehensive (loss)/income includes net (loss)/income together with other comprehensive income, which primarily consists of unrealized gains/losses on debt securities available for sale, after tax. Due to falling interest rates in 2020 and 2019, Berkshire recorded unrealized debt securities gains in both years. As a result, comprehensive results were a ($514) million loss in 2020 and $123 million income in 2019.
Quarterly Results. Quarterly results for 2019 and 2020 are presented in a note to the financial statements. Results for all of these periods have been discussed in previous SEC Forms 10-Q and 10-K, except for operations in the fourth quarter of 2020. Second and third quarter results are often the strongest quarterly results due to higher business activity during the spring and summer. In 2020, economic activity declined at an unprecedented rated due to the pandemic. This was followed by a partial rebound in the third quarter, but disease resurgence resulted in further government restrictions in the fourth quarter. Third quarter results were the strongest in terms of operating income. Results in the first half of 2020 were a loss due to pandemic impacts on the provision for credit losses on loans and the goodwill write-down. Pandemic impacts contributed to fourth quarter 2020 results declining from the third quarter due to lower operating revenue, higher operating expense, and a higher provision for credit losses on loans.
COMPARISON OF OPERATING RESULTS FOR THE YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019 AND 2018
Summary: Revenue and expense in 2019 included the SI Financial operations acquired on May 17, 2019. As a result, many categories of revenue and expense increased in 2019 over the same period of 2018. Additionally, operations in 2019 included the benefit of restructuring actions in both years, and the benefit of the acquired Commerce Bank operations which were being fully integrated in the first half of 2018. Earnings per share reflected the shares issued as merger consideration for the SI Financial acquisition. References to revenue and expense in this discussion are generally related to continuing operations unless otherwise noted. Year-over-year profitability declined primarily due to the $16 million charge related to the write-off of one commercial loan due to alleged fraud. Profitability was also adversely impacted by a lower net interest margin due to the decline in purchased loan accretion, which had been anticipated, as well as the impact of lower interest rates on the Company’s asset sensitive balance sheet. Total purchase accounting accretion decreased to $14 million in 2019 from $23 million in 2018. The Company undertook various initiatives following its strategic review to help mitigate these margin impacts. Results were also lower due to higher merger charges related to the completion and integration of the SI Financial acquisition. The Company’s return on equity was 5.7% in 2019, compared to 6.8% in the prior year. Its non-GAAP measure of adjusted return on tangible common equity was 11.3% compared to 13.5% for these respective periods.
Revenue: Net revenue from continuing operations increased in 2019 by $19 million, or 4%, to $449 million in 2019 compared to the prior year, including acquired SI Financial operations. This increase was divided between net interest income and non-interest income.
Net Interest Income: Net interest income from continuing operations increased by $9 million, or 3%, in 2019 compared to 2018. This growth was due to a 9% increase in average earning assets, which was partially offset by a decrease in the net interest margin. The increase in average earning assets included the impact of approximately $1.48 billion in earning assets acquired from SI Financial on May 17. This was offset by a net decline in other average earning assets due to the Company’s strategic initiative to reduce less strategically important loans and investments in order to decrease expensive wholesale funding sources and related leverage. The net interest margin decreased year-over-year to 3.17% from 3.40%, and the contribution from purchase accounting accretion decreased to 0.12% from 0.22%. The margin decreased further to 3.11% in the final quarter of the year, including a 0.17% contribution from purchase accounting accretion. The benefit of purchase accounting accretion decreased primarily due to the seasoning of purchased credit impaired loans from prior bank acquisitions. Purchase accounting accretion also benefited from accretion related to acquired SI Financial time deposits, which are contributing approximately 7 basis points per quarter accretion benefit which matured in the second quarter of 2020.
Non-Interest Income: Non-interest income from continuing operations increased by $10 million, or 13%, in 2019 compared to 2018 due primarily to an $8 million swing in unrealized securities gains/losses which the Company views as non-operating in nature. Fee income increased by $3 million, or 4%, including the benefit of acquired operations.
Provision for Loan Losses. The provision increased year-over-year by $10 million, or 39%, including the impact of one fraud related commercial loan loss in the third quarter.
Non-Interest Expense: Non-interest expense from continuing operations increased year-over-year by $23 million, or 9%, including acquired operations. Merger related expense included the completion of the SI Financial merger. The Company focuses on its non-GAAP financial measure of adjusted expense which excludes merger charges and other items set forth in the reconciliation of non-GAAP measures. Adjusted expense increased by $17 million, or 7%. Expenses in 2019 benefited from $3 million in FDIC premium rebates as a result of a return of FDIC reserves to smaller U.S. banks. The full efficiencies from the merger were not achieved until the fourth quarter of 2019.
Income Tax Expense: The effective tax rate measured 18% in 2019, compared to 21% in 2018. This reflected the proportionate benefit of tax advantaged income on lower pretax earnings, along with structural changes in the Company’s tax position, including the impacts of the SI Financial acquisition.
Discontinued Operations: These national mortgage banking operations became unprofitable in 2018 as a result of depressed industry conditions due to lower market demand for mortgages as interest rates rose in that period. While industry conditions improved in 2019 as interest rates moved downwards during the year, these operations continued to operate at a loss. The net loss was equivalent to $0.08 per share in 2019, compared to $0.07 per share in 2018. Total revenue improved to $41 million in 2019 from $39 million in 2018, but remained below the $55 million recorded during the profitable year of 2017. Most of the $5.5 million pretax loss in 2019 was due to a $4.5 million charge to write-down mortgage servicing rights based on market indications at year-end.
LIQUIDITY AND CASH FLOWS
Liquidity is the ability to meet cash needs at all times with available cash and established external liquidity sources or by conversion of other assets to cash at a reasonable price and in a timely manner. Berkshire evaluates liquidity at the holding company and on a consolidated basis, which is primarily a function of the Bank’s liquidity.
Total cash and cash equivalents increased to $1.6 billion at year-end 2020, compared to $0.6 billion at year-end 2019. Net cash provided by operating activities of continuing operations decreased slightly to $124 million in 2020 from $130 million in 2019. Net cash provided by operating activities of discontinued operations increased to $104 million from a use of $19 million in 2019 as these operations were liquidated during 2020.
The Company’s liquidity strengthened substantially in 2020. A $1.4 billion reduction in loans was primarily reinvested in investments. Short-term investments increased by $1.0 billion and investment securities increased by $0.5 billion. A $0.6 billion increase in demand deposits was used primarily to reduce wholesale funds, which decreased to $1.2 billion from $2.0 billion. The ratio of wholesale funds to assets decreased to 9% from 15%. The ratio of loans/deposits decreased to 79% from 92%.
The Company has an agreement to sell its 8 Mid-Atlantic branches, which is expected to be completed by midyear 2021. The Company is expected to provide in excess of $300 million in funds to complete this sale, which is expected to be funded from short-term investments. The planned consolidation of 16 additional branches in the first half of 2021 is targeted to be completed with strong deposit retention and no material reduction in total deposits. The Company may see some outflows of demand deposit balances which have accumulated during the pandemic and which may be drawn down by customers if economic conditions improve as expected. Any net outflows would most likely be funded from the excess levels of short-term investments that were built up in 2020. The Company also expects to use these funds to pay down maturing wholesale funds from brokered deposits and borrowings if conditions remain as anticipated. Due to the decrease in market interest rates in 2020, loan prepayment speeds increased, maturing time deposits tended to roll into money market deposits, and generally interest sensitive assets and liabilities both trended towards lower expected average lives, and therefore increased the potential of larger movements in loan and deposit balances depending on future conditions.
The Bank had unused FHLBB borrowing capacity totaling $1.0 billion at year-end, compared to $1.6 billion at the start of the year. The Bank also had available borrowing capacity of $816 million with the Federal Reserve Bank at period-end, compared to $201 million at the end of 2019. There were no PPP loans pledged at year-end 2020, and the Company did not make any material use of the Federal Reserve’s PPP Liquidity Facility during the year. The combination of on-balance sheet liquidity and off-balance sheet liquidity described above are viewed as strong support for any emerging liquidity needs.
Subsequent to first quarter-end, KBRA (the Kroll Bond Rating Agency) reaffirmed the Company’s and the Bank’s existing bond ratings, including the Bank’s A- ratings on deposits and senior debt. The ratings were affirmed with a negative outlook on the long-term ratings due to the uncertain economic impacts from the pandemic. The Company maintains ongoing relationships with correspondents and investment banks which provide further potential options for financial support to the Bank and the Company. At period-end, the Company had $84 million in cash at the parent held on deposit in the Bank. The holding company generally expects to maintain cash on hand equivalent to normal cash uses, including common stock dividends, for at least a one year period. Beginning in the third quarter of 2020, the Company cut its cash dividend to shareholders in half, reducing the quarterly cash dividend
requirement from $12 million to $6 million. Over the long-term, the Company relies on cash dividends from the Bank to provide operating cash and cash for shareholder dividends. Due to the second quarter loss, the Bank was no longer in compliance with Massachusetts banking regulations which generally require positive retained earnings over the prior three years in order to pay cash dividends to the parent. The Company made application to the Massachusetts Division of Banks near year-end 2020 to approve a routine bank dividend to the parent to cover the quarterly shareholder dividend, and this application was approved by the Division Banks after year-end. The Bank’s goal is to continue to apply for approval of routine quarterly Bank dividends to the parent in the future. Total cash dividends paid by the Bank to the parent in 2020 were $44 million due to amounts paid in the first quarter in anticipation of share repurchases, which were suspended due to the onset of the pandemic.
The Company maintains a contingency funding plan based on its assessment of the liquidity stress environment. Contingency funding information, reporting, and assessment were intensified in the first quarter when financial markets began signaling distress. Primary liquidity data is reported on daily, and thirty day stress analytics are maintained on an updated basis. The Company maintains monthly and quarterly cash flow forecasts. A one year forward liquidity stress test evaluates stress across a variety of stress scenarios, including severe adverse loan loss scenarios due to the pandemic. The Company has defined strategic options which allow it to meet funding needs in all stress scenarios.
The Company’s guidelines allow it to respond to liquidity stress by placing higher emphasis when necessary on liquidity versus margin expansion.
CAPITAL RESOURCES
The Company and the Bank target to maintain sufficient capital to qualify for the “Well Capitalized” designation by federal regulators. Berkshire’s long-term goal is to use capital efficiently to achieve its objective to become a higher performing company.
Berkshire views its adjusted internal return on tangible capital as a primary capital resource of the Company. This non-GAAP financial measure is based on the Company’s measure of adjusted earnings, which excludes net charges viewed as not related to ongoing operations. The Company focuses on internal capital generation to support shareholder dividends and organic growth and also to support non-operating charges and/or improvement in its capital ratios. The Company maintains a universal shelf registration of capital securities with the SEC. Additional discussion of the Company’s capital management is contained in the Shareholders’ Equity section of the discussion of Changes in Financial Condition in this report and in the Shareholders’ Equity note to the financial statements.
The Company has investment grade debt ratings and monitors capital market conditions. The Company views its regulatory capital as well cushioned above the “Well Capitalized” levels, and the Company believes that its plans are consistent with maintaining proper strong cushions above these levels. The Company conducts equity stress analyses, including severe adverse pandemic loss scenarios provided by third parties, in addition to Dodd-Frank stress testing. The Company believes that its capital is well cushioned above the Well Capitalized metrics in the adverse modeling scenarios based on the assumptions utilized.
Dividends by the holding company require notice and non-objection from the Federal Reserve Bank in the event that earnings are not sufficient to cover the dividend in the current period or for the four trailing quarters. The holding company also requires such notice and non-objection in order to conduct stock buybacks in a quarter which would reduce outstanding shares below the balance at the start of the quarter. In the first quarter, due to the pandemic, the Company allowed its existing board stock repurchase authorization and the related regulatory approval to expire without repurchasing additional shares which were contemplated at the start of the year and which were funded to the parent from the Bank during the first quarter. Due to the second quarter loss, the Company initiated a quarterly application process to the Federal Reserve Bank for notice and nonobjection for the routine quarterly dividend beginning in the third quarter. The amount of the dividend was cut in half based on considerations of Federal Reserve supervisory guidance and based on adjusting the dividend yield and payout ratio as a result the reduction in earnings. The Company expects to continue to provide notice and seek non-objection from the Federal Reserve Bank on a quarterly basis until it achieves four trailing quarters of income sufficient to cover dividends in those quarters. As discussed in the preceding section on Liquidity and Cash Flows, dividends from the Bank to the holding company are currently also subject to a procedure with the Massachusetts Division of Banks pursuant to state statute.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
The year-end 2020 contractual obligations were as follows:
Item 7 - 7A - Table 4 Contractual Obligations
(1) Consists of borrowings from the Federal Home Loan Bank. The maturities extend through 2040 and the rates vary by borrowing.
(2) Consists of leases, bank branches, and ATMs through 2039.
Further information about borrowings and lease obligations is disclosed in Note 11 - Borrowed Funds and Note 16 - Leases of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
In the normal course of operations, Berkshire engages in a variety of financial transactions that, in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, are not recorded in the Company’s financial statements. As previously reported in the discussion of changes in financial condition, Berkshire has outstanding derivative financial instruments and engages in hedging activities, and the fair value of these contracts is recorded on the balance sheet.The Company’s agreement to sell its Mid-Atlantic branches is an off-balance sheet arrangement which is expected to be completed in the first half of 2021.
FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS
The most significant fair value measurements recorded by the Company are those related to assets and liabilities acquired in business combinations. These measurements are discussed further in the mergers and acquisitions note to the financial statements. The premium or discount value of acquired loans has historically been the most significant element of this presentation.
The Company makes further measurements of fair value of certain assets and liabilities, as described in the related note in the financial statements. The most significant measurements of recurring fair values of financial instruments primarily relate to securities available for sale, marketable equity securities, and derivative instruments. These measurements were included in the previous discussion of changes in financial condition, and were generally based on Level 2 market based inputs. Non-recurring fair value measurements primarily relate to certain corporate bonds, impaired loans, capitalized mortgage servicing rights, and other real estate owned. When measurement is required, these measures are generally based on Level 3 inputs. Acquired corporate bonds and industrial development bonds are valued based on Level 3 inputs.
Berkshire provides a summary of estimated fair values of financial instruments at each period-end. The premium or discount value of loans has historically been the most significant element of this presentation. This amount is a Level 3 estimate and reflects management’s subjective judgments.
IMPACT OF INFLATION AND CHANGING PRICES
The financial statements and related financial data presented in this Form 10-K have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, which require the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars, without considering changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. Unlike many industrial companies, substantially all of the assets and liabilities of the Bank are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates have a more significant impact on the Bank’s performance than the general level of inflation. Interest rates may be affected by inflation, but the direction and magnitude of the impact may vary. A sudden change in inflation (or expectations about inflation), with a related change in interest rates, would have a significant impact on our operations.
IMPACT OF NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Please refer to the notes on Recently Adopted Accounting Principles and Future Application of Accounting Pronouncements in Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
APPLICATION OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The Company’s significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to the financial statements. Modifications to significant accounting policies made during the year are also described in Note 1 to the financial statements. The preparation of the financial statements in accordance with GAAP and practices generally applicable to the financial services industry requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, and to disclose contingent assets and liabilities. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Management has identified the Company's most critical accounting policies as related to:
•Allowance for Credit Losses
•Goodwill and Identifiable Intangible Assets
•Fair Value of Financial Instruments
These particular significant accounting policies are considered most critical in that they are important to the Company’s financial condition and results, and they require management’s subjective and complex judgment as a result of the need to make estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain. All of these most critical accounting policies were significant in determining income and financial condition based on events in 2020.
ENTERPRISE RISK MANAGEMENT
Following sections of this report on Form 10-K include discussion of market risk and risk factors. Risk management is overseen by the Company’s Chief Risk Officer, who reports directly to the CEO. This position oversees compliance, information security, risk management policy, and coordinates with the strategic services function which monitors most aspects of credit quality. Enterprise risk assessments are brought to the Company’s Enterprise Risk Management Committee, and then are reported to the Board’s Risk Management and Capital Committee. The high level corporate risk assessment focuses on the following material business risks: credit risk, interest rate risk, price risk, liquidity risk, operational risk, compliance risk, strategic risk, and reputation risk. The credit risk category has the highest weighting. Based on management's recent review, all risks were within corporate appetites. Trends toward increasing risk were noted for credit risk and compliance risk due largely to the pandemic; liquidity risks were declining due to elevated liquid assets. For all material business risks, the inherent risk was viewed as heightened due to the environment, but the residual risk was viewed as medium/low to medium due to mitigating controls functioning in the Company.