Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations includes a number of forward-looking statements that reflect Management’s current views with respect to future events and financial performance. You can identify these statements by forward-looking words such as “may” “will,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate” and “continue,” or similar words. Those statements include statements regarding the intent, belief or current expectations of us and members of its management team as well as the assumptions on which such statements are based. Prospective investors are cautioned that any such forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risk and uncertainties, and that actual results may differ materially from those contemplated by such forward-looking statements.
Readers are urged to carefully review and consider the various disclosures made by us in this report and in our other reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Important factors currently known to us could cause actual results to differ materially from those in forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to update or revise forward-looking statements to reflect changed assumptions, the occurrence of unanticipated events or changes in the future operating results over time. We believe that its assumptions are based upon reasonable data derived from and known about our business and operations and the business and operations of the Company. No assurances are made that actual results of operations or the results of our future activities will not differ materially from its assumptions. Factors that could cause differences include, but are not limited to, expected market demand for the Company ‘s services, fluctuations in pricing for materials, and competition.
Business Overview
BioCorRx Inc., through its subsidiaries, develops and provides innovative treatment programs for substance abuse and related disorders. The BioCorRx® Recovery Program is a non-addictive, medication-assisted treatment (“MAT”) program for substance abuse that includes peer recovery support. The UnCraveRx™ Weight Loss Management Program is a medically assisted weight management program that is combined with a virtual platform application. The program officially launched on October 1, 2019. The Company is also engaged in the research and development of sustained release naltrexone products for the treatment of addiction and other possible disorders. Specifically, the company is developing its product candidate (“BICX101”) a sustained release, injectable naltrexone for the treatment of opioid abuse and alcoholism. The company is also developing an implantable naltrexone treatment (“BICX102”) a long-acting naltrexone implant that can last several months for the treatment of opioid dependence and alcohol use disorders with the goal of future regulatory approval with the Food and Drug Administration.
The BioCorRx® Recovery Program is a comprehensive addiction program which includes peer support and Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (“CBT”) modules (typically completed in 16 sessions on average but not limited to), coupled with a naltrexone implant. CBT is an evidence based method that can be used to change thoughts, feelings, behaviors and improve overall life satisfaction, The implant is specifically compounded with a prescription from a medical doctor for each individual and is designed to release naltrexone into the body over multiple months. The naltrexone implant means a single administration, long acting naltrexone pellet(s) that consists of a naltrexone formulation in a biodegradable form that is suitable for subcutaneous implantation in a particular patient.
The UnCraveRx Weight Loss Program is a comprehensive medically supervised 3-month weight loss and weight management program. We partner with and train medical providers to take a comprehensive approach to offer their patients a sustained release anti-craving as an adjunct to help them reach their weight loss goals. Patients can gain access to concierge on-demand wellness specialists: nutritionists, fitness experts and personal support from behavioral experts. Participate in live fitness classes, nutrition and lifestyle support. Unlimited 24/7 messaging. Digital health addresses one of the most significant barriers in weight loss care. UnCraveRx offers a solution for patients that are in need of tailored support in conjunction with medication by providing meaningful and virtual interaction with qualified nutrition, fitness and behavioral experts, available only to patients through our participating providers.
BioCorRx is not a licensed health care provider and does not provide health care services to patients. BioCorRx does not operate substance abuse clinics. BioCorRx makes the BioCorRx Recovery Program and UnCraveRx® Weight Loss Management Program available to health care providers to utilize when the health care provider determines it is medically appropriate and indicated for his or her patients. Any physician or medical professional is solely responsible for treatment options prescribed or recommended to his or her patients. At all times, such providers retain complete and exclusive authority, responsibility, supervision and control over their medical practice, their patients, the treatment that their patients receive and any decision to prescribe the implant to any of the provider’s patients.
BioCorRx does not condition its license to health care providers accessing the implant on their making available the Counseling Program to the providers’ patients although BioCorRx certainly encourages that providers do so.
BioCorRx has issued several license and distribution agreements to several unrelated third parties involving the establishment of alcoholism and opioid addiction rehabilitation and treatment centers and creating certain addiction rehabilitation programs. There are 14 licensed providers throughout the United States that offer the BioCorRx Recovery Program and 11 providers throughout the United States that offer the UnCraveRx® Weight Loss Management Program. The company’s current focus will continue on wider distribution across the United States, branding of the BioCorRx Recovery Program and acquisition of healthcare related products and services. The Company is committed to continuing to provide excellent rehabilitation products and related services to healthcare providers nationwide as it expands the distribution of the BioCorRx Recovery Program and UnCraveRx® Weight Loss Management Program to a network of independent licensed clinics and licensed healthcare professionals.
The Company’s subsidiary, BioCorRx Pharmaceuticals, is focused on acquiring and the development of products for the treatment of addiction and other possible disorders. Specifically, the company is developing injectable and implantable naltrexone with the goal of future regulatory approval with the Food and Drug Administration. The Company’s pipeline includes BICX101 for the treatment of opioid addiction and alcoholism as well as BICX102 for the same indications.
In August 2017, the Company announced that it had decided to seek U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) approval on BICX102 in advance of BICX101. Product candidate BICX102 is a long-acting naltrexone implant that can last several months being developed for opioid dependence and alcohol use disorders. The pre-IND meeting date for BICX102 took place on January 24, 2018. On February 12, 2018, the Company announced that the FDA deemed the 505(b)(2) pathway as an acceptable route for approval for BICX102; the Company plans to apply for dual indications, both opioid use disorder and alcohol use disorder, within the same application. A grant application was submitted to the National Institutes of Health on May 14, 2018 for funding the development and study plans for BICX102. On January 17, 2019, the Company received a Notice of Award from the United States Department of Health and Human Services for a grant from the National Institutes of Health (“NIH”) in support of BICX102 from the National Institute on Drug Abuse. The grant provides for (i) $2,842,430 in funding during the first year and (ii) $2,831,838 during the second year subject to the terms and conditions specified in the grant, including satisfactory progress of project and the availability of funds. On January 30, 2020, the Company was notified by NIH that the second-year funding has been approved. In January 2020, the Company was awarded a second year of funding from the National Institute on Drug Abuse (“NIDA”) to support the development of a 3-month implantable depot pellet of naltrexone for the treatment of Opioid Use Disorder, which the Company refers to as BICX102. The grant provides for $2,831,838 during the second year subject to the terms and conditions specified in the grant, including satisfactory progress of project and availability of funds. $4,491,972 in grant funds were received and (i) $4,464,626 was recorded as grant income including accrued revenues of $224,879 related to the grant, (ii) $65,560 were recorded as deferred income and (iii) $186,665 was recorded as payment on accounts receivable during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The UnCraveRx Weight Loss Program is a comprehensive medically supervised 3-month weight loss and weight management program. We partner with and train medical providers to take a comprehensive approach to offer their patients a sustained release anti-craving as an adjunct to help them reach their weight loss goals. Patients can gain access to concierge on-demand wellness specialists: nutritionists, fitness experts and personal support from behavioral experts. Participate in live fitness classes, nutrition and lifestyle support. Unlimited 24/7 messaging. Digital health addresses one of the most significant barriers in weight loss care. UnCraveRx offers a solution for patients that are in need of tailored support in conjunction with medication by providing meaningful and virtual interaction with qualified nutrition, fitness and behavioral experts, available only to patients through our participating providers.
If determined medically appropriate by a patient’s treating physician and under his/her medical supervision, an anti-craving medication may be prescribed to help reduce food cravings. The benefits of using the anti-craving time released mediation is that it may aid in compliance. BioCorRx® does not sell, manufacture, or compound any drugs or pharmaceuticals for the program.
Training is required to assist the treating physician in making the best medical decision regarding the use of the anti-craving medication and determine whether the program is right for the patient.
Recent Developments
On January 16, 2018, majority shareholders holding 59% of the voting equity voted to grant discretionary authority to the Board of Directors of the Company (“Board”), at any time or times for a period of 12 months after the date of the written consent, to adopt an amendment to the Company’s articles of incorporation to effect a reverse split of its issued and outstanding common stock in a range of not less than 1-for-5 and not more than 1-for-500 (“Reverse Stock Split”). The Reverse Stock Split was filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Nevada and subsequently approved by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (“FINRA”) on January 18, 2019 and took effect on January 22, 2019. All share and per share information in this Annual Report have been retroactively adjusted to give effect to the Reverse Stock Split, including the financial statements and notes thereto.
On February 18, 2019, the Board appointed Ms. Luisa Ingargiola and Mr. Louis Lucido, a related party, to the Board of Directors, effective March 1, 2019.
In connection with Ms. Ingargiola’s and Mr. Lucido’s appointments to the Board, the Company entered into a Director Agreement with each of Ms. Ingargiola and Mr. Lucido pursuant to which each director will receive a quarterly cash stipend of $15,000 in compensation for their services and shall be issued, upon the last day of each fiscal quarter, provided the director is a member of the Board as of such date, the number of shares of the Company’s common stock equivalent to $5,000 as determined based on the average closing price on the three trading days immediately preceding the last day of such quarter.
On March 1, 2019, the Company entered into a director agreement (“Director Agreement”) with each of the following members of the Board: Lourdes Felix, Kent Emry, and Brady Granier. Pursuant to the Director Agreement each of the Directors will receive a quarterly cash stipend of $15,000 in compensation for his services and shall be issued, upon the last day of each fiscal quarter, provided he is a member of the Board as of such date, the number of shares of the Company’s common stock equivalent to $5,000 as determined based on the average closing price on the three trading days immediately preceding the last day of such quarter.
In March 2019, the Company issued an aggregate of 400,000 shares of its common stock under proceeds related to the Subscription and Royalty Agreements. Subsequently in April 2019, the Company received the proceeds of $6,000,000.
On May 24, 2019, the Company entered into a Master Services Agreement (“MSA”) with Charles River Laboratories, Inc. (“Charles River”). Pursuant to the MSA, Charles River will be conducting studies with regard to BICX102. Studies will be conducted pursuant to Statements of Work entered into by the Company and Charles River.
On May 30, 2019, the Company and Charles River entered into two separate Statements of Work pursuant to which Charles River is conducting a total of six studies. The Company will pay Charles River the total amended consideration of $3,024,476 for these six studies. The remaining commitment to Charles River is $499,445.
In 2019, the Company entered into a contract manufacturing agreement for an estimated total cost of $578,500 to be paid over time. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred $393,980 as research and development expenses. There is no remaining consideration as of December 31, 2020.
On July 15, 2019, the Company and its landlord agreed that the Company would move to a larger space within the building that currently houses its principal executive offices. The Company extended the term of its lease for an additional 63 months beginning approximately November 1, 2019 (upon the landlord’s completion of the work on the new space). The extended term expires on January 31, 2025. The extended lease has escalating payments from $9,505 per month to $11,018 per month.
On June 16, 2020, the Company entered into a lease agreement, whereby the Company agreed to lease office space in Costa Mesa, California for a term of 5 years. Due to COVID-19, the Company won’t be able to move in or take possession until 30 days after shelter in place has been lifted in Orange County, CA. The Company will owe monthly rental payments ranging from $2,286 to $2,584 over the term of the lease. On September 20, 2020, the Company took possession of the office space.
On February 18, 2020, the Company entered into a Master Services Agreement (“MSA”) with Sinclair Research Center LLC (“Sinclair”). Pursuant to the MSA, Sinclair will be conducting studies with regard to BICX102. Studies will be conducted pursuant to Statements of Work entered into by the Company and Sinclair. On February 20, 2020 the Company and Sinclair entered into a Statement of Work pursuant to which Sinclair is conducting one study. The total consideration the Company will pay Sinclair for the study is $894,600. During the second quarter of 2020, the Company entered into two amendments to the Statement of Work to increase the total consideration to $1,250,800. The remaining commitment to Sinclair is $178,920.
On October 31, 2020, the Company entered into a written management services agreement with Joseph DeSanto MD, Inc. (“Medical Corporation”) under which the Company provides management and other administrative services to the Medical Corporation. These services include billing, collection of accounts receivable, accounting, management and human resource functions. Pursuant to the management services agreements, a management fee equal to 65% of the Medical Corporation’s gross collected monthly revenue. Through this arrangement, we are directing the activities that most significantly impact the financial results of the respective Medical Corporation; however, all clinical treatment decisions are made solely by licensed healthcare professionals employed or engaged by the Medical Corporation as required by all applicable state laws. Based on our ability to direct the activities that most significantly impact the financial results of the Medical Corporation, and the obligation and likelihood of absorbing all expected gains and losses, we have determined that we are the primary beneficiary, and, therefore, consolidate the Medical Corporation as VIE
On February 16, 2021, the Board appointed Mr. Joseph J. Galligan as a member of the Board, effective February 17, 2021.
On February 16, 2021, the Company entered into a Subscription Agreement (the “Lucido Subscription Agreement”) with Louis C Lucido and Carolyn M. Lucido, or their Successors, as Trustee of the Lucido Family Trust, Dated May 23, 2017, managed by Mr. Louis Lucido, a member of the Company’s Board of Directors. Although the Lucido Subscription Agreement was dated February 16, 2021, it did not become effective until it was fully executed on February 23, 2021. Pursuant to the Lucido Subscription Agreement, Mr. Lucido purchased shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share, in the aggregate amount of $1,125,000 at a purchase price of $2.00 per share, for a total of 562,500 shares of Common Stock. The aggregate Purchase Price owed pursuant to the Lucido Subscription Agreement was paid in cash to the Company on February 26, 2021.
On February 16, 2021, the Company entered into a Subscription Agreement (the “Galligan Subscription Agreement”) with The J and R Galligan Revocable Trust, managed by Mr. Joseph Galligan, a member of the Company’s Board. Although the Galligan Subscription Agreement was dated February 16, 2021, it did not become effective until it was fully executed on February 23, 2021. The terms and conditions of the Galligan Subscription Agreement (including the number of shares of common stock purchased and the purchase price) are substantially the same as the Lucido Subscription Agreement.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes changes in selected operating indicators of the Company, illustrating the relationship of various income and expense items to net sales for the respective periods presented (components may not add or subtract to totals due to rounding):
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues
Total net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $122,621 compared with $240,259 for the year ended December 31, 2019, reflecting a decrease of 49.0%. Sales/access fees for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $13,500 and $29,150 , respectively, reflecting a decrease of $15,650. The primary reason for the decrease in 2020 is directly related to the reduced number of patients treated at licensed clinics and BioCorRx Recovery Program distribution. Distribution rights income for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $107,169 and $207,110, respectively, reflecting a decrease of $99,941. The primary reason for the decrease in distribution rights income was due to the deferred revenues from certain licenses were fully amortized. Membership/program fees for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $1,952 and $3,999, respectively.
Total Operating Expenses
Total operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $7,614,594 and $5,801,527, respectively, reflecting an increase of $1,813,067. The reasons for the increase in 2020 are primarily due to (i) an increase of $3,148,717 in research and development expense due to conducting studies with regard to BICX102, from $1,125,098 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $4,273,815 for the year ended December 31, 2020, (ii) an increase of $734,076 in payroll expense due to the increased number of employees during 2020 to support the Company’s growth of business and a replacement of the payment of consulting fees with the payment of annual base salary in accordance with the Company’s normal payroll schedule, from $137,867 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $871,943 for the year ended December 31, 2020, (iii) an increase of $78,195 in accounting and legal fees due to more legal services used in 2020 in connection with the drafting and filing of the Company’s SEC filings, from $331,803 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $409,998 for the year ended December 31, 2020, and (iv) an increase of $67,624 in costs on liability insurance and health insurance due to the increased number of employees and expansion of business, from $117,259 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $184,883 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
These increased expense were partially offset by (i) a decrease of $1,610,663 in stock-based compensation related to both directors and service providers due to certain options granted were fully vested, from $1,965,703 for year ended December 31, 2019 to $355,040, for the year ended December 31, 2020, and (ii) a decrease of $687,432 in consulting service fee and bonus due to a replacement of the payment of consulting fees and bonus with the payment of annual base salary in accordance with the Company’s normal payroll schedule, from $1,254,442 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $567,010 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net Interest Expense
Net Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $510,959 and $1,622,426, respectively. The decrease is primarily due to a decrease in the debt discount amortization and the accelerated interest due to conversion of debt in September 2019, partially offset by an increase in the amortization of discount on royalty obligation during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Grant Income
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized grant income of $4,464,626 as compared to $1,091,061 for the comparable period last year. The increase was related to: (i) the advancement of studies with the development of a 3-month implantable depot pellet of naltrexone for the treatment of Opioid Use Disorder, which the Company refers to as BICX102 and (ii) the award of second year funding from the National Institute on Drug Abuse (“NIDA”) providing for $2,831,838. The funds are available to reimburse the Company for certain incurred direct costs and indirect costs of 17%. Indirect costs are costs that are not directly related to the project itself but are required to conduct the research and are critical to the success of the project and organization as a whole.
Net Loss
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company experienced a net loss of $3,506,507 compared with a net loss of $6,048,321 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net loss is primarily due to the lower interest expense and higher grant income in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of approximately $592,053. The following table provides a summary of our net cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities.
On January 17, 2019, the Company received a Notice of Award from the United States Department of Health and Human Services for a grant from the National Institutes of Health (“NIH”) in support of BICX102 from the National Institute on Drug Abuse. The grant provides for (i) $2,842,430 in funding during the first year and (ii) $2,831,838 during the second year subject to the terms and conditions specified in the grant, including satisfactory progress of project and the availability of funds. In January 2020, the Company was awarded a second year of funding from the National Institute on Drug Abuse (“NIDA”) to support the development of a 3-month implantable depot pellet of naltrexone for the treatment of Opioid Use Disorder, which the Company refers to as BICX102. The grant provides for $2,831,838 during the second year subject to the terms and conditions specified in the grant, including satisfactory progress of project and availability of funds.
In March 2019, the Company entered into two Subscription and Royalty Agreements (“Subscription and Royalty Agreements”), one of which was with Louis and Carolyn Lucido CRT LLC, managed by Mr. Lucido, a related party and board member of the Company. Pursuant to the Subscription and Royalty Agreements: (i) Each party would purchase shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share (“Common Stock”), in the aggregate amount of $3,000,000 at a purchase price of $15.00 per share (“Purchase Price”), for a total of 200,000 shares of Common Stock; and (ii) the Company shall pay each (a) a total of $37.50 from the gross revenue derived from each of its weight loss treatments sold in the United States starting on the first (1st) day that the first unit of the treatment is sold (“Initial Sales Date”) and ending on the third (3rd) anniversary of the Initial Sales Date; and (b) a total of $25.00 from the gross revenue derived from each of its weight loss treatments sold in the United States starting on the day following the third (3rd) anniversary of the Initial Sales Date and ending on the fifteenth (15th) anniversary of the Initial Sales Date (“Royalty”).
Under the Lucido agreement, the Company will use no less than 65% of the proceeds of the aggregate Purchase Price of the Lucido Subscription and Royalty Agreement exclusively to develop, launch and expand the Company’s weight loss program (“Business”) including sales and marketing activities directly related to the Business, and shall be free to use up to 35% of the aggregate Purchase Price of the Lucido Subscription and Royalty Agreement for general working capital and administration, and for further product development. With the prior written consent of Mr. Lucido, the Company may use more than 35% of the aggregate Purchase Price for general working capital and administration, and for further product development. Under the second agreement, the Company will have complete discretion as to the exact amount of the aggregate purchase price to be allocated to the development and expansion of the Business. As of December 31, 2020 Lucido has granted the Company permission to utilize more than 35% of restricted funds for general working capital.
In March 2019, the Company issued an aggregate of 400,000 shares of its common stock under proceeds related to the Subscription and Royalty Agreements. Subsequently in April 2019, the Company received the proceeds of $6,000,000.
Effective September 30, 2019, the Company executed a Conversion Agreement (“Conversion Agreement”) with BICX Holding Company LLC, an entity controlled by Alpine Creek, pursuant to which the parties agreed to the conversion (“Conversion”) of the Senior Secured Convertible Promissory Note in the principal amount of $4,160,000 (“Note”), which was issued by the Company to the Investor on June 10, 2016, into 2,227,575 shares of the Company’s common stock (“Conversion Shares”). The Company is not a related party with regard to either BICX Holding Company LLC or Alpine Creek.
In connection with the Conversion Agreement, the Company and BICX Holding Company LLC entered into a Lock-Up Agreement (“Lock-Up Agreement”) pursuant to which BICX Holding Company LLC will not sell, or otherwise dispose of the Conversion Shares, during the period commencing on October 1, 2019 and ending six (6) months following the initial closing of the Company’s intended public offering of its securities to raise gross proceeds to the Company of at least $10,000,000 (subject to adjustment in the Company’s sole discretion) (“Public Offering”). As the Public Offering was abandoned on December 9, 2019, the Lock-Up Agreement expired on April 1, 2020.
In accordance with the Conversion Agreement, the Company cannot enter into any agreement to issue or announce the issuance or proposed issuance of any shares of common stock or common stock equivalents at an issuance price below $2.00 per share.
Pursuant to the Conversion Agreement, BICX Holding Company LLC has agreed that the Total Interest Payment (as defined in the Conversion Agreement) that would have been due under the Note, in the amount of $1,138,157, will be reflected on the Company’s financial statements as an amount due and owing to the Investor to be repaid within twelve (12) months of the closing of the Public Offering, or if the Public Offering is terminated or abandoned prior to closing, then on or before such date that is no later than twelve (12) months from the date of such termination or abandonment.
The Company has historically sought and continue to seek financing from private sources to move its business plan forward. In order to satisfy the financial commitments, the Company had relied upon private party financing that has inherent risks in terms of availability and adequacy of funding.
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) surfaced. The spread of COVID-19 around the world in the first quarter of 2020 has caused significant volatility in U.S. and international markets. There is significant uncertainty around the breadth and duration of business disruptions related to COVID-19, as well as its impact on the U.S. and international economies and, as such, the Company is unable to determine if it will have a material impact to its operations.
For the next twelve months, the Company anticipates that it will need to supplement its revenues with additional capital investment or debt to ensure that the Company will have adequate cash to provide the minimum operating cash requirements to continue as a going concern. There can be no guarantee or assurance that the Company can raise adequate capital from outside sources. If the Company is unable to raise funds when required or on acceptable terms, it has to significantly scale back, or discontinue its operations.
Net Cash Flow From Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $2,151,872 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $2,937,127 used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the decreased net loss in 2020, partially offset by a decrease of $1,610,663 in stock-based compensation and other insignificant factors.
Net Cash Flow From Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $9,227 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $121,793 used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to the less purchases of equipment during 2020.
Net Cash Flow From Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities decreased by $5,317,700, from $5,425,000 provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $107,300 provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the $6,000,000 proceeds received in connection with two Subscription and Royalty agreements entered into with Louis and Carolyn Lucido CRT LLC, and J and R Galligan Revocable Trust for year ended December 31, 2019. Additionally, the Company did not issue stock for proceeds during the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company applied for both the Economic Injury Disaster Loan (“EIDL”) and Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”), which were created under the CARES Act and administrated by the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”). The decrease in net cash provided by financing activities was partially offset by the proceeds received from EIDL loan and PPP loan and the less repayment of notes payable during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Going Concern
The Company’s financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applicable to a going concern. This contemplates the realization of assets and the liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had a working capital deficit of $2,077,449, and an accumulated deficit of $64,688,311. The Company has not yet generated any significant revenues, and has incurred net losses since inception. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for the next twelve-month period since the date of the financial statements were issued.
The Company believes that its current cash on hand will not be sufficient to fund its projected operating requirements for the next twelve months since the date of the issuance of the financial statements.
The Company will be dependent upon the raising of additional capital through placement of its common stock in order to implement the Company’s business plan or by using outside financing. There can be no assurance that the Company will be successful in these situations in order to continue as a going concern. The Company is funding its operations by additional borrowings and some shareholder advances.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on its financial condition, changes in financial condition, sales or expenses, results of operations, liquidity or capital expenditures, or capital resources that are material to an investment in its securities.
Critical Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates and Assumptions
The preparation of the audited consolidated financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Significant estimates include assumptions used in the fair value of stock-based compensation, the fair value of other equity and debt instruments, right-of-use assets, lease liabilities, and allowance for doubtful accounts.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board “FASB” Accounting Standards Codification “ASC” 606. A five-step analysis a must be met as outlined in Topic 606: (i) identify the contract with the customer, (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determine the transaction price, (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations, and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) performance obligations are satisfied. Provisions for discounts and rebates to customers, estimated returns and allowances, and other adjustments are provided for in the same period the related sales are recorded. There were no changes to the Company’s revenue recognition policy from the adoption of ASC 606.
The Company’s net sales are disaggregated by product category. The sales/access fees consist of product sales, which is recognized upon the transfer of promised goods to customers. The distribution rights income consists of the income recognized from the amortization of distribution agreements entered into for its products. The membership/program fees are generated from the Company’s UnCraveRx™ Weight Loss Management Program, which is recognized upon the transfer of promised goods to customers.
The following table presents our net sales by product category for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Deferred revenue:
The Company licenses proprietary products and protocols to customers under licensing agreements that allow those customers to access the products and protocols in services they provide to their customers during the term of the license agreement. The timing and amount of revenue recognized from license agreements depends upon a variety of factors, including the specific terms of each agreement. Such agreements are reviewed for multiple performance obligations. Performance obligations can include amounts related to initial non-refundable license fees for the use of the Company’s products and protocols and additional royalties on covered services.
The Company granted license and sub-license agreements for various regions or States in the United States allowing the licensee to market, distribute and sell solely in the defined license territory, as defined, the products provided by the Company. The agreements are granted for a defined period or perpetual and are effective as long as annual milestones are achieved.
Terms for payments for licensee agreements vary from full cash payment to defined terms. In cases where license or sub-license fees are uncollected or deferred; the Company nets those uncollected fees with the deferred revenue for balance sheet presentation.
The Company amortizes license fees over the shorter of the economic life of the related contract life or contract terms for each licensee.
On October 1, 2019, the Company launched the UnCraveRx™ Weight Loss Management Program. Customers are charged a membership fee and are requested to pay for three training programs at inception. The payment are recorded as deferred revenue until earned.
The following table presents the changes in deferred revenue, reflected as current and long term liabilities on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet:
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company also had $13,500 in its revenues related to access fees and $1,952 related to membership/program fees , which were not included in deferred revenue
Stock-Based Compensation
Share-based compensation issued to employees is measured at the grant date, based on the fair value of the award, and is recognized as an expense over the requisite service period. The Company measures the fair value of the share-based compensation issued to non-employees at the grant date using the stock price observed in the trading market (for stock transactions) or the fair value of the award (for non-stock transactions), which were considered to be more reliably determinable measures of fair value than the value of the services being rendered.
Grant Income
On January 17, 2019, the Company received a Notice of Award from the United States Department of Health and Human Services for a grant from the National Institutes of Health (“NIH”) in support of BICX102 from the National Institute on Drug Abuse. The grant provides for (i) $2,842,430 in funding during the first year and (ii) $2,831,838 during the second year subject to the terms and conditions specified in the grant, including satisfactory progress of project and the availability of funds. Grant payments received prior to the Company’s performance of work required by the terms of the research grant are recorded as deferred income and recognized as grant income once work is performed and qualifying costs are incurred. $4,491,972 in grant funds were received and (i) $4,464,626 was recorded as grant income including accrued revenues of $224,879 related to the grant, (ii) $65,560 were recorded as deferred income and (iii) $186,665 was recorded as payment on accounts receivable during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Leases
The Company determines if an arrangement is a lease at inception. Operating lease right-of-use assets (“ROU assets”) and short-term and long-term lease liabilities are included on the face of the consolidated balance sheet.
ROU assets represent the right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent the Company’s obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Operating lease ROU assets and liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. As most of the Company’s leases do not provide an implicit rate, the Company uses an incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at commencement date in determining the present value of lease payments. The Company’s lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that the Company will exercise that option. Lease expense for lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. The Company has lease agreements with lease and non-lease components, which are accounted for as a single lease component. For lease agreements with terms less than 12 months, the Company has elected the short-term lease measurement and recognition exemption, and it recognizes such lease payments on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Income Taxes
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the estimated future tax effects of net operating loss and credit carry forwards and temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their respective financial reporting amounts measured at the current enacted tax rates. The Company records an estimated valuation allowance on its deferred income tax assets if it is more likely than not that these deferred income tax assets will not be realized.
The Company recognizes a tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the consolidated financial statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company has not recorded any unrecognized tax benefits.
Royalty Obligations, net
The Company accounted for royalty obligations as debt in accordance with ASC 470-10-25 and derived a debt discount, which is amortized using the effective interest method over the expected life of the arrangement, which is 15 years. The Company has no obligation to repay the then outstanding balance if during the expected life of 15 years the treatment is discontinued. In order to record the discount of the liability, the Company fair valued the royalty and the difference between fair value of the royalty obligation and the gross projected future payments was $7,171,200 and was recorded as non-cash interest expense over the life of the liability and offset to additional paid in capital at inception.