Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes beginning on page of this report.
For our discussion of the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, please read Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations located in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Executive Summary
Introduction
Biogen is a global biopharmaceutical company focused on discovering, developing and delivering worldwide innovative therapies for people living with serious neurological and neurodegenerative diseases as well as related therapeutic adjacencies. Our core growth areas include MS and neuroimmunology; Alzheimer's disease and dementia; neuromuscular disorders, including SMA and ALS; movement disorders, including Parkinson's disease; ophthalmology; and neuropsychiatry. We are also focused on discovering, developing and delivering worldwide innovative therapies in our emerging growth areas of immunology; acute neurology; and neuropathic pain. In addition, we commercialize biosimilars of advanced biologics. We support our drug discovery and development efforts through the commitment of significant resources to discovery, research and development programs and business development opportunities.
Our marketed products include TECFIDERA, VUMERITY, AVONEX, PLEGRIDY, TYSABRI and FAMPYRA for the treatment of MS; SPINRAZA for the treatment of SMA; and FUMADERM for the treatment of severe plaque psoriasis. We have certain business and financial rights with respect to RITUXAN for the treatment of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, CLL and other conditions; RITUXAN HYCELA for the treatment of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and CLL; GAZYVA for the treatment of CLL and follicular lymphoma; OCREVUS for the treatment of PPMS and RMS; and other potential anti-CD20 therapies pursuant to our collaboration arrangements with Genentech. For additional information on our collaboration arrangements with Genentech, please read Note 18, Collaborative and Other Relationships, to our consolidated financial statements included in this report.
Our innovative drug development and commercialization activities are complemented by our biosimilar business that expands access to medicines and reduces the cost burden for healthcare systems. Through our agreements with Samsung Bioepis, our joint venture with Samsung BioLogics, we market and sell BENEPALI, an etanercept biosimilar referencing ENBREL, IMRALDI, an adalimumab biosimilar referencing HUMIRA, and FLIXABI, an infliximab biosimilar referencing REMICADE, in certain countries in Europe and have an option to acquire exclusive rights to commercialize these products in China. Additionally, we have exclusive rights to commercialize two potential ophthalmology biosimilar products, SB11, a proposed ranibizumab biosimilar referencing LUCENTIS, and SB15, a proposed aflibercept biosimilar referencing EYLEA, in major markets worldwide, including the U.S., Canada, Europe, Japan and Australia. For additional information on our collaboration arrangements with Samsung Bioepis, please read Note 18, Collaborative and Other Relationships, to our consolidated financial statements included in this report.
We seek to ensure an uninterrupted supply of medicines to our patients around the world. To that end, we continually review our manufacturing capacity, capabilities, processes and facilities. In order to support our future growth and drug development pipeline, we are expanding our large molecule production capacity by building a large-scale biologics manufacturing facility in Solothurn, Switzerland, which we expect to be partially operational during the first half of 2021. We believe that the Solothurn manufacturing facility will provide us with the ability to further expand if our future growth and drug development plans increase.
Our revenues depend upon continued sales of our products as well as the financial rights we have in our anti-CD20 therapeutic programs, and, unless we develop, acquire rights to and/or commercialize new products and technologies, we will be substantially dependent on sales from our products and our financial rights in our anti-CD20 therapeutic programs for many years.
In the longer term, our revenue growth will depend upon the successful clinical development, regulatory approval and launch of new commercial products as well as additional indications for our existing products, our ability to obtain and maintain patents and other rights related to our marketed products, assets originating from our research and development efforts and/or successful execution of external business development opportunities.
Business Environment
For a detailed discussion on our business environment, please read Item 1. Business included in this report. For additional information on our competition and pricing risks that could negatively impact our product sales, please read Item 1A. Risk Factors and