Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in the Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon our current plans, estimates, beliefs and expectations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under the sections entitled “Risk Factors,” “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
We are an early-stage molecular oncology diagnostics company that develops and commercializes proprietary circulating tumor cell, or CTC, and circulating tumor nucleic acid including circulating tumor DNA, or ctDNA, and circulating tumor RNA, or ctRNA, assays using a standard blood sample, or “liquid biopsy.” Effective January 2020, we also adapted and validated this technology for commercial use in cerebrospinal fluid, or CSF, to identify tumor cells that have metastasized to the central nervous system, or CNS, in patients with advanced lung cancer or breast cancer.
In June of 2020, to respond to a national public health emergency precipitated by the COVID-19 pandemic, we introduced molecular testing for SARS-CoV2, the virus responsible for COVID-19, using a United States Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, Emergency Use Authorization, or EUA, based “RT-PCR” method developed by Thermo-Fisher.
In June 2020, we entered into a development agreement with Aegea Biotechnologies, Inc., or Aegea, focused on the co-development by us and Aegea of a highly sensitive PCR-based assay designed by Aegea for detecting the COVID-19 virus. Pursuant to the development agreement, we receive compensation for development services performed based on time and materials expended. In early March 2021, we announced a supply agreement with Aegea for the PCR-based COVID-19 assay kit. Under the supply agreement, Aegea will supply the COVID-19 assay kit to us for validation in our high-complexity molecular clinical laboratory that is certified under the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments of 1988, or CLIA, and licensed by the California Department of Public Health, and accredited by the College of American Pathologists, or CAP, and subsequent commercialization of a laboratory developed test, or LDT.
Our current and planned blood and CSF assays are intended to provide information to aid healthcare providers by identifying tumor cells associated with progression or metastasis, and identifying specific oncogenic alterations that may qualify a subset of cancer patients for targeted therapy. These assays may also be used for monitoring response to treatment or to identify specific resistance mechanisms.
“Liquid biopsies” are intended to supplement or replace the need for additional invasive surgical tissue biopsies or repeated lumbar punctures to find tumor material (intact cells or tumor derived nucleic acid known as ctDNA and ctRNA) in blood or CSF. Our molecular assays are also designed to help find molecular alterations in situations where tumor tissue or CSF cytology samples are insufficient and/or unable to provide the molecular subtype information necessary for clinical decisions.
Our assays have the potential to provide faster, more contemporaneous information regarding therapy response or the characteristics of a patient’s disease when compared with surgical tissue biopsies which must be scheduled or radiographic imaging which may take a month or more to illustrate progression.
Our current assays and our planned future assays focus on key solid tumor indications utilizing our Target-SelectorTM liquid biopsy technology platform for the biomarker analysis of CTCs and ctDNA from a standard blood or CSF sample. Our patented Target-Selector™ CTC platform assays are based on an internally developed microfluidics-based cell capture and analysis platform, with enabling features that change how information provided by CTC testing is used by clinicians. Our patented Target-Selector™ molecular technology enables detection of mutations and genome alterations with enhanced sensitivity and specificity, and is applicable to nucleic acid from ctDNA, and could potentially be validated for other sample types such as bone marrow, or tissue (surgical resections and/or biopsies). Our Target-Selector™ CTC and molecular platforms provide both biomarker detection as well as monitoring capabilities and require only a patient blood sample or CSF sample to inform treatment decisions. In January 2019, we began offering research use only, or RUO, liquid biopsy kits containing our patented and proprietary ctDNA Target SelectorTM testing for certain specific cancer genes to laboratories and researchers worldwide. In March 2020 we released an update for our RUO EGFR Target SelectorTM Kit which expanded the sample types validated to include both blood and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded, or FFPE. In March 2020 we also released a RUO BRAF Target SelectorTM validated for both ctDNA and FFPE.
At our corporate headquarters facility located in San Diego, California, we operate a clinical laboratory that is certified under CLIA, licensed by the California Department of Public Health, and accredited by CAP. At this facility we perform our current assays, and we continue to perform research and development for our planned future assays. In addition, we currently
manufacture our microfluidic channels and various chemistries used in our testing process, however, we have identified and have been working with a manufacturer to outsource certain manufacturing activities in the near term to reduce costs and improve efficiency. The assays we offer and intend to offer are classified as LDTs under CLIA regulations. CLIA certification is required before any clinical laboratory, including ours, may perform testing on human specimens for the purpose of obtaining information for the diagnosis, prevention, or treatment of disease or the assessment of health. In addition, we participate in and have received CAP accreditation, which includes rigorous bi-annual laboratory inspections and requires adherence to specific quality standards.
Key Factors Affecting our Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Our overall long-term growth plan depends on our ability to continue to develop and commercialize products and assays through our CLIA-certified, CAP-accredited, and state-licensed laboratory. We have commercialized our Target-Selector assays for breast cancer, non-small cell lung cancer, or NSCLC, gastric cancer, colorectal cancer, prostate cancer, pancreaticobiliary cancer, and ovarian cancer, and plan to continue to launch a series of cancer diagnostic assays for different predictive biomarkers assays in the United States as LDTs performed in our laboratory, and enhance revenue for these products through the efforts of our sales and marketing organization. Our sales strategy is to engage medical oncologists, neuro-oncologists, surgical oncologists, urologists, pulmonologists, pathologists and other physicians in the United States at private and group practices, hospitals and cancer centers. We also plan to continue to evaluate potential opportunities for the commercialization of our products and assays in other countries. Additionally, sales of our proprietary blood collection tubes, or BCTs, which allow for the intact transport of liquid biopsy samples for research use only, or RUO, from regions around the world, commenced during 2018. In addition to testing for physicians and their patients, we offer clinical trials testing and research services to help increase the efficiency and economic viability of clinical trials for pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical companies and clinical research organizations both within and outside of the United States. We are currently exploring the possibility of introducing ctDNA technology outside the United States as part of IVD test kits and/or testing systems utilizing our Target-Selector technologies. We plan to continue to cooperate with partners on accessing markets internationally either through partnerships with local groups and distributors or through the development of IVDs and/or test systems, including instrumentation. We also have a research and development program focused on technology enhancements, novel platform development, and evaluating clinical applications for our cancer diagnostic tests in different cancer types and clinical settings.
To facilitate market adoption of our products and assays, we anticipate having to successfully complete additional clinical utility studies with clinical samples to generate clinical utility data and then publish our results in peer-reviewed scientific journals. Our ability to complete such clinical studies is dependent upon our ability to leverage our collaborative relationships with leading institutions to facilitate our research, to conduct the appropriate clinical studies and to obtain favorable clinical data. We collaborate with physicians and researchers at Sarah Cannon Research Institute, University of Colorado, the University of California, San Diego, the John Wayne Cancer Institute, Columbia University, Johns Hopkins Medical Institute, Vanderbilt University, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, and Georgetown University and plan to expand our collaborative relationships to include other key thought leaders at other institutions for the cancer types we target with our Target-Selector commercialized assays and our planned future assays, as well as for our current and planned future products. Such relationships help us develop and validate the effectiveness and utility of our products, commercialized assays and our planned future assays in specific, clinical settings and provide us access to patient samples and data.
We believe that the factors discussed in the following paragraphs have had and are expected to continue to have a material impact on our results of operations and financial condition.
Revenues
The Company's commercial revenues are generated from diagnostic services provided to patient’s physicians and billed to third-party insurance payers such as managed care organizations, Medicare and Medicaid and patients for any deductibles, coinsurance or copayments that may be due. The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606, which requires that an entity recognize revenue when it transfers promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services.
We bill third-party payers on a fee-for-service basis at our list price and third-party commercial revenue is recorded net of contractual discounts, payer-specific allowances and other reserves. Our development services revenues are supported by contractual agreements and generated from assay development services provided to entities, as well as certain other
diagnostic services provided to physicians. Diagnostic services are completed upon the delivery of assay results to the prescribing physician, at which time we bill for the service.
Our gross commercial revenues billed are subject to estimated deductions for such contractual discounts, payer-specific allowances and other reserves to arrive at reported net revenues, which relate to differences between amounts billed and corresponding amounts estimated to be subsequently collected. These third-party payer discounts and sales allowances are estimated based on a number of assumptions and factors, including historical payment trends, seasonality associated with the annual reset of patient deductible limits on January 1 of each year, and current and estimated future payments. The estimates of amounts that will ultimately be realized from commercial diagnostic services require significant judgment by us. Patients do not enter into direct agreements with us that commit them to pay any portion of the cost of the tests in the event that they have not met their annual deductible limit under their insurance policy, if any, or if their insurance otherwise declines to reimburse us. Adjustments to the estimated payment amounts are recorded at the time of final collection and settlement of each transaction as an adjustment to commercial revenue.
Costs and Expenses
We classify our costs and expenses into four categories: cost of revenues, research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative. Our costs and expenses principally consist of facility costs and overhead, personnel costs, outside services and consulting costs, laboratory consumables, development costs, and legal fees.
Cost of Revenues. Our cost of revenues consists principally of facility costs and overhead, personnel costs, and laboratory and manufacturing supplies and materials. We are pursuing various strategies to reduce and control our cost of revenues, including automating aspects of our processes, developing more efficient technology and methods, and attempting to negotiate improved terms and volume discounts with our suppliers.
Research and Development Expenses. We incur research and development expenses principally in connection with our efforts to develop and improve our tests. Our primary research and development expenses consist of direct personnel costs, laboratory equipment and consumables, and overhead expenses. We anticipate that research and development expenses will remain consistent in the near-term, principally to develop and validate tests in our pipeline and to perform work associated with clinical utility studies and development collaborations. In addition, we expect that our costs related to collaborations with research and academic institutions will increase. All research and development expenses are charged to operations in the periods in which they are incurred.
Sales and Marketing Expenses. Our sales and marketing expenses consist principally of personnel and related overhead costs for our sales team and their support personnel, travel and entertainment expenses, and other selling costs including sales collaterals and trade shows. We anticipate sales and marketing expenses to increase as we work on generating higher revenues and marketing additional offerings.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses consist principally of personnel-related expenses, professional fees, such as legal, accounting and business consultants, insurance costs, and other general expenses. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase as we expand our business operations. We further expect that general and administrative expenses will increase due to increased information technology, legal, insurance, accounting and financial reporting expenses associated with expanded commercial activities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates based on historical experience and make various assumptions, which management believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, which form the basis for judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The notes to our audited financial statements, which are included elsewhere in this Annual Report, contain a summary of our significant accounting policies. We consider the following accounting policies critical to the understanding of the results of our operations:
•
Revenue recognition;
•
stock-based compensation; and
•
going concern.
Revenue Recognition and Related Reserves
Our commercial revenues are generated from diagnostic services provided to patient’s physicians and billed to third-party insurance payers such as managed care organizations, Medicare and Medicaid and patients for any deductibles, coinsurance or copayments that may be due. We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606, which requires that an entity recognize revenue when it transfers promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services.
Contracts
For our commercial revenues, while we market directly to physicians, our customer is the patient. Patients do not enter into direct agreements with us, however, a patient’s insurance coverage requirements would dictate whether or not any portion of the cost of the tests would be patient responsibility. Accordingly, we establish a contract with a commercial patient in accordance with other customary business practices, as follows:
•
Approval of a contract is established via the order and accession, which are submitted by the patient’s physician.
•
We are obligated to perform our diagnostic services upon receipt of a sample from a physician, and the patient and/or applicable payer are obligated to reimburse us for services rendered based on the patient’s insurance benefits.
•
Payment terms are a function of a patient’s existing insurance benefits, including the impact of coverage decisions with CMS and applicable reimbursement contracts established between us and payers, unless the patient is a self-pay patient, whereby we bill the patient directly after the services are provided.
•
Once we deliver a patient’s assay result to the ordering physician, the contract with a patient has commercial substance, as we are legally able to collect payment and bill an insurer and/or patient, regardless of payer contract status or patient insurance benefit status.
•
Consideration associated with commercial revenues is considered variable and constrained until fully adjudicated, with net revenues recorded to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal will not occur.
Our development services revenues are supported by contractual agreements and generated from assay development services provided to entities, as well as certain other diagnostic services provided to physicians, and revenues are recognized upon delivery of the performance obligations in the contract.
Performance Obligations
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service, or a bundle of goods or services, to the customer. For commercial and development services revenues, our contracts have a single performance obligation, which is satisfied upon rendering of services, which culminates in the delivery of a patient’s assay result(s) to the ordering physician or entity. The duration of time between test order receipt and delivery of a valid assay result to the ordering physician or entity is typically less than two weeks, and for our RT-PCR COVID-19 testing, typically 48 hours or less. Accordingly, we elected the practical expedient and therefore, we do not disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations.
Transaction Price
The transaction price is the amount of consideration that we expect to collect in exchange for transferring promised goods or services to a customer, excluding amounts collected on behalf of third parties, such as sales taxes. The consideration expected from a contract with a customer may include fixed amounts, variable amounts, or both. Our gross commercial revenues billed, and corresponding gross accounts receivable, are subject to estimated deductions for such allowances and reserves to arrive at reported net revenues, which relate to differences between amounts billed and corresponding amounts estimated to be subsequently collected, and is deemed to be variable although the variability is not explicitly stated in any contract. Rather,
the implied variability is due to several factors, such as the payment history or lack thereof for third-party payers, reimbursement rate changes for contracted and non-contracted payers, any patient co-payments, deductibles or compliance incentives, the existence of secondary payers and claim denials. We estimate the amount of variable consideration using the most likely amount approach to estimating variable consideration for third-party payers, including direct patient bills, whereby the estimated reimbursement for services are established by payment histories on CPT codes for each payer, or similar payer types. When no payment history is available, the value of the account is estimated at Medicare rates, with additional other payer-specific reserves taken as appropriate. Collection periods for billings on commercial revenues range from less than 30 days to several months, depending on the contracted or non-contracted nature of the payer, among other variables. The estimates of amounts that will ultimately be realized from commercial diagnostic services for non-contracted payers require significant judgment by management.
We limit the amount of variable consideration included in the transaction price to the unconstrained portion of such consideration. Revenue is recognized up to the amount of variable consideration that is not subject to a significant reversal until additional information is obtained or the uncertainty associated with the additional payments or refunds is subsequently resolved. Differences between original estimates and subsequent revisions, including final settlements, represent changes in the estimate of variable consideration and are included in the period in which such revisions are made. We monitor our estimates of transaction price to depict conditions that exist at each reporting date. If we subsequently determine that we will collect more consideration than we originally estimated for a contract with a customer, we will account for the change as an increase in the estimate of the transaction price in the period identified as an increase to revenue. Similarly, if we subsequently determine that the amount it expects to collect from a customer is less than it originally estimated, we will generally account for the change as a decrease in the estimate of the transaction price as a decrease to revenue, provided that such downward adjustment does not result in a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized. Revenue recognized from changes in transaction prices was not significant during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020. Further, although the Company believes that its estimate for contractual allowances and other reserves is appropriate, it is possible that the Company will experience an impact on cash collections as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Allocate Transaction Price
For our commercial revenues, the entire transaction price is allocated to the single performance obligation contained in a contract with a customer. For our development services revenues, the contracted transaction price is allocated to each single performance obligation contained in a contract with a customer as performed.
Point-in-time Recognition
Our single performance obligation is satisfied at a point in time, and that point in time is defined as the date a patient’s successful assay result is delivered to the patient’s ordering physician or entity. We consider this date to be the time at which the patient obtains control of the promised diagnostic assay service.
Contract Balances
The timing of revenue recognition, billings and cash collections results in accounts receivable recorded in our balance sheets. Generally, billing occurs subsequent to delivery of a patient’s test result to the ordering physician or entity, resulting in an account receivable.
Practical Expedients
We do not adjust the transaction price for the effects of a significant financing component, as at contract inception, we expect the collection cycle to be one year or less.
We expense sales commissions when incurred because the amortization period is one year or less, which are recorded within sales and marketing expenses.
We incur certain other costs that are incurred regardless of whether a contract is obtained. Such costs are primarily related to legal services and patient communications. These costs are expensed as incurred and recorded within general and administrative expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation under the provisions of ASC Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all stock-based awards made to employees and directors based on estimated fair values on the grant date. We estimate the fair value of stock option awards on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, or Black-Scholes valuation model. The fair value of RSUs is determined by the price of our common stock on the date of grant. The value of the portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as expense over the requisite service periods using the straight-line method. We estimate forfeitures at the time of grant and revise our estimates in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates.
We account for stock-based compensation awards to non-employees in accordance with ASC Topic 505-50, Equity-Based Payments to Non-Employees. Under ASC 505-50, we determine the fair value of the warrants or stock-based compensation awards granted as either the fair value of the consideration received, or the fair value of the equity instruments issued, whichever is more reliably measurable. All issuances of equity instruments issued to non-employees as consideration for goods or services received by us are accounted for based on the fair value of the equity instruments issued. These awards are recorded in expense and additional paid-in capital in stockholders’ equity over the applicable service periods based on the fair value of the options at the end of each period.
Calculating the fair value of stock-based awards requires the input of highly subjective assumptions into the Black-Scholes valuation model. Stock-based compensation expense is calculated using our best estimate, which involves inherent uncertainties, and the application of our management’s judgment. Significant estimates include the fair value of our common stock at the date of grant for awards granted prior to our initial public offering, the expected life of the stock option, stock price volatility, risk-free interest rate and forfeiture rate.
Going Concern
We assess and determine our ability to continue as a going concern under the provisions of ASC Topic 205-40, Presentation of Financial Statements-Going Concern, which requires us to evaluate whether there are conditions or events that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that our annual and interim financial statements are issued. Certain additional financial statement disclosures are required if such conditions or events are identified. If and when an entity’s liquidation becomes imminent, financial statements should be prepared under the liquidation basis of accounting.
Determining the extent, if any, to which conditions or events raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern, or the extent to which mitigating plans sufficiently alleviate any such substantial doubt, as well as whether or not liquidation is imminent, requires significant judgment by us. We have determined that it is not probable based on projected cash flows that substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern exists for the one-year period following the date that the financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 were issued.
Reverse Split
In September 2020, pursuant to approval by our stockholders and board of directors, we filed an amendment to our Certificate of Amendment to our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation to effect a one-for-ten reverse stock split of our outstanding common stock. All references to share and per share amounts in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been restated to reflect the one-for-ten reverse stock split, except for the authorized number of shares of the Company’s common stock of 150,000,000 shares, which was not affected by the one-for-ten reverse stock split.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve, and the extent to which COVID-19 may impact our business will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the ultimate geographic spread of the disease, the duration of the outbreak, travel restrictions and social distancing in the United States and other countries, business closures or business disruptions, and the effectiveness of actions taken in the United States and other countries to contain and treat the disease. We estimate that the COVID-19 pandemic led to an approximate 15 to 25% decline in commercial volume from current customers, and also impacted opportunities for us to gain new customers with the closing of many physician offices and labs. We are continuing to vigilantly monitor the situation with our primary focus on the health and safety of our employees and clients.
In April 2020, we announced that we verified a COVID-19 molecular diagnostic test and that we would begin accepting physician-ordered testing requests. The testing volume was initially limited by the national shortage of specimen collection kits. On June 22, 2020, we announced the availability of 10,000 specimen collection kits for COVID-19 testing for physician ordering. Collected specimens are shipped to our high-complexity, CLIA-certified, CAP-accredited and BSL-2 safety level laboratory in San Diego with results returned to ordering physicians in an estimated 24 to 48 hours. We have received more than 300,000 samples for processing through our RT-PCR technology at our laboratory to date and we believe that performing highly accurate RT-PCR testing for COVID-19 will be an important aspect of our business until the COVID-19 pandemic subsides.
On June 3, 2020, we entered into a development agreement with Aegea focused on the co-development by Biocept and Aegea of a highly sensitive PCR-based assay designed by Aegea for detecting the COVID-19 virus. In early March 2021 we announced a supply agreement with Aegea Biotechnologies, Inc. for a new PCR-based COVID-19 assay kit designed by Aegea and co-developed by Aegea and Biocept. Under the supply agreement, Aegea will supply the COVID-19 assay kit to Biocept for validation in its CLIA-certified, CAP-accredited high-complexity molecular lab and subsequent commercialization of a laboratory developed test (LDT).
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2020
The following table sets forth certain information concerning our results of operations for the periods shown:
The composition of the Company’s net revenues recognized during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, disaggregated by source and timing of recognition, are as follows:
Net Revenues
Net revenues were approximately $27,461,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with approximately $5,529,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $21,932,000, or 397%, with the increase attributable to significant RT-PCR COVID-19 testing volumes during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 included $26.9 million in commercial test revenue, which includes $23.3 million attributable to RT-PCR COVID-19 testing, $177,000 in development services test revenue and $421,000 in revenue for distributed products, Target Selector™ RUO kits, CEE-Sure® blood collection tubes and payments from Aegea Biotechnologies, Inc. for services associated with the development of a COVID-19 assay. Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019 included $5.1 million in commercial test revenue, $212,000 in development services test revenue and $200,000 from distributed products. The increase in net revenues is due to an increase in overall accession volumes, which is attributable to the COVID-19 testing business, which was launched during the second quarter of 2020, resulting in approximately 188,000 delivered accessions during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The net estimated revenue per commercial accession delivered during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $140, based on 191,461 commercial accessions delivered, while during the year ended December 31, 2019 it was approximately $1,202, based on 4,256 commercial accessions delivered. The decrease in net estimated revenue per commercial accession delivered as compared to the prior year is primarily the result of lower net revenue per accession delivered from the portion of our accession volume related to our RT-PCR COVID-19 testing and a reduced number of biomarkers reported for each oncology case. Total accessions received for the year ended December 31, 2020 were 200,326, inclusive of 199,268 commercial accessions.
The following table sets forth certain information regarding commercial accessions delivered during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, as follows:
*(1) Not meaningful due to COVID-19 volume.
Additionally, overall development revenues stayed relatively flat as compared to the same period in the prior year. The net revenue per development services accession increased primarily due to the higher number of biomarkers ordered during the current period as compared to the same period in the prior year, partially offset by a lower number of development services accessions delivered as follows:
Costs and Expenses
Cost of Revenues. Cost of revenues was approximately $21,337,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with approximately $10,978,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of $10,359,000, or 94% primarily resulting from increased revenues related to our RT-PCR COVID-19 testing business. As we continue to leverage the fixed components of our costs, our cost of revenues as a percentage of net revenues decreased by approximately 120.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in the prior year. Cost of revenues are comprised of, but not limited to, expenses related to personnel costs, materials, shipping and other direct costs, as well as equipment depreciation and software amortization expenses.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses were approximately $5,220,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with approximately $4,697,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $523,000, or 11%. The increase was primarily attributable to costs related to launching our RT-PCR COVID-19 testing
during the year December 31, 2020, ongoing development and validation costs related to oncology liquid biopsy panels and laboratory testing automation projects. Research and development expenses are comprised of, but not limited to, personnel costs, material, shipping and other direct costs, computer and laboratory equipment maintenance and facility related costs.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses were approximately $9,973,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with approximately $6,970,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $3,003,000, or 43%. The increase was due to reporting a department previously under sales and marketing under general and administrative costs beginning in mid-2019, as well as higher investor relations expenses, directors and officer’s liability insurance, consulting and legal costs as compared to the prior year. General and administrative expenses are comprised of, but not limited to, personnel costs, facilities, depreciation, repairs and maintenance costs, stock-based compensation expenses, patent and legal costs, accounting and audit fees, as well as insurance, office and other expenses.
Sales and Marketing Expenses. Sales and marketing expenses were approximately $6,400,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with approximately $5,941,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $459,000, or 8%. The increase was primarily attributable to higher sales commissions due to higher revenues during the period. Sales and marketing expenses are comprised of, but not limited to, personnel costs, trade show and other marketing related expenses, as well as office and other costs.
Interest Expenses. Interest expenses were $236,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $250,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing a reduction of $14,000 or 6%. Interest expenses are comprised of interest incurred related to finance leases used to obtain equipment.
Warrant Inducement and Other Expenses. Warrant inducement and other expenses were approximately $2,102,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with approximately $1,831,000 for the same period in 2019, an increase of $271,000, or 15%. The increase was due to a higher fair value recognized in the first quarter of 2020 for the inducement warrants issued in January 2020 and warrant modification costs than for the inducement warrants issued in the May 2019 in connection with the warrant exercise offering.
Income Tax Expense
Over the past several years we have generated operating losses in all jurisdictions in which we may be subject to income taxes. As a result, we have accumulated significant net operating losses and other deferred tax assets. Because of our history of losses and the uncertainty as to the realization of those deferred tax assets, a full valuation allowance has been recognized. We do not expect to report a provision for income taxes until we have a history of earnings, if ever, that would support the realization of our deferred tax assets.
We have not completed a study to assess whether an ownership change has occurred or whether there have been multiple ownership changes since our formation, due to the complexity and cost associated with such a study, and the fact that there may be additional ownership changes in the future, however, we believe multiple ownership changes likely occurred. As a result, we have estimated that the use of our net operating loss is limited and the remaining net operating loss carryforwards and research and development credits we estimate can be used in the future remain fully offset by a valuation allowance to reduce the net asset to zero.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation has had a material adverse impact on our business or operating results during the periods presented.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We are actively working to improve our financial position and enable the growth of our business, by raising new capital and generating revenues.
Cash Flows
Our net cash flow from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods below were as follows:
Cash Used in Operating Activities. Net cash used in operating activities was $19.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash used in operating activities of $23.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The net decrease of $3.3 million in cash used, in addition to lower net losses, was primarily related to an increase in our accounts receivable balance of approximately $10.6 million, inventories of $1.4 million, partially offset by an increase in account payable balances of $4.5 million and decrease in prepaid expenses of $533,000.
Cash Used in Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities of approximately $867,000 and $735,000 during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, was related to purchases of fixed assets.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was $25.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $29.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our primary sources of cash from financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $660,000 in net proceeds from exercise of overallotment warrants from the December 2019 financing in January 2020, net proceeds of $24.2 million from our sale of common stock in three financing transactions in March and April 2020, and $2.4 million in proceeds from exercise of common stock warrants. Net proceeds from financing transactions were partially offset by $1.5 million of principal payments made on finance leases and indebtedness. Our primary sources of cash from financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of $2.0 million in net proceeds from our offering of common stock in January 2019, $6.6 million in net proceeds from our sale of common stock and warrants in February 2019, $0.6 million in net proceeds from the exercise of the placement agent’s overallotment option from the January 2019 transaction, $7.6 million in net proceeds from our sale of common stock and warrants in March 2019, $4.9 million in proceeds from exercise of common stock warrants, and $9.0 million in net proceeds from our December 2019 financing transaction.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Expenditure Requirements
We expect to continue to incur substantial operating losses in the future. We expect that we will use the net proceeds from our sale of equity securities, if any, cash received from the licensing of our technology, if any, and our revenues from operations to hire sales and marketing personnel, support increased sales and marketing activities, fund further research and development, clinical utility studies and future enhancements of our assays, acquire equipment, implement automation and scale our capabilities to prepare for significant assay volume, for general corporate purposes and to fund ongoing operations and the expansion of our business, including the increased costs associated with expanded commercial activities. We may also use the net proceeds from our sale of equity securities, if any, cash received from the licensing of our technology, if any, and our revenues from operations to acquire or invest in businesses, technologies, services or products, although we do not have any current plans to do so.
In January 2020, we completed a Warrant Exercise Inducement offering and received net proceeds of approximately $2.3 million, as well as an additional $700,000 from the underwriter exercising its overallotment warrants from the December 2019 underwritten financing transaction. In addition, as inducement for these exercises, we issued 692,725 warrants to purchase shares of common stock at $3.495 per share. The warrants are exercisable on the six-month anniversary of issuance and expire five years following the date first exercisable. On March 2, 2020, we sold and issued 2,300,000 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $4.00 per share in a registered direct offering and received net proceeds of approximately $8.6 million, after deducting placement agent fees and other expenses. On March 4, 2020, we sold and issued 1,600,000 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $4.10 per share in a registered direct offering and received net cash proceeds of approximately $6.1 million after deducting placement agent fees and other expenses. On April 16, 2020, we
sold and issued 2,230,000 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $4.60 per share in a registered direct offering and received net cash proceeds of approximately $9.6 million, after deducting placement agent fees and other expenses.
As of December 31, 2020, our cash totaled $14.4 million. The COVID-19 testing revenue during 2020 and through the first quarter of 2021, has provided us with increased levels of cash inflows from operations, and it is expected to continue, albeit at lower and declining levels, throughout at least the next twelve months. As a result, we believe that based on our current and planned cash usage, along with current COVID-19 testing revenues, our cash balances will support our operations through the first quarter of 2022. As such, we determined that it is not probable based on projected cash flows that substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern exists for the one-year period following the date that the financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 were issued. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve, and the extent to which COVID-19 may impact the Company’s business will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the ultimate geographic spread of the disease, the duration of the outbreak, travel restrictions and social distancing in the United States and other countries, business closures or business disruptions, and the effectiveness of actions taken in the United States and other countries to contain and treat the disease. While the Company experienced increased revenue levels in 2020 related to its COVID-19 testing business and has attained net income for the first time in its operating history in the fourth quarter in 2020, these results are not expected to be indicative of future results as the COVID-19 pandemic subsides.
In May 2020, the SEC declared effective a shelf registration statement filed by us. The shelf registration statement allows us to issue any combination of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities and warrants from time to time for an aggregate initial offering price of up to $100.0 million.
We expect that we will need additional financing to execute on our current or future business strategies beyond the next twelve months. Until we can generate significant cash from operations, including assay revenues, we expect to continue to fund operations with the proceeds from offerings of our equity securities or debt, or transactions involving product development, technology licensing or collaboration. For example, we have an effective shelf registration statement on file with the SEC which allows us to issue any combination of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities and warrants from time to time until expiration in May 2023. The specific terms of additional future offerings, if any, under this shelf registration statement would be established at the time of such offerings. We can provide no assurances that any sources of a sufficient amount of financing will be available to us on favorable terms, if at all. If we are unable to raise a sufficient amount of financing in a timely manner, we would likely need to scale back our general and administrative activities and certain of our research and development activities. Our forecast pertaining to our current financial resources and the costs to support our general and administrative and research and development activities are forward-looking statements and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results could vary materially and negatively as a result of a number of factors, including:
•
the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business;
•
our ability to secure financing and the amount thereof;
•
the costs of operating and enhancing our laboratory facilities;
•
the costs of developing our anticipated internal sales and marketing capabilities;
•
the scope, progress and results of our research and development programs, including clinical utility studies;
•
the scope, progress, results, costs, timing and outcomes of the clinical utility studies for our diagnostic assays;
•
our ability to manage the costs for manufacturing our microfluidic channels;
•
the costs of maintaining, expanding and protecting our intellectual property portfolio, including potential litigation costs and liabilities;
•
our ability to obtain adequate reimbursement from governmental and other third-party payers for our assays and services;
•
the costs of additional general and administrative personnel, including accounting and finance, legal and human resources, as a result of becoming a public company;
•
our ability to collect revenues; and
•
other risks discussed in our other filings with the SEC.
We may raise additional capital to fund our current operations and to fund expansion of our business to meet our long-term business objectives through public or private equity offerings, debt financings, borrowings or strategic partnerships coupled with an investment in our company or a combination thereof. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of convertible debt securities, or other debt securities, these securities could be secured and could have rights senior to those of our common stock. In addition, any new debt incurred by us could impose covenants that restrict our operations. The issuance of any new equity securities will also dilute the interest of our current stockholders. Given the risks associated with our business, including our unprofitable operating history and our ability or inability to develop additional assays, additional capital may not be available when needed on acceptable terms, or at all. If adequate funds are not available, we will need to curb our expansion plans or limit our research and development activities, which would have a material adverse impact on our business prospects and results of operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K.