Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following information should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions, which could cause actual results to differ materially from management’s expectations. Please see the “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” section immediately preceding Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-K and the “Risk Factors” section in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a leading provider of advanced laser systems for the dental industry. We develop, manufacture, market, and sell laser systems that provide significant benefits for dental practitioners and their patients. Our proprietary systems allow dentists, periodontists, endodontists, oral surgeons, and other dental specialists to perform a broad range of minimally invasive dental procedures, including cosmetic, restorative, and complex surgical applications. Our laser systems are designed to provide clinically superior results for many types of dental procedures compared to those achieved with drills, scalpels, and other conventional instruments. Potential patient benefits include less pain, fewer shots, faster healing, decreased fear and anxiety, and fewer appointments. Potential practitioner benefits include improved patient care and the ability to perform a higher volume and wider variety of procedures and generate more patient referrals.
We offer two categories of laser system products: Waterlase (all-tissue) systems and diode (soft-tissue) systems. Our flagship brand, the Waterlase, uses a patented combination of water and laser energy and is FDA cleared for over 80 clinical indications to perform most procedures currently performed using drills, scalpels, and other traditional dental instruments for cutting soft and hard tissue. For example, Waterlase safely debrides implants without damaging or significantly affecting surface temperature and is the only effective, safe solution to preserving sick implants. In addition, Waterlase disinfects root canals more efficiently than some traditional chemical methods. We also offer our diode laser systems to perform soft tissue, pain therapy, and cosmetic procedures, including teeth whitening. We have approximately 271 issued and 40 pending United States and international patents, the majority of which are related to Waterlase technology. From 1998 through December 31, 2020, we sold over 41,200 laser systems in over 80 countries around the world. Contained in this total are approximately 13,600 Waterlase systems, including over 9,100 Waterlase MD, MDX, Express and iPlus systems.
Consistent with our goal to focus our energies on strengthening our leadership, and worldwide competitiveness and increasing the amount of attention we pay to our professional customers and their patients, we have made strategic personnel additions to our senior management team.
Recent Developments
Impact of Coronavirus (COVID-19) on Our Operations
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China. The novel coronavirus spread to over 100 countries, including every state in the United States. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, a pandemic, and on March 13, 2020, the United States declared a national emergency with respect to the coronavirus outbreak. This outbreak severely impacted global economic activity, and many countries and many states in the United States have reacted to the outbreak by instituting quarantines, mandating business and school closures and restricting travel. These mandated business closures included dental office closures in Europe and the United States for all but emergency procedures. Our salespeople were unable to call on dental customers during these closures. In addition, most dental shows and workshops scheduled in 2020 were canceled. There is no assurance that the Company’s sales will return to normal levels during 2021 or at any time thereafter. See Item 1A - “Risk Factors” for additional information regarding the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
SWK Loan Amendment
On February 24, 2021, we entered into the Seventh Amendment to the Credit Agreement (the “Seventh Amendment”) with SWK Funding, LLC. The Seventh Amendment amends the Credit Agreement by providing for minimum aggregate revenue requirements at the end of certain periods, to the extent that liquid assets are less than $15 million.
Equity Offering
On February 10, 2021, BIOLASE issued and sold in an underwritten bought deal offering an aggregate of 14,000,000 shares of common stock at a price of $1.03 per share less underwriting discounts and commissions. The Company received gross proceeds of approximately $14.4 million before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses. The Company intends to use the aggregate net proceeds of the Offering primarily for working capital and general corporate purposes.
Warrants
As of March 25, 2021, BIOLASE issued an aggregate of 35,460,000 shares of common stock from the exercise of warrants outstanding as of December 31, 2020. The exercise of the warrants resulted in cash proceeds of $15.0 million during 2021.
Deficiency Letter from NASDAQ
On December 3, 2019, BIOLASE received a deficiency letter from NASDAQ notifying BIOLASE that it violated the continued listing requirements of “NASDAQ’s Minimum Bid Price Rule, which requires that BIOLASE common stock maintain a minimum bid price of at least $1.00 per share. In accordance with NASDAQ rules, BIOLASE was provided an initial period of 180 calendar days, or until June 1, 2020 (the “Compliance Date”), to submit a plan to regain compliance. In accordance with NASDAQ rules, BIOLASE was provided an initial period of 180 calendar days, or until June 1, 2020, to regain compliance. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic and related extraordinary market conditions, NASDAQ provided temporary relief from the continued listing requirements, as a result, the Company’s deadline to regain compliance was extended to August 15, 2020. Because the Company did not regain compliance with the Bid Price Rule by the Compliance Date, we provided written notice to NASDAQ of our intention to cure the deficiency during an additional 180 calendar day compliance period by effecting a reverse stock split, if necessary. On February 4, 2021, BIOLASE received formal notification via letter from NASDAQ confirming that the Company had regained compliance with the Minimum Bid Price Rule, and that the matter is now closed.
On March 31, 2020, BIOLASE received a deficiency letter from NASDAQ notifying BIOLASE that, based on BIOLASE’s stockholders’ equity of $377,000 as of December 31, 2019, as reported in the 2019 Form 10-K, BIOLASE was no longer in compliance with the minimum stockholders’ equity requirement for continued listing on the NASDAQ Capital Market under NASDAQ Listing Rule 5550(b)(1), which requires listed companies to maintain stockholders’ equity of at least $2.5 million. BIOLASE has responded to NASDAQ with a specific plan to achieve and sustain compliance with the foregoing listing requirement. If the Company’s plan to regain compliance is accepted, NASDAQ may grant an extension of up to 180 calendar days from the date of the letter for the Company to evidence compliance. On June 4, 2020, NASDAQ granted the Company’s request for an extension of time to regain compliance to August 31, 2020. In July 2020, the Company consummated a registered rights offering (the “Rights Offering”) for gross proceeds of $18.0 million, and on August 14, 2020, the Company received notification from NASDAQ that it had regained compliance with this requirement.
Resignation of President and Chief Executive Officer, and Director
On February 22, 2021, Todd Norbe resigned as President and Chief Executive Officer of Biolase, Inc. (the “Company”), and resigned as a member of the Board.
Appointment of President and Chief Executive Officer
Effective February 23, 2021, the Board appointed John R. Beaver President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company. Mr. Beaver was most recently the Company’s Executive Vice President, Chief Operating Officer and Chief Financial Officer. He joined BIOLASE in 2017 as Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer. He assumed roles of varying responsibilities over the past few years, including Interim Chief Executive Officer of BIOLASE from April 2017 until the hiring of Mr. Norbe.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”) requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes. The following is a summary of those accounting policies that we believe are necessary to understand and evaluate our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition. Revenue for sales of products and services is derived from contracts with customers. The products and services promised in customer contracts include delivery of laser systems, imaging systems, and consumables as well as certain ancillary services such as product training and support for extended warranties. Contracts with each customer generally state the terms of the sale, including the description, quantity and price of each product or service. Payment terms are stated in the contract and vary according to the arrangement. Because the customer typically agrees to a stated rate and price in the contract that does not vary over the life of the contract, our contracts do not contain variable consideration. We establish a provision for estimated warranty expense. For further information on warranty, see the discussion under “Warranty Cost” below.
At contract inception, we assess the products and services promised in our contracts with customers. We then identify performance obligations to transfer distinct products or services to the customers. In order to identify performance obligations, we consider all of the products or services promised in the contract regardless of whether they are explicitly stated or are implied by customary business practices.
Revenue from products and services transferred to customers at a single point in time accounted for 81%, 81% and 86% of net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The majority of the revenue recognized at a point in time is for the sale of laser systems, imaging systems, and consumables. Revenue from these contracts is recognized when the customer is able to direct the use of and obtain substantially all of the benefits from the product which generally coincides with title transfer during the shipping process.
Revenue from services transferred to customers over time accounted for 19%, 19%, and 14% of net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The majority of our revenue that is recognized over time relates to training and extended warranties.
The transaction price for a contract is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, each performance obligation is satisfied. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the contract’s transaction price to each performance obligation using the best estimate of the standalone selling price of each distinct good or service in a contract. The primary method used to estimate standalone selling price is the observable price when the good or service is sold separately in similar circumstances and to similar customers.
Revenue is recorded for extended warranties over time as the customer benefits from the warranty coverage. This revenue will be recognized equally throughout the contract period as the customer receives benefits from our promise to provide such services. Revenue is recorded for product training as the customer attends a training program or upon the expiration of the obligation.
We also have contracts that include both the product sales and product training as performance obligations. In those cases, we record revenue for product sales at the point in time when the product has been shipped. The customer obtains control of the product when it is shipped, as all shipments are made FOB shipping point, and after the customer selects its shipping method and pays all shipping costs and insurance. We have concluded that control is transferred to the customer upon shipment.
We perform our obligations under a contract with a customer by transferring products and/or services in exchange for consideration from the customer. We invoice our customers as soon as control of an asset is transferred and a receivable due to us is established. We recognize a contract liability when a customer prepays for goods and/or services and we have not transferred control of the goods and/or services.
Accounts receivable are stated at estimated net realizable value. The allowance for doubtful accounts is based on an analysis of customer accounts and our historical experience with accounts receivable write-offs.
Accounting for Stock-Based Payments. Stock-based compensation expense is estimated at the grant date of the award, is based on the fair value of the award and is recognized ratably over the requisite service period of the award. For restricted stock units we estimate the fair value of the award based on the number of awards and the fair value of our common stock on the grant date and apply an estimated forfeiture rate. For stock options, we estimate the fair value of the option award using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. This option-pricing model requires us to make several assumptions regarding the key variables used to calculate the fair value of its stock options. The risk-free interest rate used is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect for the expected lives of the options at their grant dates. Since July 1, 2005, we have used a dividend yield of zero, as we do not intend to pay cash dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future. The most critical assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock options are the expected life of the option and the expected volatility of our common stock. The expected life is calculated in accordance with the simplified method, whereby for service-based awards, the expected life is calculated as a midpoint between the vesting date and expiration date. We use the simplified method, as there is not a sufficient history of share option exercises. We believe the historic volatility of our common stock is a reliable indicator of future volatility, and accordingly, a stock volatility factor based on the historical volatility of our common stock over a lookback period of the expected life is used in approximating the estimated volatility of new stock options. Compensation expense is recognized using the straight-line method for all service-based employee awards and graded amortization for all performance-based awards. Compensation expense is recognized only for those options expected to vest, with forfeitures estimated at the date of grant based on historical experience and future expectations. Forfeitures are estimated at the time of the grant and revised in subsequent periods as actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we applied a forfeiture rate of 10.87% and 49.43% to awards granted to executives and employees, respectively,
Valuation of Inventory. Inventory is valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost determined using the first-in, first-out method. We periodically evaluate the carrying value of inventory and maintain an allowance for excess and obsolete inventory to adjust the carrying value as necessary to the lower of cost or net realizable value. We evaluate quantities on hand, physical condition, and technical functionality, as these characteristics may be impacted by anticipated customer demand for current products and new product introductions. Unfavorable changes in estimates of excess and obsolete inventory would result in an increase in cost of revenue and a decrease in gross profit.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets. Property, plant, and equipment and certain intangibles with finite lives are amortized over their estimated useful lives. Useful lives are based on our estimate of the period that the assets will generate revenue or otherwise productively support our business goals. We monitor events and changes in circumstances that could indicate that the carrying balances of long-lived assets may exceed the undiscounted expected future cash flows from those assets. If such a condition were to exist, we would determine if an impairment loss should be recognized by comparing the carrying amount of the assets to their fair value.
Valuation of Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets. Goodwill and other intangible assets with indefinite lives are not subject to amortization but are evaluated for impairment annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. We conducted our annual impairment analysis of our goodwill as of June 30, 2019 and concluded there had been no impairment in goodwill. We closely monitor our stock price and market capitalization and perform such analysis when events or circumstances indicate that there may have been a change to the carrying value of those assets.
Warranty Cost. We provide warranties against defects in materials and workmanship of our laser systems for specified periods of time. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 laser systems sold were covered by our warranty for a period of up to two years from the date of sale by us or the distributor to the end-user. In 2017, for Waterlase systems sold domestically and purchased in 2017 or later, we decreased the warranty period from two years to one year. Laser systems sold internationally were covered by our warranty for a period of up to 28 months from the date of sale to the international distributor. Estimated warranty expenses are recorded as an accrued liability with a corresponding provision to cost of revenue. This estimate is recognized concurrent with the recognition of revenue on the sale to the distributor or end-user. Warranty expenses expected to be incurred after one year from the time of sale to the distributor are classified as a long-term warranty accrual. Our overall accrual is based on our historical experience and our expectation of future conditions, taking into consideration the location and type of customer and the type of laser, which directly correlate to the materials and components under warranty, the duration of the warranty period, and the logistical costs to service the warranty. Additional factors that may impact our warranty accrual include changes in the quality of materials, leadership and training of the production and services departments, knowledge of the lasers and workmanship, training of customers, and adherence to the warranty policies. Additionally, an increase in warranty claims or in the costs associated with servicing those claims would likely result in an increase in the accrual and a decrease in gross profit. We offer extended warranties on certain imaging products. However, all imaging products are initially covered by the manufacturer’s warranties.
Litigation and Other Contingencies. We regularly evaluate our exposure to threatened or pending litigation and other business contingencies. Because of the uncertainties related to the amount of loss from litigation and other business contingencies, the recording of losses relating to such exposures requires significant judgment about the potential range of outcomes. As additional information about current or future litigation or other contingencies becomes available, we assess whether such information warrants the recording of expense relating to contingencies. To be recorded as expense, a loss contingency must be both probable and reasonably estimable. If a loss contingency is significant but is not both probable and estimable, we disclose the matter in the notes to our consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes. Based upon our operating losses during 2020, 2019, and 2018 and the available evidence, management has determined that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020 will not be realized in the near term. Consequently, we have established a valuation allowance against our net deferred tax asset totaling $56.0 million and $53.2 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In this determination, we considered factors such as our earnings history, future projected earnings, and tax planning strategies. If sufficient evidence of our ability to generate sufficient future taxable income tax benefits becomes apparent, we may reduce our valuation allowance, resulting in tax benefits in our statement of operations and in additional paid-in-capital. Management evaluates the potential realization of our deferred tax assets and assesses the need for reducing the valuation allowance periodically.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Our financial instruments, consisting of cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable, capital lease obligations and accrued liabilities, approximate fair value because of the liquid or short-term nature of these items.
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants in the principal market (or, if none exists, the most advantageous market) for the specific asset or liability at the measurement date (referred to as the “exit price”). The fair value is based on assumptions that market participants would use, including a consideration of non-performance risk. Under the accounting guidance for value hierarchy, there are three levels of measurement inputs. Level 1 inputs are quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities. Level 2 inputs are observable, either directly or indirectly. Level 3 inputs are unobservable due to little or no corroborating market data.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain data from our operating results, expressed in thousands and as percentages of revenue:
The following table summarizes our net revenues by category (dollars in thousands):
Non-GAAP Disclosure
In addition to the financial information prepared in conformity with GAAP, we provide certain historical non-GAAP financial information. Management believes that these non-GAAP financial measures assist investors in making comparisons of period-to-period operating results and that, in some respects, are indicative of our ongoing core performance. In 2019, we revised our non-GAAP financial measures to include the change in allowance for doubtful accounts in an effort to better align Adjusted EBITDA with our loan covenants and how management evaluates business performance.
Management believes that the presentation of this non-GAAP financial information provides investors with greater transparency and facilitates comparison of operating results across a broad spectrum of companies with varying capital structures, compensation strategies, derivative instruments, and amortization methods, which provides a more complete understanding of our financial performance, competitive position, and prospects for the future. However, the non-GAAP financial measures presented in this Form 10-K have certain limitations in that they do not reflect all of the costs associated with the operations of our business as determined in accordance with GAAP. Therefore, investors should consider non-GAAP financial measures in addition to, and not as a substitute for, or as superior to, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. Further, the non-GAAP financial measures presented by us may be different from similarly named non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies.
Adjusted EBITDA
Management uses Adjusted EBITDA in its evaluation of our core results of operations and trends between fiscal periods and believes that these measures are important components of its internal performance measurement process. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net loss before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, allowance for doubtful accounts, and other (income) expense, net. Management uses adjusted EBITDA in its evaluation of the our core results of operations and trends between fiscal periods and believes that these measures are important components of its internal performance measurement process. Therefore, investors should consider non-GAAP financial measures in addition to, and not as a substitute for, or as superior to, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. Further, the non-GAAP financial measures presented by us may be different from similarly named non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies.
The following table contains a reconciliation of non-GAAP Adjusted EBITDA to GAAP net loss attributable to common stockholders (in thousands):
Other (income) expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, is comprised of a $5.8 million gain on the change in fair value of the 45,000,000 warrants sold by the Company on July 23, 2020 through the Rights Offering (the “July 2020 Warrants”) partially offset by the costs to issue the July 2020 Warrants of approximately $1.6 million.
Comparison of Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net Revenue. Net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $22.8 million, a decrease of $15.0 million, or 40%, as compared with net revenue of $37.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Domestic revenues were $16.2 million, or 71% of net revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $22.8 million, or 60% of net revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2019. International revenues for year ended December 31, 2020 were $6.7 million, or 29% of net revenue, compared to $15.0 million, or 40% of net revenue for year ended December 31, 2019.
The decrease in year-over-year net revenue primarily resulted from dental office closures due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Laser system net revenues decreased by $10.5 million, or 46%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The laser systems revenue decrease was driven by a 29% decrease in domestic revenue and a 56% decrease in international revenue. The decrease in revenue was primarily due to dental office closures related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Consumables and other net revenue, which includes products such as disposable tips and shipping revenue, decreased $1.0 million, or 15%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease was driven primarily by dental office closures related to the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020 along with an increase in expense associated with inventory reserves.
Cost of Revenue. Cost of revenue decreased by $6.9 million, or approximately 29%, to $16.6 million, or 73% of net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to cost of revenue of $23.5 million, or 62% of net revenue, for the same period in 2019. The decrease in cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019 is primarily due to the decline is sales for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Gross Profit. Gross profit as a percentage of revenue typically fluctuates with product and regional mix, selling prices, product costs and revenue levels. Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $6.2 million, or 27% of net revenue, a decrease of $8.1 million, or 57%, as compared with gross profit of $14.3 million, or 38% of net revenue, for the same period in 2019. The decrease in gross profit is commensurate with the decline in sales, while the decrease in gross profit percentage was primarily due to unfavorable dilution of fixed expenses and inventory write-offs.
Operating Expenses. Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $24.7 million, or 109% of net revenue, a decrease of $5.2 million, or 17%, as compared with $29.9 million, or 79% of net revenue, for the same period in 2019. See the following expense categories for further explanations.
Sales and Marketing Expense. Sales and marketing expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $3.2 million, or 22%, to $11.2 million, or 49% of net revenue, as compared with $14.4 million, or 38% of net revenue, during the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily a result of decreases in payroll and consulting-related expense of $0.9 million primarily due to lower sales commissions from lower revenue $0.5 million and travel and entertainment expenses of $2.2 million.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $1.0 million, or 9%, to $9.8 million, or 43% of net revenue, as compared with $10.7 million, or 28% of net revenue, for the same period in 2019. The decrease in general and administrative expense was primarily due to decreases in payroll and consulting-related expense of $0.5 million, a decrease in the provision for doubtful accounts of $0.4 million, and a decrease in other expenses including bank fees of $0.3 million, partially offset by an increase in stock based compensation expense of $0.4 million, as compared to the same period in 2019.
Engineering and Development Expense. Engineering and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $1.1 million, or 22%, to $3.7 million, or 16% of net revenue, as compared with $4.8 million, or 13% of net revenue, for the same period in 2019. The decrease was primarily related to decreased payroll and consulting-related expense of $0.8 million, and operating supplies expense and other of $0.3 million as compared to the same period in 2019. We expect to continue our investment in engineering and development activity.
Non-Operating Income (Loss)
Gain (Loss) on Foreign Currency Transactions. We recognized a loss of $21 thousand on foreign currency transactions for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a $0.1 million loss for the same period in 2019, due to exchange rate fluctuations primarily between the U.S. dollar and the Euro.
Interest Expense, Net. Net interest expense increased by $0.2 million to $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $2.2 million of net interest expense for the same period in 2019. During 2019, the increase in interest expense was the result of the interest relating to the additional $2.5 million of principal amount drawn from the $12.5 million loan under the five-year secured Credit Agreement entered into with SWK on November 9, 2018 (“SWK Loan”).
Other (Income) Expense, Net. Other (Income) Expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, is comprised of a $5.8 million gain on the change in fair value to the 45,000,000 warrants sold by the Company on July 23, 2020 through the Rights Offering (the “July 2020 Warrants”) partially offset by the costs to issue the July 2020 Warrants of approximately $1.6 million.
Provision (benefit) for Income Taxes. Our provision for income taxes was a provision of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $0.2 million as compared with our benefit for income taxes of $44 thousand for the same period in 2019. The increase in our provision for 2020 is primarily due to an increase to our current income taxes in our European subsidiary.
Net Loss. For the reasons stated above, our net loss was $16.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a net loss of $17.9 million for the same period in 2019.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2018
Net Revenue. Net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $37.8 million, a decrease of $8.4 million, or 18%, as compared with net revenue of $46.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Domestic revenues were $22.8 million, or 60% of net revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $28.7 million, or 62% of net revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2018. International revenues for year ended December 31, 2019 were $15.0 million, or 40% of net revenue, compared to $17.5 million, or 38% of net revenue for year ended December 31, 2018. Given the recent dental office closures, we expect our first quarter for the year ended December 31, 2020, to be lower.
The decrease in year-over-year net revenue primarily resulted from decreases in domestic sales due to open sales territories, which were the result of strategic decisions we made to realign a significant portion of our U.S. sales force and change the culture through increased transparency and accountability. As of result of these decisions, we had approximately one-third of our sales territories open.
Laser system net revenues decreased by $6.9 million, or 23%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018. The laser systems revenue decrease was driven by a 28% decrease in domestic revenue and a 18% decrease in international revenue. The decrease in domestic revenue was primarily due to the open sales territories discussed above.
Imaging system net revenue decreased by $1.0 million, or 63%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the same period in 2018 and is due to our decision in 2018 to exit this business.
Consumables and other net revenue, which includes products such as disposable tips and shipping revenue, decreased $1.1 million, or 14%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the same period in 2018. The decrease was driven primarily by the drop in total net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the same period in 2018.Cost of Revenue. Cost of revenue decreased by $5.7 million, or approximately 20%, to $23.5 million, or 62% of net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to cost of revenue of $29.3 million, or 63% of net revenue, for the same period in 2018. The decrease in cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the same period in 2018 is primarily due to the decline is sales for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gross Profit. Gross profit as a percentage of revenue typically fluctuates with product and regional mix, selling prices, product costs and revenue levels. Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $14.3 million, or 38% of net revenue, a decrease of $2.6 million, or 15%, as compared with gross profit of $16.9 million, or 37% of net revenue, for the same period in 2018. The decrease in gross profit is commensurate with the decline in sales, while the increase in gross profit percentage was primarily due to our continued efforts at cost reduction.
Operating Expenses. Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $29.9 million, or 79% of net revenue, a decrease of $7.9 million, or 21%, as compared with $37.8 million, or 82% of net revenue, for the same period in 2018. See the following expense categories for further explanations.
Sales and Marketing Expense. Sales and marketing expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased by $3.7 million, or 21%, to $14.4 million, or 38% of net revenue, as compared with $18.1 million, or 39% of net revenue, during the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily a result of decreases in payroll and consulting-related expense of $2.4 million primarily due to lower headcount from the open territories, advertising and marketing expense of $0.5 million as we continued to use more digital media, other including travel and entertainment expenses of $0.6 million, and sales commission of $0.2 million.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased by $1.0 million, or 9%, to $10.7 million, or 28% of net revenue, as compared with $11.8 million, or 25.5% of net revenue, for the same period in 2018. The decrease in general and administrative expense was primarily due to decreases in patent and legal expense of $1.4 million, payroll and consulting-related expense of $0.6 million, other expenses including bank fees of $0.3 million, offset by an increase in provision for doubtful accounts of $1.2 million, as compared to the same period in 2018. The increase in the provision for doubtful accounts relates to balances owed from our distributor in China. We do not expect similar increases in our allowance for doubtful accounts going forward, however, as previously discussed, there were uncertainties surrounding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial results that we are not reasonably able to predict. We expect general and administrative expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue in 2020 primarily due to decreased legal expenses.
Engineering and Development Expense. Engineering and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased by $0.4 million, or 8%, to $4.8 million, or 13% of net revenue, as compared with $5.2 million, or 11% of net revenue, for the same period in 2018. The decrease was primarily related to decreased payroll and consulting-related expense of $0.2 million, and operating supplies expense of $0.2 million as compared to the same period in 2018. We expect to continue our investment in engineering and development activity. However, our primary focus will be on our sales and marketing efforts. Therefore, we expect engineering and development expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue in 2019.
Non-Operating Income (Loss)
Gain (Loss) on Foreign Currency Transactions. We recognized a $0.1 million loss on foreign currency transactions for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to a $0.1 million loss for the same period in 2018, due to exchange rate fluctuations primarily between the U.S. dollar and the Euro.
Interest Expense, Net. Net interest expense increased by $1.7 million to $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $0.5 million of net interest expense for the same period in 2018. The increase in interest expense was the result of the interest relating to the SWK Loan we entered into in 2018.
Provision (benefit) for Income Taxes. Our provision for income taxes was a benefit of $44,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $0.1 million as compared with our provision for income taxes of $63,000 for the same period in 2018. The decrease in our provision for 2019 is primarily due to the release of our valuation allowance against our deferred tax asset in our European subsidiary.
Net Loss. For the reasons stated above, our net loss was $17.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to a net loss of $21.5 million for the same period in 2018. The decrease in net loss of $3.7 million, or 17%, was primarily due to the decline in operating expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The disclosure set forth under the Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Recent Developments is hereby incorporated herein by reference.
The Company has reported losses from operations of $18.5 million, $15.6 million, and $20.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, and has not generated positive net cash from operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
At December 31, 2020, we had $17.9 million in cash and cash equivalents, including restricted cash equivalents. Management defines cash and cash equivalents as highly liquid deposits with original maturities of 90 days or less when purchased. The increase in our cash and cash equivalents by $11.8 million from December 31, 2019 was primarily due to cash provided by financing activities of $24.3 million, partially offset by cash used in operating activities of $12.8 million. The $12.8 million of net cash used in operating activities in 2020 was primarily driven by our net loss of $16.8 million during the year.
At December 31, 2020, we had $23.9 million in working capital. Our principal sources of liquidity at December 31, 2020, consisted of $17.9 million in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash and $3.1 million of net accounts receivable. However, under the Credit Agreement, we are required to maintain at least $3.0 million of cash and availability under the PMB Loan Agreement.
Sales were reduced due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and there is no assurance that sales will return to normal levels during 2021 or at any time thereafter.
Although the Company received gross proceeds of approximately $24.0 million from equity offerings in the second and third quarters of 2020 and gross proceeds of approximately $14.4 million from an equity offering in February 2021 and $15.0 million for warrant exercises subsequent to December 31, 2020, the Company may still have to raise additional capital in the future. Additional capital requirements may depend on many factors, including, among other things, the rate at which the Company’s business grows, the COVID-19 pandemic and the actions taken to contain it, demands for working capital, manufacturing capacity, and any acquisitions that the Company may pursue. From time to time, the Company could be required, or may otherwise attempt, to raise capital through either equity or debt offerings. The Company cannot provide assurance that it will be able to successfully enter into any such equity or debt financings in the future or that the required capital would be available on acceptable terms, if at all, or that any such financing activity would not be dilutive to its’ stockholders.
In order for us to continue operations beyond the next 12 months and be able to discharge our liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business, we must increase sales of our products, control or potentially reduce expenses, and establish profitable operations in order to generate cash from operations or obtain additional funds when needed.
We intend to improve our financial condition and ultimately improve our financial results by increasing revenues through expansion of our product offerings, continuing to expand and develop our field sales force and distributor relationships both domestically and internationally, forming strategic arrangements within the dental and medical industries, educating dental and medical patients as to the benefits of our advanced medical technologies, and reducing expenses.
Term Loan
The information set forth in Note 6 - Debt - Term Loan and Note 11 - Subsequent Events - SWK Seventh Amendment is hereby incorporated herein by reference.
Revolving Credit Facility
The information set forth in Note 6 - Debt - Lines of Credit - Pacific Mercantile Bank is hereby incorporated herein by reference.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
The information set forth in Note 6 - Debt - Paycheck Protection Program Loan is hereby incorporated herein by reference.
EIDL Loan
The information set forth in Note 6 - Debt - EIDL Loan is hereby incorporated herein by reference.
Registered Direct Offering and Concurrent Private Placement
On June 10, 2020, we consummated a registered direct offering of 10,800,000 shares of BIOLASE common stock to certain accredited institutional investors and a concurrent private placement of warrants to purchase 10,800,000 shares of BIOLASE common stock with an exercise price of $0.515 per share (the “June 2020 Warrants”). The June 2020 Warrants are exercisable commencing on the date of their issuance and will expire on June 10, 2025.
The combined purchase price for one share of BIOLASE common stock and one June 2020 Warrant in the offering was $0.64. We received aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $6.9 million in the offering, before deducting approximately $0.7 million in fees to the placement agents and other offering expenses.
Rights Offering
On July 22, 2020, we completed the Rights Offering, which resulted in net proceeds to us of approximately $15.8 million, after deducting expenses relating to the Rights Offering, including dealer-manager fees and expenses, and excluding any proceeds received upon exercise of any warrants. Pursuant to the Rights Offering, we sold an aggregate of 18,000 units consisting of an aggregate of 18,000 shares of Series F Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.001 per share (“Series F Preferred Stock”), and 45,000,000 warrants (the “July 2020 Warrants”), with each warrant exercisable for one share of BIOLASE common stock, resulting in net proceeds to the Company of approximately $16.1 million, after deducting expenses relating to the Rights Offering, including dealer-manager fees and expenses, and excluding any proceeds received upon exercise of any warrants. See Note 8 - Redeemable Preferred Stock and Stockholders’ Equity for additional information.
Public Offering of Common Shares and Private Placement of Unregistered Preferred Shares
The information set forth in Note 8 - Redeemable Preferred Stock and Stockholders’ Equity - Public Offering of Common Shares and Private Placement of Unregistered Preferred Shares is hereby incorporated herein by reference. Additional capital requirements may depend on many factors, including, among other things, the rate at which our business grows, demands for working capital, manufacturing capacity, and any acquisitions that we may pursue. From time to time, we could be required, or may otherwise attempt, to raise capital through either equity or debt offerings. We cannot provide assurance that we will enter into any such equity or debt financings in the future or that the required capital will be available on acceptable terms, if at all, or that any such financing activity will not be dilutive to our stockholders.
Concentration of Credit Risk
Financial instruments, which potentially expose us to a concentration of credit risk, consist principally of cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash, and trade accounts receivable. We maintain our cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash with established commercial banks. At times, balances may exceed federally insured limits. To minimize the risk associated with trade accounts receivable, we perform ongoing credit evaluations of customers’ financial condition and maintain relationships with our customers that allow us to monitor changes in business operations so we can respond as needed. We do not, generally, require customers to provide collateral before we sell them our products. However, we have required certain distributors to make prepayments for significant purchases of our products.
Receivables and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Trade accounts receivable are recorded at the invoiced amount and do not bear interest. The allowance for doubtful accounts is our best estimate of the amount of probable credit losses in the existing accounts receivable. We determine the allowance based on a quarterly specific account review of past due balances. All other balances are reviewed on a pooled basis by age of receivable. Account balances are charged off against the allowance when it is probable the receivable will not be recovered. We do not have any off-balance-sheet credit exposure related to our customers.
Consolidated Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our statements of cash flows (in thousands):
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net cash used in operating activities consists of our net loss, adjusted for our non-cash charges, plus or minus working capital changes. Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $12.8 million and was primarily comprised of our net loss of $16.8 million and a gain on the change in fair value of the July 2020 Warrants of $5.9 million, partially offset by non-cash adjustments for depreciation and amortization expenses of $0.5 million, stock-based compensation expenses of $3.4 million, our provision for bad debt of $1.3 million, inventory disposals of $1.3 million, issuance costs for the July 2020 Warrants of $1.6 million, and a net increase in our operating assets and liabilities. The net increase in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $4.3 million decrease in accounts receivable primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our revenues, partially offset by a decrease in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $2.1 million.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was minimal and primarily driven by our capital expenditures related to the relocation of our headquarters and manufacturing facility. We expect cash flows from investing activities to remain consistent through 2021.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $24.3 million primarily due to the funds borrowed on the PPP Loan and the sale of common stock from our registered direct private placement and sale of preferred stock. See Note 6 - Debt and Note 8 - Redeemable Preferred Stock and Stockholders’ Equity for additional information.
The $0.3 million effect of exchange rate on cash for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to a recognized gain on foreign currency transactions, primarily driven by changes in the Euro during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Contractual Obligations
Leases
We lease our primary facility under a non-cancellable operating lease that expires in April 2020. In January 2020, we entered into two new non-cancellable operating leases.
On January 22, 2020, the Company entered into a five-year real property lease agreement for an approximately 11,000 square foot facility in Corona, California where it will move its manufacturing operations. The lease commences on July 1, 2020. Future minimum rent payments under this lease are approximately $0.7 million.
On February 4, 2020, the Company also entered into a sixty-six month real property lease agreement for office space of approximately 11,000 square feet of office space in Foothill Ranch, California. The lease commences on July 1, 2020. Future minimum rent payments under this lease are approximately $1.9 million.
Loans
On November 9, 2018, we entered into the Credit Agreement with SWK, which provides us with the SWK Loan, a variable-rate term loan in the amount of $12.5 million. The SWK Loan bears interest at LIBOR plus 10% and is interest-only for the first two years of the five-year loan term, with the possibility of extending the interest-only period beyond two years. Principal repayments will begin in 2021, and will be approximately $0.7 million per quarter until the loan matures in November 2023.
On October 28, 2019, we entered into the PMB Loan Agreement, which provides us with the PMB Loan. Borrowings under the PMB Loan may be used for working capital. The PMB Loan matures on October 29, 2021, unless earlier terminated. There were no draws on the PMB Loan as of December 31, 2020.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
On April 14, 2020, we were granted the PPP Loan pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program from PMB in the aggregate amount of $2,980,000, under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). See Note 6 - Debt for additional information.
EIDL Loan
On May 22, 2020, the Company executed the standard loan documents required for securing a loan from the United States Small Business Administration under its Economic Injury Disaster Loan assistance program in light of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business. The principal amount of the EIDL Loan is $150,000, with proceeds to be used for working capital purposes. The information set forth in Note 6 - Debt - EIDL Loan is hereby incorporated herein by reference.
Purchase Obligations
Purchase obligations relate to purchase orders with suppliers that we expect to complete primarily during the year ended December 31, 2020. In conformity with current GAAP, purchase obligations are not reported in the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020.
The following table presents our expected cash requirements for contractual obligations outstanding for the years ended as indicated below (in thousands):
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements, including the respective dates of adoption and expected effects on our results of operations and financial condition, please refer to Part I, Item 1, Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, which is incorporated herein by this reference.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Regulation S-K Item 303(A)(4)(ii).