Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OR PLAN OF OPERATION
The following discussions contain forward-looking information. Readers are cautioned that such information involves risks and uncertainties, including those created by general market conditions, competition and the possibility of events may occur which limit our ability to maintain or improve our operating results or execute our primary growth strategy. Although we believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are reasonable, any of the assumptions could be inaccurate, and there can therefore be no assurance that the forward-looking statements included herein will prove to be accurate. The inclusion of such information should not be regarded as a representation by us or any other person that our objectives and plans will be achieved.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere herein.
CURRENT PLAN OF OPERATIONS
Our current business objective for the next 12 months is to investigate and, if such investigation warrants, acquire a target company or business seeking the perceived advantages of being a publicly held corporation. Our principal business objective for the next 12 months and beyond will be to achieve long- term growth potential through a combination with a business rather than immediate, short-term earnings. We will not restrict our potential candidate target companies to any specific business, industry or geographical location and, thus, may acquire any type of business.
We do not currently engage in any business activities that provide us with positive cash flows. As such, the costs of investigating and analyzing business combinations for the next approximately 12 months and beyond will be paid with our current cash on hand and through funds from financing to be obtained.
During the next 12 months we anticipate incurring costs related to filing of Exchange Act reports and costs relating to consummating an acquisition.
We believe we will be able to meet these costs with our current cash on hand and additional amounts, as necessary, to be loaned to or invested in us by our stockholders or other investors.
We may consider a business which has recently commenced operations, is a developing company in need of additional funds for expansion into new products or markets, is seeking to develop a new product or service, or is an established business which may be experiencing financial or operating difficulties and is in need of additional capital. In the alternative, a business combination may involve the acquisition of, or merger with, a company which does not need substantial additional capital, but which desires to establish a public trading market for its shares, while avoiding, among other things, the time delays, significant expense, and loss of voting control which may occur in a public offering.
Any target business that is selected may be a financially unstable company or an entity in its early stages of development or growth, including entities without established records of sales or earnings. In that event, we will be subject to numerous risks inherent in the business and operations of financially unstable and early stage or potential emerging growth companies. In addition, we may effect a business combination with an entity in an industry characterized by a high level of risk, and, although our management will endeavor to evaluate the risks inherent in a particular target business, there can be no assurance that we will properly ascertain or assess all significant risks.
We anticipate that the selection of a business combination will be complex and extremely risky. Because of general economic conditions, rapid technological advances being made in some industries and shortages of available capital, our management believes that there are numerous firms seeking even the limited additional capital which we will have and/or the perceived benefits of becoming a publicly traded corporation. Such perceived benefits of becoming a publicly traded corporation include, among other things, facilitating or improving the terms on which additional equity financing may be obtained, providing liquidity for the principals of and investors in a business, creating a means for providing incentive stock options or similar benefits to key employees, and offering greater flexibility in structuring acquisitions, joint ventures and the like through the issuance of stock. Potentially available business combinations may occur in many different industries and at various stages of development, all of which will make the task of comparative investigation and analysis of such business opportunities extremely difficult and complex.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, we had a working capital deficit of $4,077,936 compared to working capital deficit of $4,077,936 at December 31, 2019. The increase in the working capital deficit is due primarily to the increase in accrued liabilities. We had shareholders' deficit of $4,077,936 at December 31, 2020.
Net cash used in operating activities was $0 for 2020 compared to $0 for 2019 to settle an outstanding payable to an attorney.
We had no financings in 2020 and 2019.
We have incurred operating losses from inception through December 31, 2020. We incurred operating losses of $15,623 in 2020 and $15,623 in 2019. At December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $18,222,586.
Management believes that we will be able to achieve a satisfactory level of liquidity to meet our business plan and capital needs for the next 12 months. Management believes we have the ability to obtain additional financing from key officers, directors and certain investors. However, there can be no assurance that we will be able to generate sufficient liquidity to maintain our operations.
At December 31, 2020, we had cash of $2,979. We have limited cash resources available and have obligations due and past due.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principals generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of any contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to uncollectible receivable, investment values, income taxes, the recapitalization and contingencies. We base our estimates on various assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.