ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
GENERAL
As of March 1, 2021, we owned and operated 210 restaurants located in 29 states as described in Item 2 - Properties - “Restaurant Locations” in this Form 10-K. Our proprietary craft beer is produced at several of our locations, our Temple, Texas brewpub locations and by independent third party brewers using our proprietary recipes. Our menu features BJ’s award-winning, signature deep-dish pizza, our proprietary craft and other beers, as well as a wide selection of appetizers, entrées, pastas, sandwiches, specialty salads and desserts, including our Pizookie® dessert.
We intend to continue opening new BJ’s restaurants in high profile locations in both existing and new markets. Under normal circumstances and outside of the COVID-19 pandemic, most of our established restaurants operate close to full capacity during the peak demand periods, and given our relatively high average sales per productive square foot, over the long-term we do not expect to achieve sustained increases in comparable restaurant sales in excess of our increase in average check for our mature restaurants, assuming we are able to retain our customer traffic levels in those restaurants. However, as a result of the decreased sales in fiscal 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, in the short-term, we do anticipate significant increases in comparable restaurant sales once our restaurants resume operations without restrictions. Therefore, we expect that the majority of any year-over-year revenue growth for fiscal 2021 will be derived from increases in comparable restaurant sales growth and that long-term growth will be derived from new restaurant openings and increases in our average check.
Newly opened restaurants typically experience inefficiencies in the form of higher cost of sales, labor and direct operating and occupancy costs for several months after their opening relative to our more mature, established restaurants. Accordingly, the number and timing of new restaurant openings have had, and are expected to continue to have, an impact on restaurant opening expenses, cost of sales, labor and occupancy and operating expenses. Additionally, restaurant openings in new markets may experience even greater inefficiencies for several months, if not longer, due to lower initial sales volumes, which results from initially low consumer awareness levels, and a lack of supply chain and other operating cost leverage until additional restaurants can be opened in those markets.
Our revenues are comprised of food and beverage sales at our restaurants. Revenues from restaurant sales are recognized when payment is tendered at the point of sale. Amounts paid with a credit card are recorded in accounts and other receivables until payment is collected. Gift card sales are recorded as a liability and recognized as revenues upon redemption in our restaurants. Estimated gift card breakage is recorded as revenue and recognized in proportion to our historical redemption pattern. The estimated gift card breakage is based on when the likelihood of redemption becomes remote, which has typically been 24 months after the original gift card issuance date. Our customer loyalty program enables participants to earn points for qualifying purchases that can be redeemed for food and beverages in the future. We allocate the transaction price between the goods delivered and the future goods that will be delivered, on a relative standalone selling price basis, and defer the revenues allocated to the points until such points are redeemed.
All of our restaurants are Company-owned. In calculating comparable restaurant sales, we include a restaurant in the comparable base once it has been open for 18 months. Customer traffic for our restaurants is estimated based on customer checks.
Cost of sales is comprised of food and beverage costs, including the cost to produce and distribute our proprietary craft beer, soda and ciders. The components of cost of sales are variable and typically fluctuate directly with sales volumes, but may be impacted by changes in commodity prices, a shift in sales mix to higher cost proteins or other higher cost items, or varying levels of promotional activities.
Labor and benefit costs include direct hourly and management wages, bonuses, payroll taxes, fringe benefits and stock-based compensation and workers’ compensation expense that is directly related to restaurant level employees.
Occupancy and operating expenses include restaurant supplies, credit card fees, third party delivery company commissions, marketing costs, fixed rent, percentage rent, common area maintenance charges, utilities, real estate taxes, repairs and maintenance and other related restaurant costs.
General and administrative costs include all corporate administrative functions that support existing operations and provide infrastructure to facilitate our future growth. Components of this category include corporate management, field supervision and corporate hourly staff salaries and related employee benefits (including stock-based compensation expense and cash-based incentive compensation), travel and relocation costs, information systems, the cost to recruit and train new restaurant management employees, corporate rent, certain brand marketing-related expenses and legal, professional and consulting fees.
Depreciation and amortization are composed primarily of depreciation of capital expenditures for restaurant and brewing equipment and leasehold improvements.
Restaurant opening expenses, which are expensed as incurred, consist of the costs of hiring and training the initial hourly work force for each new restaurant, travel, the cost of food and supplies used in training, grand opening promotional costs, the cost of the initial stock of operating supplies and other direct costs related to the opening of a restaurant, including rent during the construction and in-restaurant training period.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table sets forth, for the years indicated, our Consolidated Statements of Operations expressed as percentages of total revenues. All fiscal years presented consist of 52 weeks with the exception of fiscal year 2016 which consists of 53 weeks. Percentages below may not reconcile due to rounding.
52 WEEKS ENDED DECEMBER 29, 2020 (FISCAL 2020) COMPARED TO THE 52 WEEKS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019 (FISCAL 2019)
Revenues. Total revenues decreased by $382.9 million, or 33.0%, to $778.5 million during fiscal 2020, from $1.2 billion during fiscal 2019. The decrease in revenues primarily consisted of a 34.0%, or $384.4 million, decrease in comparable restaurant sales, coupled with a $6.2 million decrease related to our temporarily closed restaurants and the permanent closure of our smaller format restaurant in Balboa, California in November 2019, partially offset by a $7.6 million increase in sales from new restaurants not yet in our comparable restaurant sales base. The decrease in comparable restaurant sales and the temporary closures of four of our restaurants were due to the business disruptions resulting from the efforts to contain the COVID-19 pandemic, including government mandated closing or limiting of dine-in restaurant operations. All of our dine-in restaurant operations were closed from March to May. As dining rooms re-opened throughout fiscal 2020, they re-opened with reduced capacity and curfews resulting in lower sales. Additionally, in November 2020, rising COVID-19 cases caused many states to close and/or significantly reduce capacity for dine-in restaurant operations. In December 2020, California, where we operate 62 of our 210 restaurants, closed all dining rooms and outdoor patio seating limiting our sales in the state to only delivery and take-out.
Cost of Sales. Cost of sales decreased by $99.4 million, or 33.7%, to $195.6 million during fiscal 2020, from $295.0 million during fiscal 2019. This decrease was due to the reduction in sales as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by
costs related to the two new restaurants opened during fiscal 2020. As a percentage of revenues, cost of sales decreased to 25.1% for fiscal 2020 from 25.4% for the prior fiscal year. This percentage decrease is primarily due to favorable menu mix related to our limited menu as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which focused on our deep dish pizza and our family feast offerings, coupled with increased menu pricing and less promotional activity.
Labor and Benefits. Labor and benefit costs for our restaurants decreased by $118.7 million, or 28.0%, to $305.6 million during fiscal 2020, from $424.4 million during fiscal 2019. This decrease was due to the reduction in sales as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, coupled with the reduction in labor hours and benefits resulting from our dining room closures, partially offset by expenses related to the two new restaurants opened during fiscal 2020, and our decision to pay accrued sick, vacation and emergency paid time off to the approximately 16,000 hourly restaurant employees who were temporarily laid off in late March 2020. As a percentage of revenues, labor and benefit costs increased to 39.3% for fiscal 2020 from 36.5% for the prior fiscal year. This percentage increase is primarily due to the deleveraging of certain fixed labor costs, including manager salaries and benefits, resulting from a lower revenue base, partially offset by less dining room and kitchen hourly labor as the majority of our sales moved to the off-premise channel, coupled with efficiencies from our limited menu offerings. Included in labor and benefits for fiscal 2020 and 2019 was approximately $2.8 million and $2.4 million, respectively, or 0.4% and 0.2%, of revenues, respectively, of stock-based compensation expense related to equity awards granted in accordance with our Gold Standard Stock Ownership Program for certain restaurant management employees.
Occupancy and Operating. Occupancy and operating expenses decreased by $35.5 million, or 13.8%, to $220.9 million during fiscal 2020, from $256.4 million during fiscal 2019. This decrease was primarily due to cost savings measures related to the COVID-19 pandemic, coupled with lower percentage rent and merchant credit card fees due to lower revenue, partially offset by higher commissions to third party delivery companies as a result of increased off-premise sales, costs for temporary patios, personal protective equipment and additional cleaning supplies, and expenses related to the two new restaurants opened during fiscal 2020. As a percentage of revenues, occupancy and operating expenses increased to 28.4% for fiscal 2020 from 22.1% for the prior fiscal year. This percentage increase was primarily due to the deleveraging of certain fixed operating and occupancy costs such as rent, insurance and property taxes over a lower revenue base as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses decreased by $7.9 million, or 12.6%, to $54.7 million during fiscal 2020, from $62.5 million during fiscal 2019. This decrease was primarily due to less short-term incentive compensation and deferred compensation, meeting and related costs due to the closure of our Restaurant Support Center, travel, and additional cost savings measures related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The deferred compensation expense decrease is offset by lower other income included in “Other income (expense), net” on our Consolidated Statements of Operations related to a decrease in the cash surrender value of our life insurance policies under our deferred compensation plan. Included in general and administrative costs for fiscal 2020 and 2019 was approximately $7.0 million and $6.5 million, respectively, or 0.9% and 0.6% of revenues, respectively, of stock-based compensation expense. As a percentage of revenues, general and administrative expenses increased to 7.0% for fiscal 2020, from 5.4% for the prior fiscal year. This percentage increase was primarily due to deleveraging from a lower revenue base as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization increased by $1.1 million, or 1.6%, to $73.1 million during fiscal 2020, compared to $72.0 million during fiscal 2019. This increase was primarily due to depreciation expense related to the two new restaurants opened in fiscal 2020, partially offset by less depreciation due to the impairment and reduction of carrying value for five restaurants. As a percentage of revenues, depreciation and amortization increased to 9.4% for fiscal 2020 from 6.2% for the prior fiscal year. This increase was primarily due to a lower revenue base as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Restaurant Opening. Restaurant opening expense decreased by $1.7 million, or 58.5%, to $1.2 million during fiscal 2020, compared to $2.9 million during fiscal 2019. This decrease is primarily due to the delay or cancelation of most of our restaurant openings for fiscal 2020. We opened two new restaurants during fiscal 2020, compared to seven new restaurants during fiscal 2019.
Loss on Disposal and Impairment of Assets. Loss on disposal and impairment of assets was $17.1 million during fiscal 2020, and $3.9 million during fiscal 2019. For fiscal 2020, these costs primarily related to the impairment and reduction in the carrying value of the long-lived and operating lease assets related to five of our restaurants, coupled with a charge to reserve for beer spoilage related to our fresh beer inventory due to the sudden decrease in draft beer sales as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Due to the uncertainty of when our restaurant dining rooms will re-open and at what sales and cash flow levels, we may incur additional impairment charges for our restaurants and our goodwill. For fiscal 2019, these costs were primarily related to the disposals of assets in conjunction with initiatives to keep our restaurants up to date.
Gain on Lease Transactions, Net. Gain on lease transactions, net, was $3.3 million during fiscal 2020, and $4.7 million during fiscal 2019. The gain in both fiscal 2020 and 2019 related to the sale of the land underlying two of our restaurants in each respective year. Prior to the adoption of Accounting Standards Update 2016-02, Leases Topic 842 on January 2, 2019, gain on lease transactions were amortized over the term of the lease.
Interest Expense, Net. Interest expense, net, increased by $2.5 million to $7.1 million during fiscal 2020, compared to $4.6 million during fiscal 2019. This increase was primarily due to a higher average debt balance during fiscal 2020, compared to fiscal 2019, coupled with a slightly higher interest rate.
Gain from Legal Settlements. Gain from legal settlements of $2.3 million during fiscal 2020 related to settlements pertaining to credit card interchange fees and handheld tablet maintenance.
Other Income, Net. Other income, net decreased by $0.5 million to $1.3 million during fiscal 2020, compared to $1.8 million during fiscal 2019. This decrease was primarily due to the decrease in the cash surrender value of certain life insurance policies under our deferred compensation plan. This decrease offsets the related deferred compensation expense impact included in “General and administrative” expenses on our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Income Tax (Benefit) Expense. On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act was enacted. Intended to provide economic relief to those impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, the CARES Act includes provisions, among others, allowing for the carryback of net operating losses generated in 2018, 2019 and 2020, refunds of alternative minimum tax credits, temporary modifications to the limitations placed on the tax deductibility of net interest expense, and technical amendments regarding the expensing of qualified improvement property (“QIP”). As a result of the CARES Act, the Company intends to carryback losses generated in 2020 and reduce taxes payable for accelerated depreciation on qualified improvements property in 2018 and 2019.
Our effective income tax rate for fiscal 2020, reflected a 35.6% tax benefit, compared to a 2.3% tax expense for fiscal 2019. The recorded tax benefit for fiscal 2020 was greater than the statutory income tax rate primarily due to FICA Tip Credits and the incremental benefit arising from the ability to carryback the 2020 loss to prior years when the tax rate was at 35%. The prior year effective tax rate was below the statutory rate primarily due to tax credits and excess tax deductions realized for share based compensation.
52 WEEKS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019 (FISCAL 2019) COMPARED TO THE 52 WEEKS ENDED JANUARY 1, 2019 (FISCAL 2018)
For discussion related to the results of operations and changes in financial condition for fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 refer to Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our fiscal 2019 Form 10-K, which was filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission on February 25, 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The following table provides, for the periods indicated, a summary of our key liquidity measurements (dollar amounts in thousands):
As a result of uncertainties in the near-term outlook for our business caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, we reevaluated all aspects of our spending and continue to focus on cash flow generation. Currently, we have no intention to repurchase shares or pay dividends in the foreseeable future, or until it is determined that it is in the best interest of the Company and its shareholders and that it is permitted under our Credit Facility. We will review and, when appropriate, adjust our overall approach to capital allocation as we know more about the ultimate duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and how the post-pandemic recovery will unfold and affect revenues and costs at our restaurants.
Our $70 million private placement of common stock completed in May 2020, our completed $11.8 million sale-leaseback and lease restructurings and our $30 million sale (before commission and other fees) of common stock through our “at-the-market” (“ATM”) offering program completed in January 2021, have strengthened our financial position. Based on the current level of operations, the reduction of new restaurant openings, and other capital expenditure initiatives, we believe that our current cash and cash equivalents will be adequate to meet our capital expenditure and working capital needs for at least the next twelve months. As of December 29, 2020, we have approximately $51.7 million of cash on our balance sheet, with an additional $97.1 million of borrowings available under our Credit Facility, which was subsequently reduced by $20.0 million on January 15, 2021, when we amended our Credit Facility, and matures on November 18, 2022, and in January 2021 we raised an additional $30 million (before commission and other fees) from the sale of common stock through an “at-the-market”(“ATM”) offering program. See Note 8 and Note 15 in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on our Credit Facility. We are taking what we believe to be necessary and appropriate measures to control costs and maximize liquidity. Our future operating performance will be subject to future economic conditions and to financial, business and other factors, many of which are beyond our control.
Similar to many restaurant chains, we typically utilize operating lease arrangements (principally ground leases) for the majority of our restaurant locations. We believe our operating lease arrangements provide appropriate leverage for our capital structure in a financially efficient manner. However, we are not limited to the use of lease arrangements as our only method of opening new restaurants and from time to time have purchased the underlying land for new restaurants. We typically lease our restaurant locations for periods of 10 to 20 years under operating lease arrangements. Our rent structures vary from lease to lease, but generally provide for the payment of both minimum and contingent (percentage) rent based on sales, as well as other expenses related to the leases (for example, our pro-rata share of common area maintenance, property tax and insurance expenses). Many of our lease arrangements include the opportunity to secure tenant improvement allowances to partially offset the cost of developing and opening the related restaurants. Generally, landlords recover the cost of such allowances from increased minimum rents. However, there can be no assurance that such allowances will be available to us on each project. From time to time, we may also decide to purchase the underlying land for a new restaurant if that is the only way to secure a highly desirable site. Currently, we own the underlying land for our Texas brewpub locations. We also own two parcels of land adjacent to two of our restaurants. It is not our current strategy to own a large number of land parcels that underlie our restaurants. Therefore, in many cases we have subsequently entered into sale-leaseback arrangements for land parcels that we previously purchased. We disburse cash for certain site-related work, buildings, leasehold improvements, furnishings, fixtures and equipment to build our leased and owned premises. We own substantially all of the equipment, furniture and trade fixtures in our restaurants and currently plan to do so in the future.
CASH FLOWS
The following tables set forth, for the years indicated, our cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities (dollar amounts in thousands):
Operating Cash Flows
Net cash provided by operating activities was $40.5 million during fiscal 2020, representing a $75.5 million decrease from the $116.0 million provided during fiscal 2019. The decrease over the prior year is primarily due to our net loss as compared to net income, coupled with the timing of accounts and other receivables collections, partially offset by the timing of payments related to accounts payable, accrued expenses and operating lease obligations due to rent deferrals.
Investing Cash Flows
Net cash used in investing activities was $35.7 million during fiscal 2020, representing a $42.4 million decrease from the $78.1 million used in fiscal 2019. The decrease over prior year is primarily due to the delay or cancelation of new restaurant openings, coupled with the suspension of certain discretionary capital expenditures due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The following table provides, for the years indicated, the components of capital expenditures (dollar amounts in thousands):
We opened two new restaurants during fiscal 2020. While we reduced capital expenditures for existing restaurants and we delayed or canceled the remainder of our new restaurant openings for fiscal 2020, we had incurred construction costs prior to the COVID-19 pandemic for additional restaurant locations. During fiscal 2021, we expect to open two new restaurants, for which we have entered into signed leases. As the country recovers from the COVID-19 pandemic, we will continue to evaluate our restaurant opening plans.
Financing Cash Flows
Net cash provided by financing activities was $24.4 million during fiscal 2020, representing a $69.2 million increase from the $44.7 million used in fiscal 2019. This increase is primarily due to net proceeds from the sale of our common stock through a private placement in May 2020 and lower repurchases of common stock. See Note 9 in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding our private placement.
See Note 8 and Note 15 in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on our Credit Facility. Prior to amending and restating our Credit Facility and subsequently modifying it (once in June 2020 and once in January 2021), in an abundance of caution and as a result of the current circumstances with the COVID-19 pandemic, we drew down all remaining amounts under our Line of Credit in late March 2020 before repaying back a portion of it. We have also been taking all necessary and appropriate steps to maximize our liquidity as we manage our business through the current environment. In addition to drawing down on our line of credit, we sold $70 million of our common stock on May 5, 2020, suspended certain discretionary capital spending, including delaying or cancelling the rest of our new restaurant openings for fiscal 2020, and have suspended future quarterly dividends and the repurchase of shares, as well as 401(k) plan employer matching contributions. Additionally, in January 2021, we completed the sale of an aggregate of 703,399 shares of common stock for proceeds of $30 million (before commission and other fees) through an “at-the-market” (“ATM”) offering program. See Note 15 in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on our ATM offering. While we believe we have sufficient liquidity with our current capital position for the next twelve months, we will continue to monitor and evaluate all financing alternatives as these unprecedented events evolve.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We do not participate in transactions that generate relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or variable interest entities (“VIEs”), which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow limited purposes. As of December 29, 2020, we are not involved in any off-balance sheet arrangements.
IMPACT OF INFLATION
Inflation on food, labor, energy and occupancy costs can significantly affect the profitability of our restaurant operations. Our profitability is dependent, among other things, on our ability to anticipate and react to changes in the cost of key operating resources, including food and other raw materials, labor, energy and other supplies and services. Substantial increases in costs and expenses could impact our operating results to the extent that such increases cannot be passed along to our restaurant customers. While we have taken steps to enter into agreements for some of the commodities used in our restaurant operations, there can be no assurance that future supplies and costs for such commodities will not fluctuate due to weather or other market conditions outside of our control. We are currently unable to contract for certain commodities, such as fluid dairy, fresh meat or seafood, and most fresh produce items for long periods of time. Consequently, such commodities can be subject to unforeseen supply and cost fluctuations.
A general shortage in the availability of qualified restaurant managers and hourly workers in certain geographic areas in which we operate has caused increases in the costs of recruiting and compensating such employees. Many of our restaurant employees are paid hourly rates subject to the federal, state or local minimum wage requirements. Numerous state and local governments have their own minimum wage and other regulatory requirements for employees that are generally greater than the federal minimum wage and are subject to annual increases based on changes in their local consumer price indices. Additionally, certain operating and other costs, including health benefits in compliance with the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act, taxes, insurance, COVID-19 pandemic related benefits, and other outside services continue to increase with the general level of inflation and may also be subject to other cost and supply fluctuations outside of our control.
While we have been able to partially offset inflation and other changes in the costs of key operating resources by gradually increasing prices of our menu items, coupled with more efficient purchasing practices, productivity improvements and greater economies of scale, there can be no assurance that we will be able to continue to do so in the future. From time to time, competitive conditions will limit our menu pricing flexibility. In addition, macroeconomic conditions that impact consumer discretionary spending for food away from home could make additional menu price increases imprudent. There can be no assurance that all of our future cost increases can be offset by higher menu prices or that higher menu prices will be accepted by our restaurant customers without any resulting changes in their visit frequencies or purchasing patterns. Many of the leases for our restaurants provide for contingent rent obligations based on a percentage of sales. As a result, rent expense will absorb a proportionate share of any menu price increases in our restaurants. There can be no assurance that we will continue to generate increases in comparable restaurant sales in amounts sufficient to offset inflationary or other cost pressures.
SEASONALITY AND ADVERSE WEATHER
Our business is impacted by weather and other seasonal factors that typically impact other restaurant operations. Holidays (and shifts in the holiday calendar) and severe weather including hurricanes, tornados, thunderstorms, snow and ice storms, prolonged extreme temperatures and similar conditions may impact restaurant sales volumes in some of the markets where we operate. Many of our restaurants are located in or near shopping centers and malls that typically experience seasonal fluctuations in sales. Quarterly results have been and will continue to be significantly impacted by the timing of new restaurant openings and their associated restaurant opening expenses. As a result of these and other factors, our financial results for any given quarter may not be indicative of the results that may be achieved for a full fiscal year.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Critical accounting policies require the greatest amount of subjective or complex judgments by management and are important to portraying our financial condition and results of operations. Judgments or uncertainties regarding the application of these policies may result in materially different amounts being reported under different conditions or using different assumptions. We consider the following policies to be the most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in preparing our consolidated financial statements.
Leases
We determine if a contract contains a lease at inception. Our material operating leases consist of restaurant locations and office space. U.S. GAAP requires that our leases be evaluated and classified as operating or finance leases for financial reporting purposes. The classification evaluation begins at the commencement date, and the lease term used in the evaluation includes the non-cancellable period for which we have the right to use the underlying asset, together with renewal option periods when the exercise of the renewal option is reasonably certain and failure to exercise such option would result in an economic penalty. All of our restaurant leases and office space are classified as operating leases. We have elected to account for lease and non-lease components as a single lease component for office and beverage gas equipment. We do not have any finance leases.
We have elected the short-term lease recognition exemption for all classes of underlying assets. Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less that do not include an option to purchase the underlying asset that we are reasonably certain to exercise are not recorded on the balance sheet. Expense for short-term leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
We disburse cash for leasehold improvements, furniture and fixtures and equipment to build out and equip our leased premises. Tenant improvement allowance incentives may be available to partially offset the cost of developing and opening the related restaurants, pursuant to agreed-upon terms in our leases. Tenant improvement allowances can take the form of cash payments upon the opening of the related restaurants, full or partial credits against minimum or percentage rents otherwise payable by us, or a combination thereof. All tenant improvement allowances received by us are recorded as a contra operating lease asset and amortized over the term of the lease.
The lease term used for straight-line rent expense is calculated from the commencement date (the date we take possession of the premises) through the lease termination date (including any options where exercise is reasonably certain and failure to exercise such option would result in an economic penalty). We expense rent from commencement date through restaurant open date as preopening expense. Once a restaurant opens for business, we record straight-line rent expense plus any additional variable contingent rent expense to the extent it is due under the lease agreement.
There is potential for variability in the rent holiday period, which begins on the commencement date and ends on the restaurant open date, during which no cash rent payments are typically due under the terms of the lease. Factors that may affect the length of the rent holiday period generally pertain to construction related delays. Extension of the rent holiday period due to delays in
restaurant opening will result in greater preopening rent expense recognized during the rent holiday period and lesser occupancy expense during the rest of the lease term (post-opening).
We record a lease liability equal to the present value of future payments discounted at the estimated fully collateralized incremental borrowing rate (discount rate) corresponding with the lease term. Our lease liability calculation is the total rent payable during the lease term, including rent escalations in which the amount of future rent is certain or fixed on the straight-line basis over the term of the lease (including the rent holiday period beginning upon our possession of the premises, and any fixed payments stated in the lease). A corresponding operating lease asset is also recorded equaling the initial amount of the lease liability, plus any lease payments made to the lessor before or at the lease commencement date and any initial direct costs incurred, less any lease incentives received. The difference between the minimum rents paid and the straight-line rent is reflected within the associated operating lease asset. Certain leases contain provisions that require additional rent payments based upon restaurant sales volume (“variable lease cost”). Contingent rent is accrued each period as the liabilities are incurred, in addition to the straight-line rent expense noted above. This results in some variability in occupancy expense as a percentage of revenues over the term of the lease in restaurants where we pay contingent rent.
Management makes judgments regarding the reasonably certain lease term for each restaurant property lease, which can impact the classification and accounting for a lease as finance or operating, the rent holiday and/or escalations in payments that are taken into consideration when calculating straight-line rent, and the term over which leasehold improvements for each restaurant are amortized. These judgments may produce materially different amounts of depreciation, amortization and rent expense than would be reported if different assumed lease terms were used.
Self-Insurance Liability
We retain large deductibles or self-insured retentions for a portion of our general liability insurance and our employee workers’ compensation programs. We maintain coverage with a third party insurer to limit our total exposure for these programs. The accrued liability associated with these programs is based on our estimate of the ultimate costs within our retention amount to settle known claims as well as claims incurred but not yet reported to us (“IBNR claims”) as of the balance sheet date. Our estimated liability is based on information provided by a third party actuary, combined with our judgments regarding a number of assumptions and factors, including the frequency and severity of claims, our claims development history, case jurisdiction, related legislation, and our claims settlement practice. Significant judgment is required to estimate IBNR claims as parties have yet to assert such claims. If actual claims trends, including the severity or frequency of claims, differ from our estimates, our financial results could be significantly impacted.
Property and Equipment
We record all property and equipment at cost. Property and equipment accounting requires us to estimate the useful lives of the assets for depreciation purposes and to select depreciation methods. We believe the useful lives reflect the actual economic life of the underlying assets. We have elected to use the straight-line method of depreciation over the estimated useful life of an asset or the lease term of the respective lease, whichever is shorter, for leasehold improvements. Renewals and betterments that materially extend the useful life of an asset are capitalized while maintenance and repair costs are charged to operating expense as incurred. Judgment is often required in the decision to distinguish between an asset which qualifies for capitalization versus an expenditure which is for maintenance and repairs. Internal costs associated with the acquisition, development and construction of our restaurants are capitalized and allocated to the projects which they relate. When property and equipment are sold or otherwise disposed of, the asset account and related accumulated depreciation and amortization accounts are relieved, and any gain or loss is included in earnings. Additionally, any interest capitalized for new restaurant construction would be included in “Property and equipment, net” on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We assess the potential impairment of our long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable. The assets are generally reviewed for impairment on a restaurant by restaurant basis, or at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets. We used the undiscounted cash flow method and assessed the recoverability by comparing the carrying value of the asset to the undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the assets. We determine that a restaurant’s long-lived assets are impaired if the forecasted undiscounted cash flows is less than the carrying value of the restaurant’s assets. As a result of this analysis, we determined five of our restaurants were impaired and during fiscal 2020, we recorded a $13.7 million charge to operating income for the amount by which the carrying value of the restaurant’s assets exceeded its fair value estimated using the discounted cash flow method. We are unable to predict how long these conditions will persist, what additional measures may be introduced by governments, or what effect any such additional measures may have on our business. Any measure that encourages potential customers to stay in their homes, engage in social distancing or avoid larger gatherings of people is highly likely to be harmful to the dining industry in general and, consequently, our business, which may result in additional impairment charges.
Income Taxes
We utilize the liability method of accounting for income taxes. Deferred income taxes are recognized based on the tax consequences in future years of differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their financial reporting amounts at each year-end based on enacted tax laws and statutory tax rates applicable to the periods in which differences are expected to affect taxable income. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. The provision for income taxes represents the tax payable for the period and the change during the period in deferred tax assets and liabilities.
We provide for income taxes based on our expected federal and state tax liabilities. Our estimates include, but are not limited to, effective federal, state and local income tax rates, allowable tax credits for items such as FICA taxes paid on reported tip income and estimates related to depreciation expense allowable for tax purposes. We usually file our income tax returns several months after our fiscal year-end. All tax returns are subject to audit by federal and state governments for years after the returns are filed, and could be subject to differing interpretations of the tax laws.
We recognize the impact of a tax position in our financial statements if that position is more likely than not of being sustained through an audit, based on the technical merits of the position. Interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions are included in income tax expense.
Stock-Based Compensation
Under our shareholder approved stock-based compensation plan, we have granted incentive stock options, non-qualified stock options, and restricted stock units that generally vest over three to five years. Incentive and non-qualified stock options expire ten years from the date of grant. We have also granted performance-based restricted stock units under our shareholder approved stock-based compensation plan that vests after three years based on achievement of certain performance targets. Stock-based compensation is measured in accordance with U.S. GAAP based on the estimated fair value of the awards granted. To value stock options on the grant date, we utilize the Black-Scholes option-pricing model which requires us to make certain assumptions and judgments regarding the inputs. These judgments include expected volatility, risk free interest rate, expected option life, and dividend yield. These estimations and judgments are determined by us using many different variables that, in many cases, are outside of our control. The changes in these variables or trends, including stock price volatility and risk free interest rate, may significantly impact the grant date fair value resulting in a significant impact to our financial results. The tax benefits resulting from tax deductions in excess of the compensation cost recognized (excess tax benefits) are classified as “Cash flows from financing activities” within our accompanying Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows and “Income tax (benefit) expense” within our accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations for the period realized.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS AND COMMITMENTS
The following table summarizes our future estimated cash payments under existing contractual obligations as of December 29, 2020, including estimated cash payments due by period (in thousands).
(1)
For more detailed description of our operating leases, refer to Note 6 in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements.
(2)
The CARES Act allowed employers to defer the deposit and payment of the employer’s portion of social security tax through December 31, 2020. Half of the deferred amount is due on December 31, 2021, and the other half is due on December 31, 2022.
(3)
Amounts represent non-cancelable commitments for the purchase of goods and other services.
(4)
We have assumed $116.8 million remains outstanding under our Credit Facility until the maturity date of November 18, 2022, using the interest rate in effect on December 22, 2020, which was approximately 4.0%.
Additionally, we have entered into lease agreements related to future restaurants with commencement dates subsequent to December 29, 2020. Our aggregate future commitment relating to these leases is $19.9 million and is not included in operating leases above.