Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The statements in the discussion and analysis regarding industry outlook, our expectations regarding the performance of our business, our liquidity and capital resources and the other non-historical statements are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risks and uncertainties described in "Risk Factors" and "Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Information." Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by the forward-looking statements. You should read the following discussion together with the sections entitled "Risk Factors," "Selected Historical Financial Data," "Liquidity and Capital Resources" and the consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Except as otherwise indicated or unless the context otherwise requires, all references to "Black Knight," the "Company," "we," "us" or "our" are to Black Knight, Inc., a Delaware corporation, and its subsidiaries ("BKI").
Overview
We are an award-winning software, data and analytics company that drives innovation in the mortgage lending and servicing and real estate industries, as well as the capital and secondary markets. Businesses leverage our robust, integrated solutions across the entire homeownership life cycle to help retain existing clients, gain new clients, mitigate risk and operate more effectively. Our clients rely on our proven, comprehensive, scalable products and our unwavering commitment to delivering exceptional client support to achieve their strategic goals and better serve their customers.
We have market-leading vertical software solutions combined with comprehensive real estate data and extensive analytic capabilities. Our solutions are utilized by U.S. mortgage loan originators and servicers, as well as other financial institutions, investors and real estate professionals, to support mortgage lending and servicing operations, analyze portfolios and properties, operate more efficiently, meet regulatory compliance requirements and mitigate risk.
We believe the breadth and depth of our comprehensive end-to-end, integrated solutions and the insight we provide to our clients differentiate us from other software providers and position us particularly well for evolving opportunities. We have served the mortgage loan and real estate industries for over 55 years and utilize this experience to design and develop solutions that fit our clients' ever-evolving needs. Our proprietary software solutions and data and analytics capabilities are designed to reduce manual processes, support compliance and quality, mitigate risk and deliver significant cost savings to our clients. Our scale allows us to continually and cost-effectively invest in our business in order to meet industry requirements and maintain our position as a provider of industry-standard platforms for mortgage loan market participants.
The table below summarizes the number of active first and second lien mortgage loans on our mortgage loan servicing software solution and the related market data, reflecting our leadership in the mortgage loan servicing software solutions market (in millions):
_______________________________________________________
(1) According to the Black Knight Mortgage Monitor Reports as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 for U.S. first lien mortgage loans.
(2) According to the January 2021 and December 2019 Equifax National Consumer Credit Trends Reports as of January 4, 2021 and September 30, 2019, respectively, for U.S. second lien mortgage loans.
We offer our solutions to a wide range of clients across the mortgage and consumer loan, real estate and capital markets verticals. The quality and breadth of our solutions contribute to the long-standing nature of our relationships with our clients, the majority of whom enter into long-term contracts across multiple products that are embedded in their mission critical workflow and decision processes, particularly in the Software Solutions segment. Given the contractual nature of our revenues and stickiness of our client relationships, our revenues are highly visible and recurring in nature. Due to our integrated suite of solutions and our scale, we are able to drive significant operating leverage, which we believe enables our clients to operate more efficiently while allowing us to generate strong margins and cash flows.
Our Markets
The U.S. mortgage loan market is large, and the loan lifecycle is complex and consists of several stages. The mortgage loan lifecycle includes origination, servicing and default. Mortgage loans are originated to finance home purchases or refinance existing mortgage loans. Once a mortgage loan is originated, it is serviced on a periodic basis by mortgage servicers, which
may not be the lenders that originated the mortgage loan. Furthermore, if a mortgage loan goes into default, it triggers a set of multifaceted processes with an assortment of potential outcomes depending on a mix of variables.
Underlying the three major stages of the mortgage loan lifecycle are the software, data and analytics support behind each process, which have become increasingly critical to industry participants. As the industry has grown in complexity, participants have responded by outsourcing to large-scale specialty providers, automating manual processes and seeking end-to-end solutions that support the processes required to manage the entire mortgage loan lifecycle.
Recent Developments
2020 Acquisitions
On March 3, 2020, we completed the acquisition of Collateral Analytics, LLC ("Collateral Analytics"), a provider of real estate products and tools to support appraisers, appraisal management companies, lenders, investors and government agencies. The acquisition is integrated into our Data and Analytics segment and enhances our real estate solutions and automated valuation model offerings.
On August 27, 2020, we completed the acquisition of DocVerify, a solution that provides proof of the integrity of digital documents, enabling organizations across a wide range of industries to streamline processes, safeguard sensitive information and reduce costs. DocVerify is reported within our Software Solutions segment and helps accelerate our goal of digitizing the entirety of the real estate and mortgage continuum as DocVerify’s trusted and proven digital document verification capabilities are integrated with Expedite®Close, our digital closing platform.
Optimal Blue Acquisition
On July 26, 2020, we entered into a definitive equity purchase agreement with affiliates of private equity firm GTCR, LLC, to purchase Optimal Blue, LLC ("Optimal Blue"), a leading provider of secondary market solutions and actionable data services. We also entered into forward purchase agreements with Cannae Holdings, LLC ("Cannae") and affiliates of Thomas H. Lee Partners, L.P. (“THL”) (collectively, the "FPAs"), whereby Cannae and affiliates of THL agreed to each acquire 20% of the equity interests of a newly formed entity, Optimal Blue Holdco, LLC ("Optimal Blue Holdco"), for a purchase price of $289.0 million. Optimal Blue Holdco was formed for the purpose of acquiring Optimal Blue and certain affiliates.
On September 15, 2020, we completed a series of transactions and completed the acquisition of Optimal Blue. In connection with the acquisition of Optimal Blue, we contributed $762.0 million in cash and our Compass Analytics business to Optimal Blue Holdco. As of December 31, 2020, we own 60% of Optimal Blue Holdco.
Optimal Blue Holdco is subject to the consolidation guidance related to variable interest entities as set forth in Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") Topic 810, Consolidation ("ASC 810"). We are the primary beneficiary of Optimal Blue Holdco through our controlling interest and possess the rights established in the Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement of Optimal Blue Holdco (the" OB Holdco LLC Agreement"). As such, we control Optimal Blue Holdco and its subsidiaries and consolidate its financial position and results of operations. Intercompany transactions between us and Optimal Blue Holdco and its subsidiaries are eliminated in consolidation. Refer to Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Redeemable noncontrolling interests represent the collective 40% equity interest owned by Cannae and THL in Optimal Blue Holdco. We have call rights on THL's and Cannae’s equity interests in Optimal Blue Holdco that are exercisable beginning September 15, 2023 at a call price equal to the greater of (i) the fair market value of such interests and (ii) an amount that would result in the multiple of THL’s or Cannae’s return on investment to equal 2.0, as applicable. In addition, THL and Cannae have the right to put their respective interests in Optimal Blue Holdco to (i) Optimal Blue Holdco if there is a change of control of Black Knight or (ii) Optimal Blue Holdco, BKT or Black Knight that are exercisable beginning September 15, 2023. We have the option to satisfy the purchase price, which shall be equal to the fair market value of such interest, in connection with the exercise of any put or call right either in cash or Black Knight common stock other than a put in connection with a change of control of Black Knight, in which case the purchase price is payable only in cash. The equity interests will be settled at the current fair value at the time we receive notice of the put election as determined by the parties or by a third party appraisal under the terms of OB Holdco LLC Agreement.
Refer to Note 3 - Business Acquisitions to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to our current and prior years acquisitions.
DNB Investment
On July 6, 2020, Dun & Bradstreet Holdings, Inc. ("DNB") closed its previously announced initial public offering ("DNB IPO") and we invested $100.0 million in the DNB private placement. In connection with the closing of the DNB IPO and the DNB private placement, our limited partner interests in Star Parent, L.P. were exchanged for 54.8 million shares of DNB common stock (the "DNB Investment"), which represents ownership of 13.0% of DNB. As of December 31, 2020, DNB's closing share price was $24.90 and the fair value of our investment in DNB was $1,365.8 million. As of December 31, 2020, assuming a statutory tax rate of 25.3%, the estimated after tax value of our investment in DNB is $1,144.8 million.
On January 8, 2021, DNB completed its acquisition of Bisnode Business Information Group AB (the "Bisnode acquisition"). In connection with the Bisnode acquisition, DNB issued an additional 6.2 million shares of common stock, which resulted in a decrease in our ownership interest in DNB to 12.8%.
Business Trends and Conditions
COVID-19 Pandemic
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization ("WHO") declared the COVID-19 outbreak to be a global pandemic. In addition to the devastating effects on human life, the pandemic is having a negative ripple effect on the global economy, leading to disruptions and volatility in the global financial markets. Most U.S. states and many countries have issued policies intended to stop or slow the further spread of the disease.
COVID-19 and the U.S.'s response to the pandemic are significantly affecting the mortgage and real estate industries. On March 18, 2020, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD") and the Federal Housing Finance Agency ("FHFA") announced a 60-day moratorium on mortgage loan foreclosures and evictions. Likewise, the FHFA also announced mortgage loan forbearance programs for certain borrowers that allow mortgage loan payments to be suspended for up to 12 months.
On March 27, 2020 the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the "CARES Act") was signed into law in an effort to provide economic assistance to workers, families and businesses and codified the actions of HUD and the FHFA.
Subsequent to the CARES Act, the Federal Housing Administration ("FHA") extended the moratorium on mortgage loan foreclosures and evictions through at least June 30, 2021. In addition, many states have implemented additional guidance that extends their moratorium on mortgage loan foreclosures and evictions, and additional extensions of these moratoriums may be implemented in the future.
There are no comparable events that provide guidance as to the effect the COVID-19 pandemic may have, and, as a result, the ultimate effect of the pandemic is uncertain and subject to change. We do not yet know the full extent of the effects on the economy, the markets we serve, our business or our operations.
Black Knight Response and the Effect on Our Business
We continue to execute on our business continuity plans to address the challenges related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Since March 2020, substantially all of our employees have been working from home. We are following the requirements and protocols published by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control, the WHO and country, state and local governments. Our most important priorities are the health and safety of our employees and helping the communities where we work and live. We continue to assess when and how we will begin to lift the actions put in place as part of our business continuity plans, including working from home and travel restrictions, while we continue to offer our clients the high level of service they have come to expect from us. We believe our transition to working from home has been successful and has not significantly affected our results of operations, financial condition, cash flows or control environment as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The extraordinary effects of the broad-based response to the COVID-19 pandemic have delayed the timing of certain revenues. Specifically, the current mortgage loan foreclosure moratorium and forbearance plans offered as part of the CARES Act are reducing the number of foreclosures being processed on our BankruptcySM/ForeclosureSM and InvoicingSM software solutions for which revenue is recognized as transactions occur. For the year ended December 31, 2020, approximately $37 million in revenues were delayed beyond 2020. Many of our clients continue to work from home while experiencing origination volume increases as well as an elevated number of customer service calls. As a result, we initially saw delays to some of our implementation timelines, but continue to make progress while many of our clients and team members continue to work remotely. Our teams are focused on supporting our clients in this shifting landscape and stand ready to deliver our solutions.
Our clients have realized there will be significant changes in how their customers want to, or are able to, interact with them throughout the pandemic and beyond. In reaction to these changes, our clients are prioritizing automated technology solutions that enable them to remotely engage with their customers and provide streamlined ways of performing the core functions of their businesses, all while maintaining regulatory compliance in an environment that is rapidly changing. We believe our solutions are well-positioned to help our clients address these needs.
We partner with many of the industry’s leading lenders and servicers and believe it is our duty to serve in a leadership role as we manage through this crisis and beyond. From the start of the COVID-19 crisis, we have worked to provide leadership on behalf of our clients and to provide them with actionable intelligence, including our monthly Mortgage Monitor report and our McDash Flash Forbearance Tracker. We have also published in-depth white papers, held town hall meetings with our clients and have had frequent meetings with senior executives at our clients, government agencies and industry associations. We believe the in-depth data and insights we offer are essential for both mortgage market participants and government entities as we work together to address the economic ramifications of the crisis.
Our investment and innovation in digital mortgage loan solutions have made it possible for a majority of the mortgage application, underwriting and closing processes to happen online and remotely. Our industry-leading servicing system and a mortgage loan contributory data set represents a majority of the U.S. market and is modeled to represent the entire U.S. market. Our robust analytics and seamless integration ties them all together and allows for real-time visibility into the majority of active mortgage loans and a holistic view of the homeownership lifecycle. The depth of our integrated software, data and analytics enables clients to see what the effects of the pandemic mean for their business and industry. Our clients use these robust solutions for modeling, forecasting and reserve setting, which is critical, especially in this current environment.
Market Trends
Market trends that have spurred lenders and servicers to seek software, data and analytics solutions are as follows:
Integral role of technology in the U.S. mortgage loan industry. Over the past few years, banks and other lenders and servicers have become increasingly focused on automation and workflow management to operate more efficiently and meet their regulatory requirements as well as using technology to enhance the consumer experience during the mortgage loan origination, closing and servicing processes. Since the start of the pandemic, our clients have become increasingly aware that digital solutions are integral to their ability to stay connected with their customer base in times when face-to-face interactions are not possible. We believe technology providers must be able to support the complexity and dynamic nature of the market, display extensive industry knowledge and possess the financial resources to make the necessary investments in technology and software to support lenders. This includes an enhanced digital experience along with the application of artificial intelligence, robotic process automation and adaptive learning.
Heightened demand for enhanced transparency and analytic insight. As U.S. mortgage loan market participants work to minimize the risk in lending, servicing and capital markets, they rely on the integration of data and analytics with solutions that enhance the decision-making process. These industry participants rely on large comprehensive third-party databases coupled with enhanced analytics to achieve these goals. The pandemic is putting pressure on the U.S. economy, affecting millions of American jobs and creating a high-level of uncertainty in the volume of work that our clients are facing with possible
delinquent mortgage loans. Mortgage loan market participants are eager for timely data and insights to help them plan and react to the changing environment.
Regulatory changes and oversight. Most U.S. mortgage loan market participants are subject to a high level of regulatory oversight and regulatory requirements as federal and state governments have enacted various new laws, rules and regulations. It is our experience that mortgage lenders have become more focused on minimizing the risk of non-compliance with regulatory requirements and are looking toward solutions that assist them in complying with their regulatory requirements. We expect this trend to continue as additional governmental programs and regulations have been recently enacted to address the economic concerns resulting from the pandemic, and our clients have had to adapt their systems and processes in record time to the shifting landscape. In addition, our clients and our clients' regulators have elevated their focus on privacy and data security while many of our clients’ employees are working from home and in light of an increased level of cybersecurity incidents. We expect the industry focus on privacy and data security to continue to increase.
Our Business Segments
Our business is organized into two segments: Software Solutions and Data and Analytics.
Software Solutions
Our Software Solutions segment offers software and hosting solutions that support loan servicing, loan origination and settlement services. Our software solutions revenues were 84%, 86% and 86% of our consolidated revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
The following table summarizes our software solutions revenues (in millions):
Our servicing software solutions primarily include our core servicing software solution that automates loan servicing, including loan setup and ongoing processing, customer service, accounting, reporting to the secondary mortgage market and investors and web-based workflow information systems. Our servicing software solutions primarily generate revenues based on the number of active loans outstanding on our system, which has been very stable; however, we have some exposure to foreclosure and bankruptcy loan volumes, which can fluctuate based on economic cycles and other factors.
Before the pandemic, foreclosure start volumes were already at historic lows. Our servicing software solutions that are more sensitive to foreclosure volumes were approximately 2% of our consolidated revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020. As a result of the effects of the broad-based response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have seen lower foreclosure-related transactional revenues due to the mortgage loan foreclosure moratorium and expect this trend to continue due to the mortgage loan forbearance plans offered as part of the CARES Act. As of February 16, 2021, Black Knight’s McDash Flash Forbearance Tracker estimated 2.7 million homeowners, or 5.1% of all U.S. mortgage loans, were in COVID-19 mortgage loan forbearance plans.
Our origination software solutions primarily include our solutions that automate and facilitate the origination of mortgage loans and provide an interconnected network allowing the various parties and systems associated with lending transactions to exchange data quickly and efficiently. For our origination software solutions, our loan origination system revenues are based on closed loan volumes subject to minimum base subscription fees that are contractually obligated, which limits our exposure to declines in origination volumes. Some of our origination software solutions are exposed to variances in origination volumes, primarily related to refinance volumes due to the nature of the services provided. Given the near record low level of mortgage loan rates, we have seen elevated volumes related to refinance originations. We expect this trend to continue during the first half of 2021 followed by a subsequent decline in origination volumes during the second half of 2021. Despite the initial decline with stay-at-home orders and similar restrictive mitigation measures issued in various parts of the country for an unknown duration, we have seen some improvement in purchase origination volumes due to pent-up demand and the current interest rate environment. Our origination software solutions that are more sensitive to origination volumes were approximately 6% of our consolidated revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Data and Analytics
Our Data and Analytics segment offers data and analytics solutions to the mortgage, real estate and capital markets verticals. These solutions include property ownership data, lien data, servicing data, automated valuation models, collateral risk scores, behavioral models, a multiple listing service software solution and other data solutions. Our data and analytics business is predominantly based on longer-term strategic data licenses, other data licenses and subscription-based revenues. Our data and
analytics revenues were 16%, 14% and 14% of our consolidated revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Our data and analytics solutions that are more sensitive to fluctuations in home buying activity and origination volumes were approximately 5% of our consolidated revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 and relate to services where we provide data necessary for title insurance and other settlement service activities.
Regulatory Requirements
There continues to be a high level of legislative and regulatory focus on consumer protection practices. As a result, federal and state governments have enacted various new laws, rules and regulations. This has led banks and other lenders to seek software solutions that assist them in satisfying their regulatory compliance obligations in the face of a changing regulatory environment. We have developed solutions that target this need, which has resulted in additional revenues.
The CFPB has issued guidance that applies to "supervised service providers," which the CFPB has defined to include service providers, like us, to CFPB-supervised banks and non-banks. In addition, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (the "Dodd-Frank Act") contains the Mortgage Reform and Anti-Predatory Lending Act that imposes additional requirements on lenders and servicers of residential mortgage loans. Future legislative or regulatory changes are difficult to predict, and new laws or regulations that may be implemented by the CFPB or other regulatory bodies may require us to change our business practices or incur increased costs to comply.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon audited consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures with respect to contingent liabilities and assets at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Certain of our accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by management in selecting the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. Our actual results may differ from those estimates. See Note 2 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional description of the significant accounting policies that have been followed in preparing our consolidated financial statements.
The accounting policies described below are those we consider to be the most critical to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations and that require the most complex and subjective management judgment.
Revenue Recognition
At times, revenue recognition requires significant judgment, especially for our complex arrangements that include multiple performance obligations, or deliverables, such as arrangements that include the implementation of several software solutions over a period of time as well as post-implementation subscription fees and support for those solutions. The amount of revenues we recognize in a particular period depends on the value we allocate to the products and services delivered during that period. Changes to these estimates could materially affect the amount of revenues reflected in our consolidated results of operations.
Our judgments for revenue recognition relate to (i) identifying performance obligations within the arrangement, including whether those obligations are distinct or should be combined; (ii) determining the standalone selling price ("SSP") for each performance obligation; and (iii) determining the effect of contract modifications.
Delivery of our primary software solutions is often considered a distinct performance obligation; however, certain agreements that include complex, proprietary implementation-related professional services require judgment to determine if the software solution and related implementation professional services should be combined into one performance obligation.
The SSP for many of our solutions and services is based on observable selling prices. However, when observable selling prices are not available, judgment and analysis is required to establish an estimated SSP through consideration of all reasonably available information, including market conditions, demands, trends, our specific factors and information about the client or class of client. The adjusted market approach is generally used when observable inputs are not available or limited.
Contract modifications require judgment to determine if the modification should be accounted for as (i) a separate contract, (ii) the termination of the original contract and creation of a new contract or (iii) a cumulative catch-up adjustment to the original contract. When evaluating contract modifications, we must identify the performance obligations of the modified contract and determine both the allocation of revenues to the remaining performance obligations and the period of recognition for each identified performance obligation.
Computer Software
For computer software products to be sold, leased or marketed, all costs incurred to establish the technological feasibility are research and development costs and are expensed as they are incurred. Costs incurred subsequent to establishing
technological feasibility, such as programmers' salaries, related payroll costs and costs of independent contractors, are capitalized and amortized commencing on the date of general release to clients. Judgment is required in determining when technological feasibility of a product is established. The timing of when various research and development projects become technologically feasible or ready for release can cause fluctuations in the amount of research and development costs that are expensed or capitalized in any given period. Generally, we amortize capitalized costs on a straight-line basis. However, we use an accelerated amortization method equal to the ratio of revenues generated by the software solution in the current year as a percentage of the estimated current and future revenues over its estimated useful life if that ratio is greater than the percentage to be amortized using the straight-line method.
Purchase Accounting
We are required to allocate the purchase price of acquired businesses to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and the liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values, with the excess recorded as goodwill. We generally engage third-party valuation specialists to assist us in making fair value determinations. The third-party valuation specialists generally use discounted cash flow models, which require internally-developed assumptions, to determine the acquisition fair value of client relationship intangible assets and developed technology software assets. Assumptions for client relationship asset valuations generally include forecasted revenue attributable to existing customer contracts and relationships, estimated annual attrition, forecasted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization margin and estimated weighted average cost of capital and discount rates. Assumptions for software asset valuations generally include forecasted revenue attributable to the software assets, obsolescence rates, estimated royalty rates and estimated weighted average cost of capital and discount rates.
If the initial accounting for a business combination is incomplete by the end of the reporting period during which the combination took place, we are required to record provisional amounts in our financial statements for items for which the accounting has not been completed. Measurement period adjustments to provisional purchase price allocations are recognized in the period in which they are determined, with the effect on earnings of changes in depreciation, amortization or other income resulting from such changes calculated as if the accounting had been completed on the acquisition date. Any new assets or liabilities identified during the measurement period are recognized as of the acquisition date. The measurement period ends the sooner of one year from the acquisition date or when we receive the information we were seeking about facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date or learn that more information is not obtainable.
Refer to Note 3 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion of our acquisitions during years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill is tested for impairment annually or more frequently if circumstances indicate potential impairment, through a comparison of a reporting unit's fair value to its carrying value. A qualitative or quantitative assessment of factors that may indicate a potential for impairment include macroeconomic conditions, industry and market changes, our overall financial performance, changes in share price and other events or changes in circumstances that could negatively affect us. If the results of a qualitative assessment indicate a potential for impairment, a quantitative goodwill impairment test is performed. The quantitative process of determining whether or not an asset, such as goodwill, is impaired or recoverable relies on a weighted average of multiple valuation methods, primarily a combination of an income approach and a market approach. The income approach includes the present value of estimated future cash flows, while the market approach uses earnings multiples of similar guideline public companies. Such projections are inherently uncertain. A quantitative goodwill impairment analysis is sensitive to changes in estimates of future cash flows and discount rates. Changes to these estimates might result in material changes in the fair value of the reporting units and determination of the recoverability of goodwill.
Other intangible assets, net of accumulated amortization, consist primarily of client relationship assets. Intangible assets with definite useful lives are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized, but are reviewed for impairment at least annually in accordance with ASC 350.
Factors Affecting the Comparability of Our Results of Operations
Our historical results of operations may not be comparable to our results of operations in future periods as a result of these and a number of other factors. In addition, our results of operations may vary from period to period. Set forth below is a brief discussion of the key factors affecting the comparability of our results of operations.
Revenues. On September 15, 2020, we completed a series of transactions and completed the acquisition of Optimal Blue. The reported results for 2020 include revenues of $37.6 million from our acquisition of Optimal Blue.
Investments in Unconsolidated Affiliates. In 2019, we completed our D&B Investment for an economic ownership of approximately 18.1%. Our Net earnings for the year ended December 31, 2019 include our equity in losses of Star Parent for the period from February 8, 2019 to December 31, 2019. In 2020, in connection with the closing of DNB IPO and the DNB
Private Placement, our limited partner interests in Star Parent were exchanged for 54.8 million shares of DNB common stock, which represents ownership of 13.0% of DNB. Our Net earnings for the year ended December 31, 2020 include a non-cash gain of $88.2 million recognized as a result of DNB IPO and concurrent private placement. Refer to Note 4 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to the DNB Investment.
Redeemable Noncontrolling Interests. Redeemable noncontrolling interests represent the collective 40% equity interest owned by Cannae and THL in Optimal Blue Holdco. Refer to Note 1 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to Redeemable noncontrolling interests.
Key Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
We generate revenues through contractual arrangements we enter into with our clients to provide products or services either individually or in combination with one another as part of an integrated offering of multiple services. These arrangements occasionally include offerings from more than one segment to the same client.
Software Solutions
Our Software Solutions segment revenues are primarily derived from software and hosting solutions and professional services. Revenues from software and hosting solutions are typically volume-based agreements driven by factors such as the number of accounts processed, transactions processed and computer resources utilized. Professional services consist of pre-implementation and post-implementation support and services and are primarily billed on a time and materials basis. Professional services may also include dedicated teams provided as part of agreements with software and hosting solutions clients.
Data and Analytics
Our Data and Analytics segment revenues are primarily derived from property ownership data, lien data, servicing data, automated valuation models, collateral risk scores, behavioral models, a multiple listing service software solution and other data solutions.
Expenses
The following is a brief description of the components of our expenses:
•Operating expenses primarily include compensation costs, including equity-based compensation and benefits, hardware and software maintenance costs, software subscription costs, cloud computing costs, rent-related costs and professional services.
•Transition and integration costs for 2020 and 2019 primarily consisted of costs associated with acquisitions and expense reduction initiatives. In 2018, these costs primarily consisted of costs associated with executive transition, transition-related costs as we transferred certain corporate functions from FNF following the Distribution and costs associated with acquisitions.
•Depreciation and amortization expense consists of our depreciation related to investments in property and equipment, including hardware, as well as amortization of purchased and developed software and other intangible assets, primarily client relationship assets recorded in connection with acquisitions. It also includes the amortization of previously deferred contract costs.
•Interest expense, net consists primarily of interest expense on our borrowings, amortization of our debt issuance costs and original issue discount, payments on our interest rate swaps, commitment fees on our revolving credit facility and administrative agent fees net of capitalized interest and interest income.
•Other income, net for 2020 primarily related to a recognized gain for the resolution of a legacy legal matter. Other expense, net for 2019 primarily related to legal fees. Other expense, net for 2018 primarily related to the loss on extinguishment of debt and costs incurred in connection with our debt refinancing on April 30, 2018.
•Income tax expense represents federal, state, local and foreign taxes.
•Equity in losses of unconsolidated affiliates, net of tax primarily represents the effect of our investment in DNB, which is accounted for as an equity-method investment. Refer to Note 4 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Results of Operations
Key Performance Metrics
Revenues, EBITDA and EBITDA Margin for the Software Solutions and Data and Analytics segments are presented in conformity with ASC Topic 280, Segment Reporting. These measures are reported to the chief operating decision maker for purposes of making decisions about allocating resources to the segments and assessing their performance. For these reasons, these measures are excluded from the definition of non-GAAP financial measures under the Securities and Exchange Commission's ("SEC") Regulation G and Item 10(e) of Regulation S-K.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following tables present certain financial data for the periods indicated (dollars in millions):
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Segment Financial Results
Revenues
The following table sets forth revenues by segment for the periods presented (in millions):
_______________________________________________________
(1) Revenues for Corporate and Other represent deferred revenue purchase accounting adjustments recorded in accordance with GAAP.
Software Solutions
Revenues were $1,040.2 million in 2020 compared to $1,012.3 million in 2019, an increase of $27.9 million, or 3%. Our servicing software solutions revenues decreased 5%, or $37.8 million, as increased revenues from new and existing clients on MSP® were more than offset by the effect of client deconversions and approximately $37 million of lower revenues related to the effect of lower foreclosure related volumes due to the foreclosure moratorium as part of the CARES Act. Our origination software solutions revenues increased 33%, or $65.7 million, primarily driven by revenues of $37.6 million from our acquisition of Optimal Blue, increased revenues from new clients and higher origination volumes, partially offset by higher license and termination fees in the prior year.
Data and Analytics
Revenues were $198.7 million in 2020 compared to $165.4 million in 2019, an increase of $33.3 million, or 20%. The increase was primarily driven by higher origination volumes, strong sales execution and revenues of $10.8 million from our acquisition of Collateral Analytics.
EBITDA and EBITDA margin
The following tables set forth EBITDA (in millions) and EBITDA margin by segment for the periods presented:
Software Solutions
EBITDA was $604.6 million in 2020 compared to $599.6 million in 2019, an increase of $5.0 million, or 1%, with an EBITDA margin of 58.1%, a decrease of 110 basis points from the prior year. The EBITDA margin decrease was driven by revenue mix primarily related to high incremental margins associated with the lower foreclosure related revenues due to the foreclosure moratorium and higher revenues from acquisitions with margins slightly below the segment average.
Data and Analytics
EBITDA was $64.8 million in 2020 compared to $42.0 million in 2019, an increase of $22.8 million, or 54%, with an EBITDA margin of 32.6% in 2020 compared to 25.4% in 2019. The EBITDA margin increase was primarily driven by incremental margins on revenue growth.
Consolidated Financial Results
Operating Expenses
The following table sets forth operating expenses by segment for the periods presented (in millions):
_______________________________________________________
(1) Operating expenses for Corporate and Other include equity-based compensation, including certain related payroll taxes, of $40.6 million and $51.7 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The increase in Operating Expenses was primarily driven by the effect of current and prior year acquisitions, higher net personnel expense, software subscription and maintenance costs, and data acquisition costs, partially offset by lower equity-based compensation, medical costs and travel related costs.
Depreciation and Amortization
The following table sets forth Depreciation and amortization by segment for the periods presented (in millions):
_______________________________________________________
(1) Depreciation and amortization for Corporate and Other primarily represents net incremental depreciation and amortization adjustments associated with the application of purchase accounting recorded in accordance with GAAP.
The increase in Depreciation and amortization is primarily driven by the effect of amortization of acquired intangible assets and software and new hardware and software placed in service as a result of new client wins.
Transition and Integration Costs
Transition and integration costs were $31.4 million in 2020 compared to $5.4 million in 2019. Transition and integration costs in 2020 and 2019 primarily consisted of costs associated with acquisitions, including transaction costs of $15.0 million related to the acquisition of Optimal Blue, and expense reduction initiatives.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net was $62.9 million in 2020 compared to $63.5 million in 2019, a decrease of $0.6 million, or 1%. The decrease was primarily driven by lower average interest rates, partially offset by higher average debt balances following the acquisition of Optimal Blue.
Other Expense, Net
Other income, net was $16.4 million in 2020 compared to Other expense, net $1.4 million in 2019. The 2020 amounts are primarily related to a recognized gain of $18.5 million for the resolution of a legacy legal matter. The 2019 amounts are primarily related to legal fees.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense was $41.6 million in 2020 compared to $41.9 million in 2019. Our effective tax rate was 18.9% in 2020 compared to 18.6% in 2019. Refer to Note 19 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information related to the components of our effective tax rate.
Equity in Earnings (Losses) of Unconsolidated Affiliates, Net of Tax
Equity in earnings (losses) of unconsolidated affiliates, net of tax consists of the following (in millions):
Refer to Note 4 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information related to our investment in DNB.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
See Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 28, 2020, for a discussion of our consolidated results of operations for 2019 compared to 2018.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Requirements
Our primary sources of liquidity are our existing cash balances, cash flows from operations and borrowings on our revolving credit facility. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $34.7 million, debt principal of $2,213.7 million and available capacity of $702.3 million on our revolving credit facility. Our existing credit facility matures on April 30, 2023.
Our primary cash requirements include operating expenses, debt service payments (principal and interest), capital expenditures (including property, equipment and computer software expenditures) and tax-related payments and may include business acquisitions and share repurchases.
We believe that our cash flows from operations and available cash and cash equivalents are sufficient to meet our liquidity needs, including the repayment of our outstanding debt, for at least the next 12 months. We anticipate that to the extent that we require additional liquidity, it will be funded through borrowings on our revolving credit facility, the incurrence of other indebtedness, equity issuance or a combination thereof. The loss of the largest lender on our revolving credit facility would reduce our borrowing capacity by $102.5 million. Additionally, our liquidity and our ability to meet our obligations and fund our capital requirements are also dependent on our future financial performance, which is subject to general economic, financial and other factors that are beyond our control. Accordingly, we cannot be assured that our business will generate sufficient cash flows from operations or that future borrowings will be available from additional indebtedness or otherwise to meet our liquidity needs. Although we have no specific current plans to do so, if we decide to pursue one or more significant acquisitions, we may incur additional debt or sell additional equity to finance such acquisitions.
The CARES Act allows us to defer payments of our share of social security taxes until December 31, 2021 and 2022. As of December 31, 2020, we have deferred $14.8 million of payments related to employer social security taxes.
Cash Flows
The following table provides a summary of cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities (in millions):
Operating Activities
The $37.1 million increase in cash provided by operating activities in 2020 compared to 2019 is primarily related to higher earnings and the timing of payments for employer payroll taxes, partially offset by acquisition-related payments. The $57.2 million decrease in cash provided by operating activities in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily related to the timing and amount of cash receipts for Trade receivables, net, higher payments primarily related to income taxes and incentive bonus, and the timing of payments for Trade accounts payable and other accrued liabilities.
Investing Activities
The $1,538.2 million increase in cash used in investing activities in 2020 compared to 2019 is primarily related to the acquisition of Optimal Blue, partially offset by higher investments related to Star Parent in 2019. The $406.9 million increase in cash used in investing activities in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily related to investments in Star Parent and our acquisition of Compass Analytics.
Financing Activities
The $1,525.3 million increase in cash provided by financing activities in 2020 compared to 2019 is primarily related to the issuance by BKIS of $1.0 billion in aggregate principal amount of 3.625% senior unsecured notes due 2028 (the "Senior Notes"), contributions from affiliates of Cannae and THL to their redeemable noncontrolling interests in Optimal Blue Holdco and cash proceeds received from our underwritten common stock offering, partially offset by higher net payments on our revolving credit facility. The $455.1 million increase in cash provided by financing activities in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily related to an incremental borrowing to fund our DNB Investment as well as fewer share repurchases.
Financing
For a description of our financing arrangements, see Note 12 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of Part II of this Report, which is incorporated by reference into this Part II Item 7.
Contractual Obligations
Our long-term contractual obligations generally include our debt and related interest payments, data processing and maintenance commitments and operating and finance lease payments for our offices, data centers, property and equipment. These long-term contractual obligations extend through 2028.
As of December 31, 2020, our required annual payments relating to these contractual obligations were as follows (in millions):
___________________
(1) Includes finance lease obligations.
(2) These calculations include the effect of our interest rate swaps and assume that (a) applicable margins remain constant; (b) our term A loan and revolving credit facility variable rate debt is priced at the one-month LIBOR rate in effect as of December 31, 2020; (c) only mandatory debt repayments are made; and (d) no refinancing occurs at debt maturity.
(3) Other includes commitment fees on our revolving credit facility and rating agencies fees.
Share Repurchase Program
On January 31, 2017, our Board of Directors authorized a three-year share repurchase program, under which we could repurchase up to 10 million shares of Black Knight Financial Services, Inc. ("BKFS") Class A common stock through February 2, 2020, through open market purchases, negotiated transactions or other means, in accordance with applicable securities laws and other restrictions. In connection with the Distribution, our Board of Directors approved a share repurchase program authorizing the repurchase of shares of BKI common stock consistent with the previous BKFS share repurchase program.
A summary of share repurchases for the periods covered in this report is as follows (in millions, except for per share amounts):
On February 12, 2020, our Board of Directors approved a three-year share repurchase program authorizing us to repurchase up to 10.0 million shares of our outstanding common stock through February 12, 2023, through open market purchases, negotiated transactions or other means, in accordance with applicable securities laws and other restrictions. We did not make any repurchases under this program during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Indemnifications and Warranties
We often agree to indemnify our clients against damages and costs resulting from claims of patent, copyright, trademark infringement or breaches of confidentiality associated with use of our software through software licensing agreements. Historically, we have not made any payments under such indemnifications, but continue to monitor the conditions that are subject to the indemnifications to identify whether a loss has occurred that is both probable and estimable that would require recognition. In addition, we warrant to clients that our software operates substantially in accordance with the software specifications. Historically, no costs have been incurred related to software warranties and none are expected in the future, and as such, no accruals for warranty costs have been made.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any material off-balance sheet arrangements other than interest rate swaps.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of recent accounting pronouncements.