Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Executive Summary
BK Technologies Corporation is a holding company, with a wholly-owned operating subsidiary, BK Technologies, Inc. We design, manufacture and market American made two-way land mobile radios, repeaters, base stations and related components and subsystems. All operating activities are undertaken by BK Technologies, Inc.
Our overall financial and operating results for 2020 improved markedly from the preceding year. Sales for 2020 grew over 10% compared with 2019, while gross profit margins as a percentage of sales increased by 2 percentage points year-over-year. Selling, general and administrative and administrative expenses for 2020 declined approximately $3.0 million, or 15.0%. The combined impact of sales growth, gross profit margin improvement, and reduced operating expenses yielded an increase of over $5.4 million in operating income from the prior year. Additionally, our balance sheet strengthened during the year with a $4 million (30%) reduction in inventory, which was a significant contributor to positive cash flow for the year of approximately $2.2 million. Meanwhile, we launched the first portable radio, the BKR 5000, in a new line of land mobile radio products, with additional models planned for 2021.
Total sales in 2020 grew 10.1% to approximately $44.1 million, compared with approximately $40.1 million for the prior year. The increase was primarily attributed to federal and state public safety agencies, some of which were new customers. We also realized sales from our new BKR 5000 portable radio, which was introduced during the third quarter of 2020.
Gross profit margin as a percentage of sales in 2020 increased to approximately 41.0%, compared with 39.0% for the previous year. The improvement was attributed primarily to the improved mix of product sales and reduced manufacturing costs.
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses for 2020 declined approximately $3.0 million (15.0%) to approximately $17.0 million, or 38.6% of sales, compared with $20.0 million, or 50.0% of sales, for 2019. The decrease in SG&A expenses was the result of broad-based cost reduction actions, including a reduction in our workforce.
For 2020, we recognized operating income of approximately $1.0 million , which was an improvement of $5.4 million from last year’s operating loss of $4.4 million.
We recognized other expenses totaling approximately $797,000 in 2020, primarily attributed to an unrealized loss from our investment in FGF, made through FGI 1347 Holdings, LP, a consolidated variable interest entity. This compares with other income of $762,000 last year, which was primarily related to an unrealized gain from the investment in FGF.
For 2020, we recognized pretax income of approximately $251,000, a significant improvement from last year’s pretax loss of approximately $3.6 million.
We recognized a tax expense of approximately $3,000 for 2020, compared with a benefit of approximately $987,000 for the prior year. The income tax benefit last year was largely non-cash as a result of deferred items.
Net income for 2020 of approximately $248,000 ($0.02 per basic and diluted share), improved $2.9 million from last year’s net loss of approximately $2.6 million ($0.21 per basic and diluted share).
As of December 31, 2020, working capital totaled approximately $15.1 million, of which $13.3 million was comprised of cash, cash equivalents and trade receivables. This compares with working capital totaling approximately $14.5 million at 2019 year-end, which included $8.6 million of cash, cash equivalents and trade receivables. During 2020, we fulfilled the limit of our stock repurchase program, repurchasing 117,942 shares of our common stock, utilizing cash of approximately $269,000.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
In December 2019, a novel strain of the coronavirus (COVID-19) surfaced, which spread globally and was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization in March 2020. The challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy increased significantly in the first several months of 2020. In response to COVID-19, national and local governments around the world instituted certain measures, including travel bans, prohibitions on group events and gatherings, shutdowns of certain businesses, curfews, shelter-in-place orders and recommendations to practice social distancing. We are considered an “essential business” that is supporting first responders and our manufacturing operations remained open throughout the year. Accordingly, we have implemented certain policies at our offices in accordance with best practices to accommodate, and at times mandate, social distancing, wearing face masks, and remote work practices. Among other things, we have invested in employee safety equipment, additional cleaning supplies and measures, adjusted production lines and workplaces as necessary and adapted new processes for interactions with our suppliers and customers to safely manage our operations. To-date, two staff members at our primary facility in West Melbourne, FL tested positive for COVID-19. These employees were quarantined and worked remotely in accordance with accepted safety practices until after passing subsequent testing.
In planning for the possible disruption of our business, we have taken steps to reduce expenses throughout the Company. This included suspending all Company travel for a period of time, as well as our participation in trade shows and other business meetings, instituting strict inventory control and decreasing expenditures. We also implemented workforce reductions during the second quarter of 2020, decreasing employment and related expenses by approximately 18% as well as suspended the employer’s 401K match. During the first nine months, impact to customer orders was limited as reflected by our sales, which increased compared with the same period last year. Also, while some of our supply chain partners were temporarily closed during the early stages of the pandemic, most of these partners resumed operations and we have been able to procure the materials necessary to manufacture products and fulfill customer orders. Depending on the progression of the pandemic, our ability to obtain necessary supplies and ship finished products to customers may be partly or completely disrupted. Continued progression of the pandemic could result in a decline in customer orders, as our customers could shift purchases to lower-priced or other perceived value offerings or reduce their purchases and inventories due to decreased budgets, reduced access to credit or various other factors, and impair our ability to manufacture our products, which could have a material adverse impact on our results of operations and cash flow. While the current impacts of COVID-19 are reflected in our results of operations, we cannot at this time separate the direct COVID-19 impacts from other factors that cause our performance to vary from year to year. The ultimate duration and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows is dependent on future developments, including the duration and severity of the pandemic, and the related length of its impact on the global economy, which are uncertain and, given the daily evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic and the global responses to curb its spread, cannot be predicted at this time. Even after the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided, we may continue to experience an adverse impact to our business as a result of its national and, to some extent, global economic impact, including any recession that has occurred or may occur in the future. Furthermore, the extent to which our mitigation efforts are successful, if at all, is not presently ascertainable. However, we anticipate that our results of operations in future periods may continue to be adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and its negative effects on global economic conditions. For additional risks relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, see Item 1A. Risk Factors in Part II of this report.
On March 27, 2020, President Trump signed into law the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). Among other things, the CARES Act includes provisions relating to refundable payroll tax credits, deferment of employer side social security payments, net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property. On April 13, 2020, we received an unsecured Loan (as defined below) in the amount of $2,196,335 under the Paycheck Protection Program (or “PPP”) established under the CARES Act, as further discussed below under “Liquidity and Capital Resources.” We intended to use the Loan for qualifying expenses in accordance with the terms of the CARES Act. At the time of application, we believed we qualified to receive the funds pursuant to the PPP.
On April 23, 2020, the SBA, in consultation with the Department of Treasury, issued new guidance that created uncertainty regarding the qualification requirements for a PPP loan. In April 2020, out of an abundance of caution, we repaid the Loan in full.
On May 4, 2020, the Company implemented workforce reductions of approximately 18% to reduce costs and to better position the Company in an uncertain business environment resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company incurred approximately $221,000 in severance costs relating to these workforce reductions, which were recognized in the second quarter of 2020 and was paid according to our normal payroll practices through September 2020.
We may experience fluctuations in our quarterly results, in part, due to governmental customer spending patterns that are influenced by government fiscal year-end budgets and appropriations. We may also experience fluctuations in our quarterly results, in part, due to our sales to federal and state agencies that participate in wildland fire-suppression efforts, which may be greater during the summer season when forest fire activity is heightened. In some years, these factors may cause an increase in sales for the second and third quarters, compared with the first and fourth quarters of the same fiscal year. Such increases in sales may cause quarterly variances in our cash flow from operations and overall financial condition.
Results of Operations
As an aid to understanding our operating results, the following table shows items from our consolidated statements of operations expressed as a percentage of sales:
Fiscal Year 2020 Compared With Fiscal Year 2019
Sales, net
During the year, procurement activities of some customers were likely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, although the precise impact to sales cannot be quantified. Despite any such impact, sales for 2020 grew 10.1% ($4.0 million) to approximately $44.1 million, compared with approximately $40.1 million last year.
The increase in sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 was attributed primarily to federal and state public safety agencies, which included a combination of new and existing customers. Furthermore, during the year we launched, and generated sales from, the first product (BKR 5000) in the BKR Series, a new line of land mobile radios and solutions. Also, for comparative purposes, the prior year’s sales were adversely impacted by the federal government shutdown early in the year.
The BKR Series is envisioned as a comprehensive line of new products with additional new models planned for 2021, including products with multi-band capability. The timing of developing additional BKR Series products and bringing them to market could be impacted by various factors, including potential impacts related to the COVID-19 pandemic. BKR Series products, we believe, should increase our addressable market by expanding the number of federal and other public safety customers that may purchase our products. However, the timing and size of orders from agencies at all levels can be unpredictable and subject to budgets, priorities and other factors. Accordingly, we cannot assure that sales will occur under particular contracts, or that our sales prospects will otherwise be realized.
In 2020, we reorganized our sales resources to focus more effectively on target markets and customers where we can realize sales success. The current funnel of sales prospects includes potential new customers in federal, state and local public safety agencies. We believe the reorganization and our sales funnel better positions us to capture new sales opportunities moving forward.
While the potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic in coming months and quarters remain uncertain, such effects have the potential to adversely impact our customers and our supply chain. Such negative effects on our customers and suppliers could adversely affect our future sales, operations and financial results.
Cost of Products and Gross Profit Margin
Gross profit margins as a percentage of sales for 2020 was approximately 41.0%, compared with 39.0% for the prior year.
Our cost of products and gross profit margins are primarily derived from material, labor and overhead costs, product mix, manufacturing volumes and pricing. The improvement in gross profit margins for 2020 compared with last year was attributed primarily to a more favorable sales mix of higher margin products. Furthermore, during the year we reduced manufacturing operations employment by approximately 21%, as well as other related expenses. These reductions, combined with increased production volumes, enabled us to better utilize and absorb our manufacturing support and overhead expenses, which favorably impacting gross profit margins.
We utilize a combination of internal manufacturing capabilities and contract manufacturing relationships for production efficiencies and to manage material and labor costs. In the future we anticipate expanding our utilization of internal manufacturing resources. We believe that our internal manufacturing capabilities and contract relationships or comparable alternatives will continue to be available to us. Although in the future we may encounter new product cost and competitive pricing pressures, the extent of their impact on gross margins, if any, is uncertain.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses consist of sales, marketing, commissions, engineering, product development, management information systems, accounting, headquarters and non-cash, share-based employee compensation expenses.
SG&A expenses for 2020 decreased 15.0% ($3.0 million) to approximately $17.0 million, or 38.6% of sales, compared with approximately $20.0 million, or 50.0% of sales, for the previous year.
Engineering and product development expenses for 2020 decreased $1.9 million, or 19.8%, to approximately $7.9 million (17.8% of sales), compared with approximately $9.8 million (24.5% of sales) for the previous year. Product development expenses related to an anticipated new line of portable and mobile radios with enhanced features, the BKR Series, continued to decrease as development activities migrated away from external resources to our new internal engineering team. This team is primarily involved with development of the BKR Series, including our planned multiband product. The precise date for developing and introducing new products is uncertain and can be impacted by, among other things, the potential effects of the COVID-19 pandemic in coming months.
Marketing and selling expenses for 2020 declined by approximately $1.0 million, or 19.0%, to approximately $4.2 million (9.5% of sales), compared with approximately $5.2 million (13.0% of sales) last year. The decreases are attributed to reductions in sales and go-to-market employment, as well as other sales and marketing related expenses.
Other general and administrative expenses for 2020 totaled approximately $4.9 million (11.2% of sales), compared with approximately $5.0 million (12.5% of sales) for the previous year. Decreases in employment and other headquarters expenses were more than offset by non-recurring severance costs recognized in the second quarter of 2020 related to our reduction in employment.
Operating Income (Loss)
For 2020, our operating income improved by $5.4 million to approximately $1.0 million (2.4% of sales), compared with an operating loss of approximately $4.4 million (10.9% of sales) for the prior year. The improved operating income for 2020 was primarily attributed to sales growth and higher gross profit margins combined with reduced employment and other operating expenses.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest (Expense) Income
We recorded net interest expense of approximately $8,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with net interest income of approximately $150,000 last year. Reduced interest income was primarily the result of lower cash balances and interest rates.
Gain/Loss on Investment in Securities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized an unrealized loss of $620,000 on our investment in FGF, compared with an unrealized gain of $716,000 for the previous year.
Other Expense
For 2020, we recognized other expense totaling approximately $169,000, compared with approximately $104,000 last year. Other expenses were comprised primarily of foreign exchange transaction losses related to sales under a Canadian dollar-denominated contract and other investment management expenses.
Income Tax/Expense Benefit
We recorded an income tax expense of approximately $3,000 for 2020, compared with and income tax benefit of approximately $987,000 last year.
Our income tax provision is based on management’s estimate of the effective tax rate for the full year. The tax provision (benefit) in any period will be affected by, among other things, permanent, as well as temporary, differences in the deductibility of certain items, in addition to changes in tax legislation. As a result, we may experience significant fluctuations in the effective book tax rate (that is, tax expense divided by pre-tax book income) from period to period.
As of December 31, 2020, our net deferred tax assets totaled approximately $4.3 million, and were primarily derived from research and development tax credits, operating loss carryforwards and accrued expenses.
In order to fully utilize the net deferred tax assets, we will need to generate sufficient taxable income in future years. We analyze all positive and negative evidence to determine if, based on the weight of available evidence, we are more likely than not to realize the benefit of the net deferred tax assets. The recognition of the net deferred tax assets and related tax benefits is based upon our conclusions regarding, among other considerations, estimates of future earnings based on information currently available and current and anticipated customers, contracts and product introductions, as well as historical operating results and certain tax planning strategies.
Based on our analysis of all available evidence, both positive and negative, we have concluded that we do not have the ability to generate sufficient taxable income in the necessary period to utilize the entire benefit for the deferred tax asset. Accordingly, we established a valuation allowance of $98,000. We cannot presently estimate what, if any, changes to the valuation of our deferred tax assets may be deemed appropriate in the future. If we incur future losses, it may be necessary to record additional valuation allowance related to the deferred tax assets recognized as of December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities totaled approximately $4.4 million, compared with cash used in operating activities of approximately $2.5 million last year. Cash provided by operating activities for 2020 was primarily related to net income and a decrease in inventory, combined with increases in depreciation and amortization, accrued compensation and related taxes, and deferred revenue, as well as an unrealized loss on our investment in FGF. These items were partially offset by increases in accounts receivable, and a decrease in accrued warranty expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net income of approximately $248,000, compared with a net loss of approximately $2.6 million for the prior year. Net inventories decreased during 2020 by approximately $4.1 million, compared with an increase of approximately $2.0 million for the prior year. The decrease for the year was primarily attributed to product sales combined with our inventory reduction program. Depreciation and amortization totaled approximately $1.3 million for 2020, compared with approximately $1.2 million for the prior year, primarily due to capital expenditures related to manufacturing and engineering equipment. Accrued compensation and related taxes for 2020 increased approximately $364,000, compared with a decrease of $743,000 last year. The increase in 2020 was the result of incentive compensation related to improved sales and operating results. Deferred revenue for 2020 increased approximately $585,000, compared with approximately $947,000 for the prior year, which was attributed primarily to the sales of extended warranties. Unrealized losses on securities for 2020 totaled approximately $620,000, compared with gains of approximately $716,000 for last year. For additional information pertaining to our investment in securities, refer to Note 6 (Investment in Securities) to the consolidated financial statements included in this report. Accounts receivable for 2020 increased approximately $2.5 million, compared with a decrease of approximately $1.8 million last year. The increase for the current year was attributable to the timing of sales later in the year that had not yet completed their collection cycle. Accrued warranty expenses for 2020 decreased approximately $457,000, compared with approximately $298,000 last year. The decrease for the year is attributed primarily to manufacturing operations and quality improvements.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled approximately $946,000 and was attributed to purchases of property, plant and equipment. For the same period last year, cash used in investing activities totaled approximately $2.5 million, and was also attributed to purchases of property, plant and equipment.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash of approximately $1.3 million was used in financing activities. During the year we received proceeds totaling approximately $2.2 million under the PPP, which were repaid in full within the same period. We also used cash for our capital return program, which included quarterly dividends totaling approximately $1.0 million and stock repurchases totaling approximately $269,000. Our stock repurchase program terminated in April 2020 and was not renewed. Last year, approximately $1.0 million was used to pay dividends and approximately $1.0 million was used for stock repurchases. Last year we received $425,000 from U.S. Bank Equipment Finance for the purchase of manufacturing equipment items, pursuant to the Master Loan Agreement, described below.
On April 13, 2020, BK Technologies, Inc., our wholly-owned operating subsidiary, received approval and funding pursuant to a promissory note (the “PPP Note”) evidencing an unsecured loan in the amount of $2,196,335 (the “Loan”) under the PPP. The PPP was established under the CARES Act and is administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”). The Loan was made through JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. (“JPMC”). We intended to use the Loan for qualifying expenses in accordance with the terms of the CARES Act. At the time of application, we believed we qualified to receive the funds pursuant to the PPP.
On April 23, 2020, the SBA, in consultation with the Department of Treasury, issued new guidance that created uncertainty regarding the qualification requirements for a PPP loan. In April 2020, out of an abundance of caution, we repaid the loan in full.
On May 4, 2020, the Company implemented workforce reductions of approximately 18% to reduce costs and to better position the Company in an uncertain business environment resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company incurred approximately $221,000 in severance costs relating to these workforce reductions, which were recognized in the second quarter of 2020 and paid under our customary payroll practices through September 2020.
On January 30, 2020, BK Technologies, Inc., our wholly-owned subsidiary, entered into a $5.0 million Credit Agreement and a related Line of Credit Note (the “Note” and collectively with the Credit Agreement, as modified by a Note Modification Agreement, the “Credit Agreement”) with JPMC. The Credit Agreement provides for a revolving line of credit of up to $5.0 million, with availability under the line of credit subject to a borrowing base calculated as a percentage of accounts receivable and inventory. The line of credit was modified on January 26, 2021 to, among other things, extend the expiration date to January 31, 2022. Proceeds of borrowings under the Credit Agreement may be used for general corporate purposes. The line of credit is collateralized by a blanket lien on all personal property of BK Technologies, Inc. pursuant to the terms of the Continuing Security Agreement with JPMC. We and each subsidiary of BK Technologies, Inc. are guarantors of BK Technologies, Inc.’s obligations under the Credit Agreement, in accordance with the terms of the Continuing Guaranty.
Borrowings under the Credit Agreement will bear interest at a rate per annum equal to one-month LIBOR (or zero if the LIBOR is less than zero) plus a margin of 1.90% (2.054% as of December 31, 2020). The line of credit, as modified, is to be repaid in monthly payments of interest only, payable in arrears, commencing on February 1, 2020, with all outstanding principal and interest to be payable in full at maturity, January 31, 2022.
The Credit Agreement contains certain customary restrictive covenants, including restrictions on liens, indebtedness, loans and guarantees, acquisitions and mergers, sales of assets, and stock repurchases by BK Technologies, Inc. The Credit Agreement contains one financial covenant requiring BK Technologies, Inc. to maintain a tangible net worth of at least $20.0 million at any fiscal quarter end.
The Credit Agreement provides for customary events of default, including: (1) failure to pay principal, interest or fees under the Credit Agreement when due and payable; (2) failure to comply with other covenants and agreements contained in the Credit Agreement and the other documents executed in connection therewith; (3) the making of false or inaccurate representations and warranties; (4) defaults under other agreements with JPMC or under other debt or other obligations of BK Technologies, Inc.; (5) money judgments and material adverse changes; (6) a change in control or ceasing to operate business in the ordinary course; and (7) certain events of bankruptcy or insolvency. Upon the occurrence of an event of default, JPMC may declare the entire unpaid balance immediately due and payable and/or exercise any and all remedial and other rights under the Credit Agreement.
BK Technologies, Inc. was in compliance with all covenants under the Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2020 and the date of filing this report. As of December 31, 2020 and the date of filing this report, there were no borrowings outstanding under the Credit Agreement and there was approximately $5.0 million of borrowing available under the Credit Agreement.
Our cash and cash equivalents balance at December 31, 2020 was approximately $6.8 million. We believe these funds, combined with our cost-saving initiatives, anticipated cash generated from operations and borrowing availability under our Credit Agreement, are sufficient to meet our working capital requirements for the foreseeable future. We may, depending on a variety of factors, including market conditions for capital raises, the trading price of our common stock and opportunities for uses of any proceeds, engage in public or private offerings of equity or debt securities to increase our capital resources. However, financial and economic conditions, including those resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, could limit our access to credit and impair our ability to raise capital, if needed, on acceptable terms or at all. We also face other risks that could impact our business, liquidity and financial condition. For a description of these risks, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors” set forth in this report.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance-sheet arrangements.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02 “Leases,” which amended leasing guidance by requiring companies to recognize a right-of-use (“ROU”) asset and a lease liability for all operating and capital (finance) leases with lease terms greater than twelve months. The lease liability is equal to the present value of lease payments. The lease asset is based on the lease liability, subject to adjustment, such as for initial direct costs. For income statement purposes, leases continue to be classified as operating or capital (finance), with lease expense in both cases calculated substantially the same as under the prior leasing guidance. The updated guidance became effective for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2018. The Company adopted the new guidance on January 1, 2019. Adoption resulted in the recognition of ROU assets and lease liabilities on the consolidated financial statements. Based on the Company’s lease portfolio as of January 1, 2019, which consisted solely of operating leases, the Company recognized approximately $2.9 million of ROU assets and $3.0 million of lease liabilities on its consolidated financial statements.. Refer to Note 7 (Leases) for further details on leases.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-15, “Intangibles-Goodwill and Other-Internal-Use Software (Subtopic 350-40): Customer’s Accounting for Implementation Costs Incurred in a Cloud Computing Arrangement That Is a Service Contract,” to help entities evaluate the accounting for fees paid by a customer in a cloud computing arrangement (hosting arrangement) by providing guidance for determining when the arrangement includes a software license. The amendments in ASU 2018-15 align the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred in a hosting arrangement that is a service contract with the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred to develop or obtain internal-use software (and hosting arrangements that include an internal use software license). The accounting for the service element of a hosting arrangement that is a service contract is not affected by the amendments in ASU 2018-15. The amendments in ASU 2018-15 became effective for fiscal years and interim periods beginning after December 15, 2019. Early adoption was permitted, including adoption in any interim period. The Company adopted the new guidance in the fourth quarter of 2018, with no material impact on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, “Disclosure Framework-Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement,” which modifies the disclosure requirements on fair value measurements in Topic 820, Fair Value Measurement, including the removal of certain disclosure requirements. The amendments in the ASU are effective for all entities for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2019. Early adoption was permitted upon issuance of the ASU. The Company adopted this guidance as of January 1, 2020, and the adoption did not have an impact on its consolidated financial statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The Company does not discuss recent pronouncements that are not anticipated to have an impact on or are unrelated to its financial condition, results of operations, cash flows or disclosures.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our revenue recognition process and our more subjective accounting estimation processes affect our reported revenues and current assets and are, therefore, critical in assessing our financial and operating status. The processes for determining the allowance for collection of trade receivables, allowance for slow-moving, excess and obsolete inventory, allowance for product warranty, and income taxes involve certain assumptions that, if incorrect, could create an adverse impact on our operations and financial position.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
The allowance for doubtful accounts was approximately $50,000 on gross trade receivables of approximately $6.5 million as of December 31, 2020, as compared with $50,000 on gross trade receivables of approximately $4.0 million as of December 31, 2019. This allowance is used to state trade receivables at a net realizable value or the amount that we estimate will be collected on our gross receivables as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. Because the amount that we will actually collect on the receivables outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 cannot be known with certainty, we rely on prior experience. Our historical collection losses have typically been infrequent, with write-offs of trade receivables being significantly less than 1% of sales during past years. Accordingly, we have maintained a general allowance of up to approximately 5% of the gross trade receivables balance in order to allow for future collection losses that arise from customer accounts that do not indicate the inability to pay but turn out to have such an inability. Currently, our general allowance on trade receivables is approximately 0.8% of gross receivables. As revenues and total receivables increase, the allowance balance may also increase. We also maintain a specific allowance for customer accounts that we know may not be collectible due to various reasons, such as bankruptcy and other customer liquidity issues. We analyze our trade receivables portfolio based on the age of each customer’s invoice. In this way, we can identify those accounts that are more likely than not to have collection problems. We may reserve a portion or all of the customer’s balance. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had no specific allowance on trade receivables.
Slow-moving, Excess and Obsolete Inventory
The allowance for slow-moving, excess and obsolete inventory was approximately $520,000 and $823,000 at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The allowance for slow-moving, excess, and obsolete inventory is used to state our inventories at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Because the amount of inventory that we will actually recoup through sales cannot be known with certainty at any particular time, we rely on past sales experience, future sales forecasts and our strategic business plans. Generally, in analyzing our inventory levels, we classify inventory as having been used or unused during the past year and establish an allowance based upon several factors, including, but not limited to, business forecasts, inventory quantities and historical usage profile. Supplemental to the aforementioned analysis, specific inventory items are reviewed individually by management. Based on the review, considering business levels, future prospects, new products and technology changes, management, using its business judgment, may adjust the valuation of specific inventory items to reflect an accurate valuation estimate. Management also performs a determination of net realizable value for all finished goods with a selling price below cost. For all such items, the inventory is valued at not more than the selling price less cost, if any, to sell.
Allowance for Product Warranty
We offer two-year standard warranties to our customers, depending on the specific product and terms of the customer purchase agreement. Our typical warranties require us to repair and replace defective products during the warranty period at no cost to the customer. At the time the product revenue is recognized, we record a liability for estimated costs under our warranties. The costs are estimated based on historical experience. We periodically assess the adequacy of our recorded liability for product warranties and adjust the amount as necessary.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the enacted tax rates expected to apply in the period in which the deferred tax asset or liability is expected to be realized. The effect of changes in net deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized on our consolidated balance sheets and consolidated statements of operations in the period in which the change is recognized. Valuation allowances are provided to the extent that it is more likely than not that some portion, or all, of deferred tax assets will not be realized. In determining whether a tax asset is realizable, we consider, among other things, estimates of future earnings based on information currently available, current and anticipated customers, contracts and new product introductions, as well as recent operating results and certain tax planning strategies. If we fail to achieve the future results anticipated in the calculation and valuation of net deferred tax assets, we may be required to increase the valuation allowance related to our deferred tax assets in the future.
Forward-Looking Statements
We believe that it is important to communicate our future expectations to our security holders and to the public. This report, therefore, contains statements about future events and expectations which are “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Sections 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and 21E of the Exchange Act, including the statements about our plans, objectives, expectations and prospects under the heading “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.” You can expect to identify these statements by forward-looking words such as “may,” “might,” “could,” “would,” “should,” “will,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “plan,” “estimate,” “project,” “expect,” “intend,” “seek,” “are encouraged” and other similar expressions. Any statement contained in this report that is not a statement of historical fact may be deemed to be a forward-looking statement. Forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, the following: changes or advances in technology; the success of our LMR product line; successful introduction of new products and technologies, including our ability to successfully develop and sell our anticipated new multiband product and other related products in the planned new BKR Series product line; competition in the LMR industry; general economic and business conditions, including federal, state and local government budget deficits and spending limitations and any impact from a prolonged shutdown of the U.S. Government; the availability, terms and deployment of capital; reliance on contract manufacturers and suppliers; risks associated with fixed-price contacts; heavy reliance on sales to agencies of the U.S. Government and our ability to comply with the requirements of contracts, laws and regulations related to such sales; allocations by government agencies among multiple approved suppliers under existing agreements; our ability to comply with U.S. tax laws and utilize deferred tax assets; our ability to attract and retain executive officers, skilled workers and key personnel; our ability to manage our growth; our ability to identify potential candidates for, and consummate, acquisition, disposition or investment transactions, and risks incumbent to being a noncontrolling interest stockholder in a corporation; impact of our capital allocation strategy; risks related to maintaining our brand and reputation; impact of government regulation; rising health care costs; our business with manufacturers located in other countries, including changes in the U.S. Government and foreign governments’ trade and tariff policies; our inventory and debt levels; protection of our intellectual property rights; fluctuation in our operating results and stock price; acts of war or terrorism, natural disasters and other catastrophic events; any infringement claims; data security breaches, cyber attacks and other factors impacting our technology systems; availability of adequate insurance coverage; maintenance of our NYSE American listing; risks related to being a holding company; and the effect on our stock price and ability to raise equity capital of future sales of shares of our common stock.
Although we believe that the plans, objectives, expectations and prospects reflected in or suggested by our forward-looking statements are reasonable, those statements involve risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements, and we can give no assurance that our plans, objectives, expectations and prospects will be achieved.
Important factors that might cause our actual results to differ materially from the results contemplated by the forward-looking statements are contained in “Part I-Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report and in our subsequent filings with the SEC. We assume no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements made in this report, whether as a result of new information, future events, changes in assumptions or otherwise, after the date of this report. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements.