Item 7 Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the financial statements and the related notes set forth in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” The following discussion also contains forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties. See Part I, “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for a discussion of the forward-looking statements contained below and Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” for a discussion of certain risks that could cause our actual results to differ materially from the results anticipated in such forward-looking statements.
This discussion and analysis deals with comparisons of material changes in the consolidated financial statements for fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019. For the comparison of fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2018, see the Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in Part II, Item 7 of our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 27, 2020.
Overview
We have created a comprehensive cloud-based software platform designed to transform and modernize accounting and finance operations for organizations of all types and sizes. Our secure, scalable platform supports critical accounting processes such as the financial close, account reconciliations, intercompany accounting, and controls assurance. By introducing software to automate these processes and to enable them to function continuously, we empower our customers to improve the integrity of their financial reporting, increase efficiency in their accounting and finance processes and enhance real-time visibility into their operations.
At December 31, 2020, we had 291,873 individual users across 3,433 customers. Additionally, we continue to build strategic relationships with technology vendors, professional services firms, business process outsourcers, and resellers.
We are a holding company and conduct our operations through our wholly-owned subsidiary, BlackLine Systems, Inc. (“BlackLine Systems”). BlackLine Systems funded its business with investments from our founder and cash flows from operations until September 3, 2013. On September 3, 2013, we acquired BlackLine Systems, and Silver Lake Sumeru and Iconiq acquired a controlling interest in us, which we refer to as the “2013 Acquisition.” The 2013 Acquisition was accounted for as a business combination under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”) and resulted in a change in accounting basis as of the date of the 2013 Acquisition.
Our cloud-based products include Account Reconciliations, Cash Application, Compliance, Consolidation Integrity Manager, Intercompany Hub, Journal Entry, Task Management, Transaction Matching, and Variance Analysis. These products are offered to customers as scalable solutions that support critical accounting processes, such as the financial close, account reconciliations, cash application, intercompany accounting, and compliance.
We derived approximately 93% of our revenue from subscriptions to our cloud-based software platform and approximately 7% from professional services for the year ended December 31, 2020. The majority of subscriptions are sold through one-year non-cancellable contracts, with a growing percentage of subscriptions sold through three-year contracts. We price our subscriptions based on a number of factors, primarily the number of users having access to the products and the number of products purchased by the customer. Subscription revenue is recognized ratably over the term of the customer contract. The first year of subscription fees are typically payable within 30 days after execution of a contract, and thereafter upon renewal.
Professional services consist of implementation and consulting services. Although our platform is ready to use immediately after a new customer has access to it, we typically help customers implement our solutions for a fixed fee, which is initially recorded as deferred revenue and recognized on a proportional performance basis as the services are performed. We also provide consulting services to help customers optimize the use of our products. We charge customers for our consulting services on a time-and-materials basis and we recognize that revenue as services are performed.
We typically invoice customers annually in advance for annual and multi-year subscriptions and invoice in advance or on a time-and-materials basis for professional services. We record amounts invoiced for portions of annual subscription periods that have not occurred or services that have not been performed as deferred revenue on our consolidated balance sheet.
We sell our solutions primarily through our direct sales force, which leverages our relationships with technology vendors, professional services firms and business process outsourcers. In particular, our solution integrates with SAP’s ERP solutions. In the fourth quarter of 2018, SAP became part of the reseller channel that we use in the ordinary course of business. SAP has the ability to resell our solutions, as an SAP solution-extension (“SolEx”), for which we receive a percentage of the revenues.
Our ability to maximize the lifetime value of our customer relationships will depend, in part, on the willingness of customers to purchase additional user licenses and products from us. We rely on our sales and customer
success teams to support and grow our existing customers by maintaining high customer satisfaction and educating customers on the value all our products provide.
The length of our sales cycle depends on the size of a potential customer and contract, as well as the type of solution or product being purchased. The sales cycle for our global enterprise customers is generally longer than that of our mid-market customers. In addition, the length of the sales cycle tends to increase for larger contracts and for more complex, strategic products like Intercompany Hub. As we continue to focus on increasing our average contract size and selling more strategic products, we expect our sales cycle to lengthen and become less predictable, which could cause variability in our results for any particular period.
We have historically signed a high percentage of agreements with new customers, as well as renewal agreements with existing customers, in the fourth quarter of each year and usually during the last month of the quarter. This can be attributed to buying patterns typical in the software industry. As the terms of most of our customer agreements are measured in full year increments, agreements initially entered into during the fourth quarter or last month of any quarter will generally come up for renewal at that same time in subsequent years. This seasonality is reflected in our revenues, though the impact to overall annual or quarterly revenues is minimal due to the fact that we recognize subscription revenue ratably over the term of the customer contract.
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, we had revenues totaling $351.7 million, $289.0 million, and $227.8 million, respectively, and we incurred net losses attributable to BlackLine, Inc. of $46.9 million, $32.5 million, and $28.7 million, respectively.
COVID-19 Update
In December 2019, the emergence of a novel coronavirus, or COVID-19, was reported and in March 2020, the World Health Organization, or WHO, characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic. We responded to the pandemic by creating an executive task force to monitor the COVID-19 situation daily, immediately restricted non-essential travel and enabled work-from-home protocols. Shortly thereafter, and in line with guidance provided by government agencies and international organizations, we restricted all travel, mandated a work-from-home policy across our global workforce, and moved all in-person customer-facing events to virtual ones. We expect these restrictions to stay in effect during the first half of 2021. We also responded with COVID-19 customer-relief programs to help our community of global accounting and finance professionals in these challenging times. We have offered free access to our entire training library. We also offered the Task Management and Reporting modules complimentary for six months to existing customers to enable a more effective remote close. In addition, we announced complimentary coaching sessions with our existing customers. We have been recognized by The Stevie International Business Awards and the CEO World Awards for our commitment to helping ensure business continuity and fostering well-being for both customers and employees in response to, and throughout the COVID-19 pandemic.
We have continued to see purchasing decisions being deferred due to COVID-19 and a reduction on new business pipeline and large deals. Moreover, we have experienced and expect to continue to experience delays in deals in EMEA and North America mid-market, as well as large digital transformation deals. We further expect delays in deals arising out of our SAP partnership, all which will impact our customers and prospects, and our financial results for fiscal 2021. We have also seen a decrease in travel-related expenses and advertising and trade show expenses.
The broader implications of the global emergence of COVID-19 on our business, operating results, and overall financial performance remain uncertain and depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, impact on our customers and our sales cycles, impact on our partners and employees, and impact on the economic environment and financial markets, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. We are conducting business as usual with certain limitations to employee travel, employee work locations, and marketing events, among other modifications. We have observed other companies taking precautionary and preemptive actions to address COVID-19, and the effects it has had and is expected to have on business and the economy. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we have seen certain new and existing customers halt or decrease investment in infrastructure, and we have seen that certain of our current and potential customers take actions to reduce operating expenses and moderate cash flows, including by delaying sales and requesting extended billing and payment terms. The risk of a cybersecurity incident occurring has increased as more companies and individuals are working remotely and through less secure network connections. As a result, we have increased our investments in network security to help mitigate against such an incident. We cannot provide assurances that our preventative efforts will be successful. We will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions that alter our
business operations, as may be required by federal, state, or local authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, partners, suppliers, and stockholders.
Acquisition of Rimilia
On October 2, 2020, we completed the acquisition (the “Rimilia Acquisition”) of Rimilia Holdings Ltd. (“Rimilia”) for consideration of $120.0 million payable at the closing of the acquisition with additional cash payments of up to $30.0 million payable upon certain earnout conditions being met. We funded the Rimilia Acquisition on September 30, 2020 with existing cash on-hand, in advance of the closing. The acquisition extends our capabilities into accounts receivable automation through enabling cash application and collection solutions, accelerating our larger, long-term plan for transforming and modernizing Finance and Accounting. This acquisition was not a significant acquisition under Regulation S-X.
Key Metrics
We regularly review a number of metrics, including the following key metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections, and make strategic decisions. Each of the metrics below exclude the impact of on-premise software.
Dollar-based net revenue retention rate. We believe that dollar-based net revenue retention rate is an important metric to measure the long-term value of customer agreements and our ability to retain and grow our relationships with existing customers over time. We calculate dollar-based net revenue retention rate as the implied monthly subscription and support revenue at the end of a period for the base set of customers from which we generated subscription revenue in the year prior to the calculation, divided by the implied monthly subscription and support revenue one year prior to the date of calculation for that same customer base. This calculation does not reflect implied monthly subscription and support revenue for new customers added during the one-year period but does include the effect of customers who terminated during the period. We define implied monthly subscription and support revenue as the total amount of minimum subscription and support revenue contractually committed to, under each of our customer agreements over the entire term of the agreement, divided by the number of months in the term of the agreement. At December 31, 2020, our dollar-based net revenue retention rate declined primarily due to lower net growth in existing customer accounts. We believe that the financial challenges caused by COVID-19 contributed to lower technology spending by our existing customers. Our ability to maximize the lifetime value of our customer relationships will depend, in part, on the willingness of the customer to purchase additional user licenses and products from us. We rely on our customer success and sales teams to support and grow our existing customers by maintaining high customer satisfaction and educating the customer on the value all our products provide.
Number of customers. We believe that our ability to expand our customer base is an indicator of our market penetration and the growth of our business. We define a customer as an entity with an active subscription agreement as of the measurement date. In situations where an organization has multiple subsidiaries or divisions, each entity that is invoiced as a separate entity is treated as a separate customer. However, where an existing customer requests its invoice be divided for the sole purpose of restructuring its internal billing arrangement without any incremental increase in revenue, such customer continues to be treated as a single customer. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, no single customer accounted for more than 10% of our total revenues.
Number of users. Since our customers generally pay fees based on the number of users of our platform within their organization, we believe the total number of users is an indicator of the growth of our business. We are also beginning to sell an increasing number of non-user based strategic products, such as Transaction Matching and Intercompany Hub.
Key Components of our Results of Operations
Revenues
Subscription and support. The majority of subscriptions are sold through one-year non-cancellable contracts and a growing percentage of subscriptions are sold through three-year contracts. Fees are based on a number of factors, including the solutions subscribed to by the customer and the number of users having access to the solutions. The first year of subscription fees are typically payable within 30 days after execution of a contract, and thereafter upon renewal. We initially record the subscription fees as deferred revenue and recognize revenue ratably over the term of the contract. At any time during the subscription period, customers may increase their number of users and add products. Additional fees are payable for the remainder of the initial or renewed contract term. Customers may only reduce their number of users or subscription to products upon renewal of their arrangement. Revenues from subscriptions to our cloud-based software platform composed approximately 93% of our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Subscription and support revenues also include revenues associated with sales of on-premise software licenses and related support. Prior to our migration to SaaS in 2012, we licensed our legacy on-premise software. We no longer develop any new applications or functionality for our legacy on-premise software.
Professional services. We offer our customers implementation and consulting services. Although our platform is ready to use immediately after a new customer has access to it, we typically help customers implement our solutions for a fixed fee. We also provide consulting and training services to help customers optimize the use of our products. These services are considered distinct performance obligations. Professional services do not result in significant customization of the subscription service. We apply the practical expedient to recognize professional services revenue when we have the right to invoice based on time and materials incurred. Professional services revenues composed approximately 7% of our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020.
For a description of our revenue accounting policies, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates.”
Cost of Revenues
Subscription and support cost of revenues. Subscription and support cost of revenues primarily consists of amortization of acquired developed technology costs, salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation associated with our hosting operations and support personnel, data center costs related to hosting our cloud-based software, and amortization of capitalized internal-use software costs. We also allocate a portion of overhead to subscription and support cost of revenues.
Professional services costs of revenues. Costs associated with providing professional services primarily consist of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation associated with our implementation personnel. These costs are expensed as incurred when the services are performed. We also allocate a portion of overhead to professional services cost of revenues.
Operating Expenses
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel costs of our sales and marketing employees, including salaries, sales commissions and incentives, benefits and stock-based compensation expense, travel and related costs, commissions paid in connection with our strategic relationships, outside consulting fees, marketing programs, including lead generation, costs of our annual conference, advertising, and trade shows, other event expenses, and allocated overhead costs. Sales and marketing expenses also include amortization of customer relationship intangible assets. We defer sales and partner commissions and amortize them over an estimated period of benefit of five years. We expect the annual trend in sales and marketing expenses to continue to increase as we expand our direct sales teams and increase sales through our strategic relationships and resellers.
Research and development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation associated with our engineering, product and quality assurance personnel and allocated overhead costs. Research and development expenses also include the cost of third-party contractors. Other than internal-use software development costs that qualify for capitalization, research and development costs are expensed as incurred. We expect research and development costs to increase as we develop new solutions and make improvements to our existing platform.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation associated with our executive, finance, legal, human resources, compliance, and other administrative personnel, accounting, auditing and legal professional services fees, recruitment costs, other corporate-related expenses, transaction-related costs, and allocated overhead costs. General and administrative expenses also include amortization of covenant not to compete and trade name intangible assets, and the change in fair value of contingent consideration. We expect that general and administrative expenses will increase as we incur the costs of compliance associated with being a publicly-traded company, including legal, audit and consulting fees.
Interest Income
Interest income primarily consists of earnings on our cash and cash equivalents and our marketable securities.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest expense associated with our Convertible Senior Notes (the “Notes”) issued in August 2019.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes
We are subject to federal and state income taxes in the United States and taxes in foreign jurisdictions. We use the liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under the liability method, deferred taxes are determined based on the temporary differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities, using tax rates expected to be in effect during the years in which the bases differences are expected to reverse.
We record a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets to the extent that realization of the deferred tax assets, including consideration of our deferred tax liabilities, is not more likely than not. For the year ended December 31, 2020, for both federal and state income taxes, our deferred assets exceeded our deferred tax liabilities and because of our recent history of operating losses we believe that the realization of the deferred tax assets is currently not more likely than not. Accordingly, we have recorded a valuation allowance against our federal, state, and certain foreign deferred tax assets.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe the non-GAAP measures below are useful to us and our investors in evaluating our business. These non-GAAP financial measures are useful because they provide consistency and comparability with our past performance, facilitate period-to-period comparisons of operations and facilitate comparisons with other peer companies, many of which use similar non-GAAP financial measures to supplement their GAAP results.
Non-GAAP Gross Profit and Non-GAAP Gross Margin. Non-GAAP gross profit is defined as GAAP revenues less GAAP cost of revenue adjusted for the amortization of acquired developed technology and stock-based compensation. Non-GAAP gross margin is defined as non-GAAP gross profit divided by GAAP revenues. We believe that presenting non-GAAP gross margin is useful to investors as it eliminates the impact of certain non-cash expenses and allows a direct comparison of gross margin between periods.
Non-GAAP Net Income. Non-GAAP net income is defined as GAAP net loss adjusted for the impact of the provision for (benefit from) income taxes related to acquisitions, amortization of acquired intangible assets, stock-based compensation, the amortization of debt discount and issuance costs, the change in the fair value of contingent consideration, transaction-related costs, legal settlement gains, and the adjustment to the value of the redeemable non-controlling interest to the redemption amount. We believe that presenting non-GAAP net income is useful to investors as it eliminates the impact of items that have been affected by the 2013 Acquisition, the Runbook Acquisition, and the Rimilia Acquisition, certain non-cash expenses, and other costs related to non-recurring non-operating events in order to allow a direct comparison of net loss between current and future periods
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The following table presents a reconciliation of gross profit, gross margin, and net loss, the most comparable GAAP measures to non-GAAP gross profit, non-GAAP gross margin and non-GAAP net income:
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth selected historical consolidated statements of operations data, which should be read in conjunction with Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates, Liquidity and Capital Resources, and Contractual Obligations and Commitments included in this Item 7, as well as Quantitative and Qualitative
Disclosures About Market Risk and the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Consolidated statements of operations information was as follows (in thousands):
Revenues
The increase in revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to an increase in the number of customers, an increase in the number of users added by
existing customers, and an increase in non-user based strategic product sales. The total number of customers and users increased by 14% and 9%, respectively, during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of revenues
The increase in cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to a $10.0 million increase in salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation; a $2.7 million increase in computer software expenses; a $1.7 million increase in amortization of internally developed technology; and a $0.6 million increase in professional services expense. These increases were partially offset by a $3.1 million decrease in depreciation and amortization; a $1.5 million decrease in travel-related expenses; and a $0.8 million decrease in data center costs. The increase in salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation was primarily driven by a 27% increase in average cost of revenues-related headcount from the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in computer software expenses was primarily driven by purchases of additional server licenses and cloud hosting charges, driven by growth in our customer base. Amortization of our capitalized software development costs increased due to larger total capitalized costs as we expanded the functionality of our solutions. Depreciation and amortization expense decreased primarily due to a decrease in amortization related to acquired developed technology from the 2013 Acquisition, which became fully amortized in the year ended December 31, 2019. Travel-related expenses decreased primarily as a result of travel restrictions due to COVID-19.
Sales and marketing
The increase in sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to a $30.1 million increase in salaries, sales commissions, stock-based compensation, and incentives; a $1.3 million increase in company event-related expenses; a $1.0 million increase in computer software expenses; and a $0.9 million increase in depreciation and amortization. These increases were partially offset by a $7.2 million decrease in travel-related costs; a $5.1 million decrease in partner referral fees; and a $4.9 million decrease in advertising and trade show expenses. The increase in salaries, sales commissions, and incentives was primarily driven by an increase in headcount and revenue growth. Our sales and marketing average headcount increased 20% from the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2020. Computer software expenses increased due to the additional software licenses driven by an increase in average sales and marketing headcount. Travel-related expenses decreased primarily as a result of COVID-19 travel restrictions. The decrease in partner referral fees was primarily driven by the amendment of the previous SAP agreement in the fourth quarter of 2018 and the addition of SAP to our channel of resellers. The decrease in advertising and trade show expenses was primarily a result of restrictions related to live events due to COVID-19.
Research and development
The increase in research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to a $14.9 million increase in salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation; a $2.7 million increase in computer software expenses; and a $1.8 million increase in professional services expense. These increases were partially offset by a $5.6 million increase in capitalized software costs, which resulted in a decrease in net expenses, and a $0.6 million decrease in travel-related costs. The increase in salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation was primarily driven by a 33% increase in average headcount from the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in computer software expenses was primarily driven by our migration to the public cloud and the purchase of additional software licenses driven by an increase in average research and development headcount. The increase in professional services expense was primarily driven by external consultant fees as part of our investment in products, features, and functionality buildouts. Capitalized software costs increased due to significant new enhancement initiatives related to the functionality of our solutions. Travel-related expenses decreased primarily as a result of COVID-19 travel restrictions.
General and administrative
The increase in general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to an $8.8 million increase in salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation; $4.7 million of transaction-related costs; and a $2.2 million increase in professional services expense. These increases were partially offset by a $0.8 million decrease in travel-related expenses. The increase in salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation was primarily driven by an 18% increase in average headcount from the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2020. Transaction-related costs in the period related to the Rimilia Acquisition, which closed in October 2020. Travel-related expenses decreased primarily as a result of COVID-19 travel restrictions.
Interest income
The decrease in interest income during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to a decrease in average interest rates, partially offset by interest earned on higher cash balances in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Interest expense
The increase in interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to increased amortization of the debt discount on the Notes. The notes were issued in the third quarter of 2019 and, as such, there was less amortization in 2019 as compared to a full year in 2020. The increase was also, to a lesser extent, related to increased interest accrued during the period on the outstanding balance on the Notes in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Provision for income taxes
We are subject to federal and state income taxes in the United States and taxes in foreign jurisdictions. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our annual estimated effective tax rate differed from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21% primarily as a result of state taxes, foreign taxes, and changes in our valuation allowance for domestic income taxes. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded $0.7 million and $1.7 million in income tax expense, respectively. The decrease in income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was attributable to 2020 tax benefits associated with our international operations. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we continued to maintain a full valuation allowance on our U.S. federal and state net deferred tax assets as it was more likely than not that those deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, our principal sources of liquidity were an aggregate of $542.6 million of cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities, which primarily consist of short-term, investment-grade U.S. treasury securities, corporate bonds, and commercial paper. In October 2020, we completed the acquisition of Rimilia and paid $121.4 million. We had $500.0 million aggregate principal amount of Notes outstanding at December 31, 2020.
During the quarter ended December 31, 2020, the Stock Price Condition allowing holders of the Notes to convert was met. As a result, holders have the option to convert their Notes at any time during the calendar quarter ending March 31, 2021. We have the ability to settle the Notes in cash, shares of our common stock, or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock at our election. From January 1, 2021, through the date of this filing, we have not received any conversion requests for our Notes. It is our current intent to settle any such conversions through combination settlement, which involves repayment of the principal portion in cash and any excess conversion value over the principal amount in shares of our common stock.
In connection with the offering of the Notes, we entered into the Capped Calls with certain counterparties covering, subject to anti-dilution adjustments, approximately 6.8 million shares of our common stock and are generally expected to offset the potential economic dilution of our common stock up to the initial cap price. The Capped Calls have an initial strike price of $73.40 per share, subject to certain adjustments, which corresponds to the initial conversion price of the Notes. The Capped Calls have an initial cap price of $106.76 per share, subject to certain adjustments. At December 31, 2020, all of the Capped Calls for the Notes remained outstanding.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, investments in marketable securities and cash from operations will be sufficient to meet our working capital needs, capital expenditures and financing obligations for at least the next 12 months.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our growth rate, the expansion of our direct sales force, strategic relationships and international operations, the timing and extent of spending to support research and development efforts and strategic transactions and the continuing market acceptance of our solutions. From time to time, we may require or opportunistically raise additional equity or debt financing. Sales of additional equity or equity-linked securities could result in dilution to our stockholders. If we raise funds by borrowing from third parties, the terms of those financing arrangements would require us to incur interest expense and may include negative covenants or other restrictions on our business that could impair our operating flexibility. We can provide no assurance that financing will be available at all or, if available, that we would be able to obtain financing on terms favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional capital when needed, we would be required to curtail our operating activities and capital expenditures, and our business operating results and financial condition would be adversely affected.
Historical Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Our net loss and cash flows from operating activities are significantly influenced by our investments in headcount and infrastructure to support anticipated growth. In recent periods, our net loss has generally been significantly greater than our use of cash for operating activities due to our subscription-based revenue model in which billings occur in advance of revenue recognition, as well as the substantial amount of non-cash charges which we incur. Non-cash charges primarily include depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, non-cash lease expense, amortization of debt discount and issuance costs, and deferred taxes.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by operations was $54.7 million, resulting from net non-cash expenses of $97.5 million, partially offset by our net loss of $39.4 million and net cash flow used as a result of changes in operating assets and liabilities of $3.4 million. The $3.4 million of net cash flows used as a result of changes in our operating assets and liabilities reflected the following:
•a $12.4 million increase in other assets;
•a $5.7 million increase in accounts receivable;
•a $5.3 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets;
•a $5.0 million decrease in operating lease liabilities; and
•a $4.4 million decrease in accounts payable.
These changes in our operating assets and liabilities were partially offset by the following:
•a $26.4 million increase in deferred revenue as a result of the growth of our customer and user bases; and
•a $3.1 million increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by operations was $29.7 million, resulting from net non-cash expenses of $68.2 million, partially offset by our net loss of $32.1 million and net cash flow used as a result of changes in operating assets and liabilities of $6.3 million. The $6.3 million of net cash flows used as a result of changes in our operating assets and liabilities reflected the following:
•a $28.0 million increase in accounts receivable;
•a $16.4 million increase in other assets; and
•a $5.5 million decrease in operating lease liabilities.
These changes in our operating assets and liabilities were largely offset by the following:
•a $33.4 million increase in deferred revenue as a result of the growth of our customer and user bases;
•a $5.8 million increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities primarily associated with increases in employee-related accruals as a result of increases in headcount and bonuses;
•a $3.2 million increase in accounts payable; and
•a $1.2 million decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets.
Net Cash Provided By (Used In) Investing Activities
Our investing activities consist primarily of investments in and maturities of marketable securities, capital expenditures for property and equipment, and capitalized software development costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by investing activities was $173.6 million as a result of $312.4 million of proceeds from maturities and sales of marketable securities, net of purchases, partially offset by $119.3 million in cash paid for an acquisition, net of cash acquired, $10.6 million in capitalized software development costs, $6.5 million in purchases of property and equipment, and $2.3 million in purchases of intangible assets related to the purchase of a defensive patent.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in investing activities was $408.5 million as a result of $398.8 million of purchases of marketable securities, net of proceeds from maturities and sales, $5.1 million in capitalized software development costs, and $4.6 million in purchases of property and equipment.
Net Cash Provided By Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $18.9 million as a result of $20.6 million of proceeds from exercises of stock options and $7.0 million of proceeds from the employee stock purchase plan, partially offset by $8.2 million of acquisitions of common stock for tax withholding obligations.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by financing activities was $452.5 million primarily as a result of net proceeds of $441.0 million from the issuance of the Notes and the purchase of the associated Capped Calls; $10.6 million of proceeds from exercises of stock options; and $5.3 million of proceeds from the employee stock purchase plan, partially offset by $3.9 million of acquisitions of common stock for tax withholding obligations.
Backlog
We enter into both single and multi-year subscription contracts for our solutions. The timing of our invoices to the customer is a negotiated term and thus varies among our subscription contracts. For multi-year agreements, it is common to invoice an initial amount at contract signing followed by subsequent annual invoices. At any point in the contract term, there can be amounts that we have not yet been contractually able to invoice. Until such time as these amounts are invoiced, they are not recorded in revenues, deferred revenue or elsewhere in our consolidated financial statements and are considered by us to be backlog. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had backlog of approximately $468.6 million and $366.9 million, respectively. We expect backlog will change from period to period for several reasons, including the timing and duration of customer agreements, varying billing cycles of subscription agreements, and the timing and duration of customer renewals. Because revenue for any period is a function of revenue recognized from deferred revenue under contracts in existence at the beginning of the period, as well as contract renewals and new customer contracts during the period, backlog at the beginning of any period is not necessarily indicative of future revenue performance. We do not utilize backlog as a key management metric internally.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020:
We are required to pay up to a maximum of $8.0 million of contingent consideration relating to our 2013 Acquisition if we realize a tax benefit from the use of net operating losses generated from the stock option exercises concurrent with the 2013 Acquisition and up to a maximum of $30.0 million of contingent consideration relating to the Rimilia Acquisition if certain Rimilia Annual Recurring Revenue ("ARR") thresholds are met each year over a two year period subsequent to the acquisition date. We have not included these obligations in the table above because there is a high degree of uncertainty regarding the amount and timing of future cash flows to extinguish this liability.
At December 31, 2020, liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits of $2.5 million were not included in the table above because, due to their nature, there was a high degree of uncertainty regarding the timing of future cash outflows and other events that extinguish these liabilities.
Commitments under letters of credit at December 31, 2020 were scheduled to expire as follows (in thousands):
Letters of credit are maintained pursuant to certain of our lease arrangements. The letters of credit remain in effect at varying levels through the terms of the related agreements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As part of our ongoing business, we do not have any relationships with other entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities that have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. We are therefore not exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in those types of relationships.
In the ordinary course of business, we may provide indemnification of varying scope and terms to customers, vendors, investors, directors and officers with respect to certain matters, including, but not limited to, losses arising out of our breach of such agreements, services to be provided by us, or from intellectual property infringement claims made by third parties. These indemnification provisions may survive termination of the underlying agreement and the maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these indemnification provisions may not be subject to maximum loss clauses. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these indemnification provisions is indeterminable. We have never paid a material claim, nor have we been sued in connection with these indemnification arrangements. At December 31, 2020, we had not accrued a liability for these indemnification arrangements because the likelihood of incurring a payment obligation, if any, in connection with these indemnification arrangements is not probable or reasonably estimable.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the dates of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
We believe that the following critical accounting policies involve a greater degree of judgment or complexity than our other accounting policies. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to a full understanding and evaluation of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations. See “Significant Accounting Policies” in Note 2 of the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Revenue Recognition and Deferred Revenue
Assets recognized from the costs to obtain a contract with a customer - We recognize an asset for the incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer if we expect the benefit of those costs to be one year or longer. We have determined that certain sales incentive programs to our employees ("deferred customer contract acquisition costs") and our partners ("partner referral fees") meet the requirements to be capitalized. Deferred customer acquisition costs related to new revenue contracts and upsells are deferred and then amortized straight line over the expected period of benefit that we have determined to be five years, based upon both the product turnover rate and estimated customer life. Partner referral fees are deferred and then amortized on a straight-line basis over the related contractual period, as the fees for renewals are commensurate with fees incurred for the initial contract. Deferred customer acquisition costs and partner referral fees are included within other assets on the consolidated balance sheets. There were no impairment losses in relation to the costs capitalized for the periods presented.
Capitalized Software Costs
We account for the costs of computer software obtained or developed for internal use in accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (“ASC 350”). We capitalize certain implementation costs incurred in a hosting arrangement that is a service contract. These capitalized costs exclude training costs, project management costs, and data migration costs. We capitalize certain costs in the development of our SaaS subscription solutions when (i) the preliminary project stage is completed, (ii) management has authorized further funding for the completion of the project and (iii) it is probable that the project will be completed and performed as intended. These capitalized costs include personnel and related expenses for employees and costs of third-party contractors who are directly associated with and who devote time to internal-use software projects and, when material, interest costs incurred during the development. Capitalization of these costs ceases once the project is substantially complete and the software is ready for its intended purpose. Costs incurred for significant upgrades and enhancements to our SaaS software solutions are also capitalized. Costs incurred for post-configuration training, maintenance and minor modifications or enhancements are expensed as incurred. Capitalized software development costs are amortized using the straight-line method over an estimated useful life of three years.
Business Combinations
The results of businesses acquired in business combinations are included in our consolidated financial statements from the date of the acquisition. Purchase accounting results in assets and liabilities of an acquired business being recorded at their estimated fair values on the acquisition date. Any excess consideration over the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recognized as goodwill.
We perform valuations of assets acquired and liabilities assumed and allocate the purchase price to its respective assets and liabilities. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires our management to use significant judgment and estimates, including the selection of valuation methodologies, estimates of future revenue, costs and cash flows, discount rates, and selection of comparable companies. We engage the assistance of valuation specialists in concluding on fair value measurements in connection with determining fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combinations.
Contingent consideration payable in cash arising from business combinations is recorded at fair value as a liability on the acquisition date and remeasured at each reporting date. Changes in fair value are recorded in general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. Determining the fair value of the
contingent consideration each period requires management to make assumptions and judgments. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties, and if different assumptions had been used, the fair value of contingent consideration could have been materially different from the amounts recorded. The significant inputs used in the fair value measurement of contingent consideration are the amount and timing of Rimilia ARR in each year over a two year period subsequent to the acquisition and determining an appropriate discount rate, which considers the risk associated with the forecasted ARR. Significant changes in the estimated future ARR and the periods in which they are generated would significantly impact the fair value of the contingent consideration liability.
Transaction-related costs incurred by the Company are expensed as incurred and are included in general and administrative expenses in the Company's consolidated statements of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, "Significant Accounting Policies-Recently Issued Accounting Standards,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.