ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with “Item 6. Selected Financial Data” and the financial statements and related notes included in "Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those expressed or implied in any forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under the caption “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
On February 5, 2020, we filed a Certificate of Amendment of the Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware to (i) effect a reverse stock split of all issued and outstanding shares of our common stock at a ratio of 1-for-10 and (ii) reduce the number of authorized shares of our common stock from 200,000,000 to 40,000,000.
On February 5, 2020, we effected a reverse stock split of all issued and outstanding shares of our common stock at a ratio of 1-for-10, and reduced the number of authorized shares of our common stock from 200,000,000 to 40,000,000. Share related amounts have been retroactively adjusted in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to reflect this reverse stock-split for all periods presented.
Overview
We are a clinical stage biopharmaceutical company focused on discovering and developing novel, controllable cellular immunotherapies for various forms of cancer. We are advancing CAR-T cell therapies which are an innovative approach in which a patient’s or donor’s T cells, are genetically modified to carry chimeric antigen receptors, or CARs. We are using our proprietary Chemical Induction of Dimerization, or CID, technology platform to engineer our product candidates with switch technologies that are designed to control components of the immune system in real time. By incorporating our CID platform, our product candidates may offer better efficacy and safety outcomes than are seen with current cellular immunotherapies. For additional information about our business, and candidate development programs, see the discussions contained within “Item 1. Business” in this Annual Report.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods indicated:
Revenues
The Company's decrease for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was due to the Company receiving $0.5 million related to maintenance of its license agreement with the MD Anderson Cancer Center supporting the ongoing use of its CaspaCIDe safety switch as its only source of revenue. In the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company received the initial $5 million licensing fee from the same agreement and unrelated grant revenue.
Research and Development Expenses (R&D)
The decrease in R&D expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to reduced expenses related to rivo-cel related activities, the sale of the manufacturing facility, and the reduction in force that was implemented during the second half of the year ended December 31, 2019, partially offset by an increase in expenses related to our GoCAR-T programs. This resulted in $9.0 million reduction in salaries, benefits, travel, and share based compensation related charges and a $12.2 million reduction in general R&D expenses primarily due to lower clinical trial activities. Additionally, depreciation expense decreased $4.3 million due to the manufacturing facility and related laboratories and office space meeting the accounting standards criteria of assets held for sale, which were then disposed of in April 2020.
General and Administrative Expenses (G&A)
The decrease in G&A expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due the reduction in rivo-cel related commercialization activities that reduced charges by $13.7 million as well as the aforementioned reduction in force that reduced employee related charges by $0.7 million.
Impairment
In October 2020, in connection with the Company's restructuring plan, our management elected to seek an exit to its leased R&D facility in Houston, Texas. As a result of this decision, the Company reclassified the assets and liabilities associated with the leased facility as held for sale. The reclassified assets included a right-of-use asset of $0.5 million, and property plant and equipment of $2.3 million. Based on the cost to exit the lease and the net realizable value of the related assets the Company recognized an impairment charge of $1.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Gain on dispositions, net
The increase in gain on dispositions, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 over the prior year was primarily due to the disposal of the manufacturing facility to M.D. Anderson in April 2020.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income primarily consists of changes in the fair value of our warrant liability and the private placement option liability, partially offset by interest expense.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had other income of $43.9 million versus the year ended December 31, 2019, total other expense of $25.1 million. The difference is primarily attributable to $46.1 million gain related to the changes in fair value of our warrant and private placement option liabilities, which are remeasured at each reporting period, and a reduction in interest expense to $2.6 million with the early retirement of the Oxford Loan.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
At December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $540.7 million, a net loss of approximately $7.7 million, negative cash flows from operations of approximately $56.7 million, and cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash of $37.0 million.
Our cash resources are primarily consumed by operating activities and we expect negative cash flows from operations to continue for at least the next 12 months. Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, compensation and related expenses, third-party clinical research and development services, laboratory services, clinical trial costs, legal and other regulatory expenses and general overhead costs. Based on our current research and development plans and our timing expectations related to the progress of our programs, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements through at least the next twelve months from the date the accompanying annual financial statements are issued.
We plan to continue to attempt to obtain financing and/or engage in strategic transactions, but we cannot predict, with certainty, the outcome of our actions to generate liquidity, including the availability of additional equity or debt financing, or whether such actions would generate the expected liquidity as currently planned. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to slow its spread, the global credit and financial markets have experienced extreme volatility, including diminished liquidity and credit availability, declines in consumer confidence, declines in economic growth, increases in unemployment rates and uncertainty about economic stability. There can be no assurance that further deterioration in credit and financial markets and confidence in economic conditions will not occur. If equity and credit markets deteriorate, it may make any necessary debt or equity financing more difficult to obtain, more costly and/or more dilutive.
On August 16, 2019, we entered into an underwritten public offering of 575,000 shares of our Series 1 Preferred Stock and warrants to purchase up to 5,750,000 shares of our common stock. Each share of Series 1 Preferred Stock was sold together with a warrant to purchase 10 shares of common stock at a combined price to the public of $100.00. The net proceeds to us were approximately $53.9 million, net of issuance costs, and excluded any proceeds that we may receive upon exercise of the warrants.
On August 16, 2019, we entered into a securities purchase agreement to which we agreed to issue in a private placement (i) 350,000 shares of our Series 2 Preferred Stock, at a purchase price of $100.00 per share, and related warrants to purchase up to 2,800,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $10.00 per share, and (ii) 250,000 shares of our Series 3 Preferred Stock, at a purchase price of $140.00 per share, and related warrants to purchase up to 875,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $14.00 per share. The purchase and sale of the securities issuable under this agreement may occur in two or more separate closings, within five days’ notice to us. The Company received $11.2 million, net, in proceeds from the issuance of the private placement option.
On January 17, 2020, we entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, as amended by the First Amendment to Asset Purchase Agreement dated February 21, 2020, in connection with the sale of certain of our assets. Pursuant to the Asset Purchase Agreement, we agreed to sell to M.D. Anderson certain assets and liabilities relating to our manufacturing facility and related laboratories and office space located at 2130 W. Holcombe Blvd., Houston, Texas 77030. On April 14, 2020, we completed the Asset Sale. Upon closing of the Asset Sale, M.D. Anderson paid us an amount equal to $15.0 million, subject to certain escrow provisions and a reduction for prepayment of rent under an associated sublease agreement.
In November 2020, we closed an underwritten offering of 1,040,000 shares of common stock, pre-funded warrants to purchase 3,109,378 shares of common stock, and accompanying common warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 4,149,378 shares of common stock. Each share of common stock and pre-funded warrant to purchase one share of common stock was sold together with a common warrant to purchase one share of common stock. The public offering price of each share of common stock and accompanying common warrant was $6.025 and $6.024 for each pre-funded warrant. The pre-funded warrants are immediately exercisable at a price of $0.001 per share of common stock. The common warrants are immediately exercisable at an exercise price of $6.50 per share of common stock and will expire five years from the date of issuance. The shares of common stock and pre-funded warrants, and the accompanying common warrants, were issued separately and were immediately separable upon issuance. The gross proceeds to us were approximately $25.0 million before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, was $56.7 million compared to $77.6 million for the same period last year. The primary operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, were (1) $7.7 million of net losses and (2) a $8.2 million decrease from changes in operating assets and liabilities, (3) a $46.1 million change in fair market value of warrant derivative and private placement option liabilities, and (4) $3.6 million of gain on dispositions, net. These activities were partially offset by non-cash charges from impairment of property and equipment of $1.4 million and other smaller non-cash charge items.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, was $14.1 million compared to $48.9 million for the same period last year. The net cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to proceeds of $14.7 million from the sale certain assets in the transaction with M.D. Anderson during 2020. The cash increase was partially offset by purchases of property and equipment of $0.6 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, was $14.2 million compared to $74.1 million provided for the same period last year. The net cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to the principal payments and the subsequent early retirement of debt totaling $37.1 million partially offset by proceeds from the issuance of common stock and pre-funded warrants, net in the amount of $22.9 million.
Debt
In October 2020, we executed a payoff letter to repay in full outstanding indebtedness and terminate all commitments and obligations under our Loan and Security Agreement, dated December 21, 2017, as amended, with Oxford Finance LLC. Pursuant to the payoff letter, we remitted payment of $27.4 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements (as defined by applicable regulations of the SEC) that are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. We do not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or for any other contractually narrow or limited purpose.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Estimates
Management's discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. In many instances, we could have reasonably used different accounting estimates, and in other instances changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Accordingly, actual results could differ significantly from management’s estimates under different assumptions or conditions. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected. While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our financial statements, we believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies related to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates. Our management has discussed the development and selection of these critical accounting estimates with the audit committee of our board of directors and the audit committee has reviewed the company's disclosure relating to it in this MD&A.
Warrant Derivatives
Freestanding warrants exercisable for multiple instruments are classified as liabilities. The Company accounts for these warrants in accordance with ASC Topic 815, Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities (“ASC 815”). The Company estimates the fair value of these liabilities using the binomial option model. The option pricing model of our warrant derivative liabilities are estimates and are sensitive to changes to certain inputs used in the pricing model. See Note 1 - Organization, Basis of Presentation, and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for a discussion of how the Company accounts for its warrant derivatives.
Private Placement Option
The Company has entered into a security purchase agreement that contains a call option on preferred shares that are puttable outside the control of the Company. The Company accounts for the option in accordance with ASC Topic 815, Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities ("ASC 815"). The Company estimates the fair value of the liability using a binomial lattice model. The model is sensitive to changes to certain inputs. See Note 1 - Organization, Basis of Presentation, and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for a discussion of how the Company accounts for its private placement option derivative.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist of expenses incurred in performing research and development activities, including compensation and benefits for research and development employees and consultants, facilities expenses, overhead expenses, cost of laboratory supplies, manufacturing expenses, fees paid to third parties and other outside expenses. We accrue for costs incurred as the services are being provided by monitoring the status of the clinical trial or project and the invoices received from our external service
providers. We adjust our accrual as actual costs become known. See Note 1 - Organization, Basis of Presentation, and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for a discussion of how the Company accounts for research and development expenses.
Share-Based Compensation
The Company's share-based awards include stock option grants and restricted stock awards. The estimated fair value for stock options, which determines the Company's calculation of compensation expense, is based on the Black-Scholes pricing model, which requires a number of estimates, including the expected lives of awards, interest rates, stock volatility and other assumptions. Additionally, we apply a forfeiture rate to estimate the number of grants that will ultimately vest, as applicable, and adjust the expense as these awards vest. See Note 1 - Organization, Basis of Presentation, and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for a discussion of how the Company accounts for share-based compensation.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 - Organization, Basis of Presentation, and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for discussion regarding recent accounting pronouncements.