ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Form 10-K contains “forward-looking statements”. These forward-looking statements involve a number of risks and uncertainties. We caution readers that any forward-looking statement is not a guarantee of future performance and that actual results could differ materially from those contained in the forward-looking statement. These statements are based on current expectations of future events. Such statements include, but are not limited to, statements about our products, including our newly acquired products, customers, regulatory approvals, the potential utility of and market for our products and services, our ability to implement our business strategy and anticipated business and operations, in particular following the 2020 and 2019 acquisitions, future financial and operational performance, our anticipated future growth strategy, including the acquisition of synergistic cell and gene therapy manufacturing tools and services or technologies, or other companies or technologies, capital requirements, intellectual property, suppliers, joint venture partners, future financial and operating results, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, plans, objectives, expectations and intentions, revenues, costs and expenses, interest rates, outcome of contingencies, business strategies, regulatory filings and requirements, the estimated potential size of markets, capital requirements, the terms of any capital financing agreements and other statements that are not historical facts. You can find many of these statements by looking for words like “believes,” “expects,” “anticipates,” “estimates,” “may,” “should,” “will,” “could,” “plan,” “intend,” or similar expressions in this Form 10-K. We intend that such forward-looking statements be subject to the safe harbors created thereby.
These forward-looking statements are based on the current beliefs and expectations of our management and are subject to significant risks and uncertainties. If underlying assumptions prove inaccurate or unknown risks or uncertainties materialize, actual results may differ materially from current expectations and projections. Factors that might cause such a difference include those discussed under “Risk Factors,” as well as those discussed elsewhere in the Form 10-K.
You are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date of this Form 10-K or, in the case of documents referred to or incorporated by reference, the date of those documents.
All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or any person acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by the cautionary statements contained or referred to in this section. We do not undertake any obligation to release publicly any revisions to these forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this Form 10-K or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events, except as may be required under applicable U.S. securities law. If we do update one or more forward-looking statements, no inference should be drawn that we will make additional updates with respect to those or other forward-looking statements.
We are a life sciences company that develops and commercializes innovative technologies used in the manufacture, storage and transportation of biological materials and provides storage solutions for biological and pharmaceutical materials.
We develop, manufacture and market bioproduction tools and services to the cell and gene therapy (“CGT”) industry, which are designed to improve quality and de-risk biologic manufacturing and delivery. Our products are used in basic and applied research, and commercial manufacturing of biologic based therapies by maintaining the health and function of biologic material during sourcing, manufacturing, storage, distribution, and patient delivery of cells and tissues.
Our current portfolio of bioproduction tools and services includes biopreservation media for the preservation of cells and tissues, automated thaw devices which provide controlled, consistent thawing of frozen biologics in vials and cryobags, a line of “smart”, cloud connected devices for transporting biologic payloads at a variety of temperature ranges, a full line of isothermal and liquid nitrogen freezers and accessories for freezing and storage of biologic samples, and biological and pharmaceutical storage.
We currently operate as one bioproduction tools and services business with product lines that serve the continuum in the biologic drug manufacturing and delivery process. We have a diversified portfolio of tools that focus on the freezing and thawing process of biologic drugs. We have in-house expertise in cryobiology and continue to capitalize on opportunities to maximize the value of our product platform for our extensive customer base through both organic growth innovations and acquisitions.
Astero Bio Corporation Acquisition
On April 1, 2019, BioLife completed the acquisition of all the outstanding shares of Astero (the “Astero Acquisition”). Astero’s ThawSTAR product line is comprised of a family of automated thawing devices for frozen cell and gene therapies packaged in cryovials and cryobags. The products improve the quality of administration of high-value, temperature-sensitive biologic therapies to patients by standardizing the thawing process and reducing the risks of contamination and overheating, which are inherent with the use of traditional water baths.
In connection with the Astero Acquisition, the Company paid a base payment in the amount of $12.5 million consisting of an initial cash payment of $8.0 million at the closing of the transactions contemplated by the Purchase Agreement, subject to adjustment for working capital, net debt and transaction expenses, and a deferred cash payment that was paid into escrow of $4.5 million payable upon the earlier of Astero meeting certain product development milestones or one year after the date of the Closing and earnout payments in calendar years 2019, 2020 and 2021 of up to an aggregate of $3.5 million, which shall be payable upon Astero achieving certain specified revenue targets in each year and a separate earnout payment of $5.0 million for calendar year 2021 which shall be payable upon Astero achieving a cumulative revenue target over the three-year period from 2019 to 2021. In the second quarter of 2020 we paid $483,000 for the earnout related to 2019 revenues. We do not expect to pay any earnout in 2021 related to 2020 revenues.
The Astero Acquisition was accounted for as a purchase of a business under Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standard Codification No. (“ASC”) 805, “Business Combinations.” Under the acquisition method of accounting, the acquired assets and liabilities assumed from Astero were recorded as of the acquisition date, at their fair values, and consolidated with BioLife. The fair value of the net tangible assets acquired is approximately $324,000, the fair value of the identifiable intangibles is $4.1 million, and the residual goodwill is $9.5 million. The fair value estimates required critical estimates, including, but not limited to, future expected cash flows, revenue and expense projections, discount rates, revenue volatility, and royalty rates. BioLife believes these estimates to be reasonable. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
SAVSU Technologies, Inc. Acquisition
On August 7, 2019, the Company consummated the acquisition (the “SAVSU Acquisition”) of the remaining shares of SAVSU Technologies, Inc., a Delaware corporation, pursuant to a Share Exchange Agreement (the “Exchange Agreement”) by and among the Company, SAVSU and SAVSU Origin LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Origin”). Pursuant to the Exchange Agreement, Origin agreed to transfer to the Company and the Company agreed to acquire from Origin 8,616 shares of common stock of SAVSU, representing the remaining 56% of the outstanding shares of SAVSU that the Company did not own, in exchange for 1,100,000 shares of common stock of the Company. On August 8, 2019, the Company completed the SAVSU Acquisition, and SAVSU became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company.
SAVSU is a leading developer and supplier of next generation cold chain management tools for CGT. The evo® cloud connect platform allows biologic products to be traced and tracked in real time. Our evo platform consists of rentable cloud connected shippers and evo technology tracking software provides real-time information on geolocation, payload temperature, ambient temperature, tilt of shipper, humidity, altitude, and real-time alerts when a shipper has been opened. Our internally developed evo software allows customers to customize alert notifications both in data measurements and user requirements. The evo Dry Vapor Shipper (“DVS”) is specifically marketed to CGT companies. The evo DVS has improved form factor and ergonomics over the traditional dewar, including extended thermal performance, reduced liquid nitrogen recharge time, improved payload extractors and ability to maintain temperature for longer periods on its side. The evo DVS does not require to be shipped in a pallet format, enabling shipping on narrow-bodied aircraft which is not an option for competitors who use palletized shipments. Our integrated system of internal and external packing innovations reduces risk of payload breakage due to shock while in transportation.
The Company paid to Origin 1,100,000 shares of unregistered common stock totaling $19.9 million (based on a share price of $18.12 at the time of acquisition) for the 56% we did not previously own.
The SAVSU Acquisition was accounted for as a purchase of a business under ASC 805, “Business Combinations.” Under the acquisition method of accounting, the acquired assets and liabilities assumed from SAVSU were recorded as of the acquisition date, at their fair values, and consolidated with BioLife. The fair value of the net tangible assets acquired is $4.2 million, the fair value of the identifiable intangibles is $12.2 million, and the residual goodwill is $19.5 million. The fair value estimates required critical estimates, including, but not limited to, future expected cash flows, revenue and expense projections, discount rates, revenue volatility, and royalty rates. BioLife believes these estimates to be reasonable. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Custom Biogenic Systems, Inc. Acquisition
On November 10, 2019, we entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement, by and among the Company, Arctic Solutions, Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, and Custom Biogenic Systems, Inc., a Michigan corporation (“CBS Seller”), pursuant to which we agreed to purchase from the CBS Seller substantially all of CBS Seller’s assets, properties and rights (the “CBS Acquisition”). The CBS Seller, a privately held company with operations located near Detroit, Michigan, designs and manufactures liquid nitrogen laboratory freezers and cryogenic equipment and also offers a related cloud-based monitoring system that continuously assesses biologic sample storage conditions and alerts equipment owners if a fault condition occurs. The Acquisition closed on November 12, 2019.
In connection with the CBS Acquisition, we paid to CBS Seller a base payment in the amount of $15.0 million, consisting of a cash payment of $11.0 million paid at the closing of the CBS Acquisition, less a cash holdback escrow of $550,000 to satisfy certain indemnification claims, and an aggregate number of shares of our common stock, with an aggregate fair value equal to $4.0 million, less a holdback escrow of shares of Common Stock with an aggregate value equal to $3.0 million to satisfy potential payments related to any product liability claims outstanding as of March 13, 2019 and potential earnout payments in calendar years 2020, 2021, 2022, 2023 and 2024 of up to an aggregate of, but not exceeding, $15.0 million payable to CBS Seller upon achieving certain specified revenue targets in each year for certain product lines. We do not expect to pay any earnout in 2021 related to 2020 revenues.
The CBS acquisition was accounted for as a purchase of a business under FASB ASC Topic 805, “Business Combinations”. Under the acquisition method of accounting, the acquired assets and liabilities assumed from CBS were recorded as of the acquisition date, at their fair values, and consolidated with BioLife. The fair value of the net tangible assets acquired is $6.0 million, the fair value of the identifiable intangibles is $6.8 million, and the residual goodwill is $3.1 million. The fair value estimates required critical estimates, including, but not limited to, future expected cash flows, revenue and expense projections, discount rates, revenue volatility, and royalty rates. BioLife believes these estimates to be reasonable. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
SciSafe Holdings, Inc. Acquisition
On September 18, 2020, BioLife entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement, by and among the Company, SciSafe Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation, and the stockholders of SciSafe (collectively, the “SciSafe Sellers”), pursuant to which the Company agreed to purchase from the SciSafe Sellers one hundred percent (100%) of the issued and outstanding capital shares or other equity interests of SciSafe (the “SciSafe Acquisition”). The SciSafe Acquisition closed October 1, 2020.
In connection with the SciSafe Acquisition, the Company issued to the SciSafe Sellers 611,683 shares of common stock valued at $29.29 per share and a cash payment of $15 million, with $1.5 million held in escrow to account for adjustments for net working capital and as a security for, and a source of payment of, the Company’s indemnity rights. Pending the occurrence of certain events, the Company will issue to the SciSafe Sellers an additional 626,000 shares of common stock, which shall be issuable to SciSafe Sellers upon SciSafe achieving certain specified revenue targets in each year from 2021 to 2024.
The SciSafe Acquisition was accounted for as a purchase of a business under FASB ASC Topic 805, “Business Combinations”. The fair value of the contingent consideration is $3.7 million, the fair value of the net tangible assets acquired is $2.8 million, the fair value of the deferred tax liability is $3.3 million, the fair value of the intangible assets acquired is $12.1 million, and the residual goodwill is $24.9 million. The fair value estimates required critical estimates, including, but not limited to, future expected cash flows, revenue and expense projections, discount rates, revenue volatility, and royalty rates. BioLife believes these estimates to be reasonable. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We have identified the policies and estimates below as being critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations. These policies require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgements, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. The impact of any associated risks related to these policies on our business operations are discussed throughout “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition,” including in the “Results of Operations” section, where such policies affect our reported and expected financial results. Although we believe that our estimates, assumptions, and judgements are reasonable, they are based upon information presently available. Actual results may differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions, judgments, or conditions.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue from the sale or lease of our products and services, primarily to customers within the CGT market. Under ASC 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers,” revenue is recognized when, or as, obligations under the terms of a contract are satisfied, which occurs when control of the promised products or services is transferred to customers. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for transferring products or services to a customer (“transaction price”). To the extent the transaction price includes variable consideration, the Company estimates the amount of variable consideration that should be included in the transaction price utilizing the expected value method or the most likely amount method, depending on the facts and circumstances relative to the contract. When determining the transaction price of a contract, an adjustment is made if payment from a customer occurs either significantly before or significantly after performance, resulting in a significant financing component. Applying the practical expedient in paragraph 606-10-32-18, the Company does not assess whether a significant financing component exists if the period between when the Company performs its obligations under the contract and when the customer pays is one year or less. None of the Company’s contracts contained a significant financing component or variable consideration as of and during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company also generates revenue from the leasing of our evo cold chain systems, which are typically cloud-connected shippers with enabling cold chain cloud applications, to customers pursuant to rental arrangements entered into with the customer. Revenue from the rental of cold chain systems is not within the scope of FASB ASC Topic 606 as it is within the scope of FASB ASC Topic 842, “Leases”. All customers leasing shippers currently do so under month-to-month rental arrangements. We account for these rental transactions as operating leases and record rental revenue on a straight-line basis over the rental term. These rental arrangements may contain both lease and non-lease components. We have elected to utilize the practical expedient to account for lease and non-lease components together as a single combined lease component as the timing and pattern of transfer are the same for the non-lease components and associated lease component and, the lease component, if accounted for separately, would be classified as an operating lease.
Contracts with customers may contain multiple performance obligations. For such arrangements, the transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation based on the estimated relative standalone selling prices of the promised products or services underlying each performance obligation. The Company determines standalone selling prices based on the price at which the performance obligation is sold separately. If the standalone selling price is not observable through past transactions, the Company estimates the standalone selling price, taking into account available information such as market conditions and internally approved pricing guidelines related to the performance obligations. The Company recognizes product revenue under the terms of each customer agreement upon transfer of control to the customer, which occurs at a point in time.
Inventories
We value biopreservation media inventory at cost or, if lower, net realizable value, using the specific identification method. All other inventory is valued at cost or, if lower, net realizable value, using the first-in, first-out method. We review our inventory at least quarterly and record a provision for excess and obsolete inventory based on our estimates of expected product revenue volume, production capacity and expiration dates of raw materials, work-in-process and finished products. We write down inventory that has become obsolete, inventory that has a cost basis in excess of its expected net realizable value, and inventory in excess of expected requirements to cost of product revenue. Manufacturing of bioproduction finished goods is done to order and tested for quality specifications prior to shipment.
A change in the estimated timing or amount of demand for our products could result in additional provisions for excess inventory quantities on hand. Any significant unanticipated changes in demand or unexpected quality failures could have a significant impact on the value of inventory and reported operating results. During all periods presented in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, there have been no material adjustments related to a revised estimate of inventory valuations.
Assets held for rent
Assets held for rent consists of all evo shippers and related components, in process of being assembled, and evo shippers and accessories complete and ready to be deployed and placed in service upon a customer order. Our customers rent the shippers per a rental agreement, which includes access to the evo.is cloud based tracking and information app. We retain ownership of the evo shippers and the evo tracking software platform. At the end of the rental agreement, the customer returns the shipper to the Company. Once an evo shipper is deployed and placed in service with a customer, we depreciate the cost of the evo shippers and related accessories over an estimated useful life of three years.
Business combinations
Amounts paid for acquisitions are allocated to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, if any, based on their fair values at the dates of acquisition. This purchase price allocation process requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions with respect to intangible assets and deferred revenue obligations. The fair value of identifiable intangible assets is based on detailed valuations that use information and assumptions determined by management. Any excess of purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired is allocated to goodwill. While we use our best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date as well as any contingent consideration, where applicable, our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to our consolidated statements of comprehensive income. The fair value of contingent consideration includes estimates and judgments made by management regarding the probability that future contingent payments will be made, the extent of royalties to be earned in excess of the defined minimum royalties, etc. Management updates these estimates and the related fair value of contingent consideration at each reporting period based on the estimated probability of achieving the earnout targets and applying a discount rate that captures the risk associated with the expected contingent payments. To the extent our estimates change in the future regarding the likelihood of achieving these targets we may need to record material adjustments to our accrued contingent consideration. Changes in the fair value of contingent consideration are recorded in our consolidated statements of operations. We use the income approach to determine the fair value of certain identifiable intangible assets including customer relationships and developed technology. This approach determines fair value by estimating after-tax cash flows attributable to these assets over their respective useful lives and then discounting these after-tax cash flows back to a present value. We base our assumptions on estimates of future cash flows, expected growth rates, expected trends in technology, etc. We base the discount rates used to arrive at a present value as of the date of acquisition on the time value of money and certain industry-specific risk factors. We believe the estimated purchased customer relationships, developed technologies, trademark/tradename, patents, and in process research and development amounts so determined represent the fair value at the date of acquisition and do not exceed the amount a third party would pay for the assets.
Intangible Assets and Goodwill
Intangible assets
Intangible assets with a definite life are amortized over their estimated useful lives using the straight-line method and the amortization expense is recorded within intangible asset amortization in the consolidated statements of operations. Intangible assets and their related estimated useful lives are reviewed at least annually to determine if any adverse conditions exist that would indicate the carrying value of these assets may not be recoverable. More frequent impairment assessments are conducted if certain conditions exist, including a change in the competitive landscape, any internal decisions to pursue new or different technology strategies, a loss of a significant customer, or a significant change in the marketplace, including changes in the prices paid for the Company’s products or changes in the size of the market for the Company’s products. If impairment indicators are present, the Company determines whether the underlying intangible asset is recoverable through estimated future undiscounted cash flows. If the asset is not found to be recoverable, it is written down to the estimated fair value of the asset based on the sum of the future discounted cash flows expected to result from the use and disposition of the asset. If the estimate of an intangible asset’s remaining useful life is changed, the remaining carrying amount of the intangible asset is amortized prospectively over the revised remaining useful life. The Company continues to believe that its definite-lived intangible assets are recoverable at December 31, 2020.
Goodwill
We test goodwill for impairment on an annual basis, and between annual tests if events and circumstances indicate it is more likely than not that the fair value of our goodwill is less than its carrying value. Events that would indicate impairment and trigger an interim impairment assessment include, but are not limited to, current economic and market conditions, including a decline in the Company’s market capitalization, a significant adverse change in legal factors, business climate or operational performance of the business, and an adverse action or assessment by a regulator. Goodwill is tested for impairment as of December 31st of each year, or more frequently as warranted by events or changes in circumstances mentioned above. Accounting guidance also permits an optional qualitative assessment for goodwill to determine whether it is more likely than not that the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value. If, after this qualitative assessment, we determine that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then no further quantitative testing would be necessary. A quantitative assessment is performed if the qualitative assessment results in a more likely than not determination or if a qualitative assessment is not performed. The quantitative assessment considers whether the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, in which case an impairment charge is recorded to the extent the reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value. The Company operates as one reporting unit as of the goodwill impairment measurement date of December 31, 2020. As a result of our 2020 quantitative assessment, we concluded that goodwill was not impaired as of December 31, 2020.
Contingent Consideration
We estimate the acquisition date fair value of the acquisition-related contingent consideration using various valuation approaches, including option pricing models and Monte Carlo simulations, as well as significant unobservable inputs, reflecting the Company’s assessment of the assumptions market participants would use to value these liabilities. The fair value of the contingent consideration is remeasured each reporting period, with any change in the value recorded in our consolidated statements of operations as change in fair value of contingent consideration.
Stock-based Compensation
We measure and record compensation expense using the applicable accounting guidance for share-based payments related to stock options, time-based restricted stock, market-based restricted stock awards and performance-based awards granted to our directors and employees. The fair value of stock options is determined by using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The fair value of market-based restricted stock awards is estimated, at the date of grant, using the Monte Carlo Simulation model. The Black-Scholes and Monte Carlo Simulation valuation models incorporate assumptions as to stock price volatility, the expected life of options or awards, a risk-free interest rate and dividend yield. In valuing our stock options and market-based stock awards, significant judgment is required in determining the expected volatility of our common stock. Expected volatility for stock options is based on the historical and implied volatility of our own common stock while the volatility for our market-based restricted stock awards is based on the historical volatility of our own stock and the stock of companies within our defined peer group. Further, our expected volatility may change in the future, which could substantially change the grant-date fair value of future awards and, ultimately, the expense we record. The fair value of restricted stock, including performance awards, without a market condition is estimated using the current market price of our common stock on the date of grant.
We expense stock-based compensation for stock options, restricted stock awards, and performance awards over the requisite service period. For awards with only a service condition, we expense stock-based compensation using the straight-line method over the requisite service period for the entire award. For awards with a market condition, we expense over the vesting period regardless of the value that the award recipients will ultimately receive.
Provision for Income Taxes
We maintain a full valuation allowance on our net deferred tax assets. The assessment regarding whether a valuation allowance is required considers both positive and negative evidence when determining whether it is more likely than not that deferred tax assets are recoverable. In making this assessment, significant weight is given to evidence that can be objectively verified. In its evaluation, the Company considered its cumulative loss and its forecasted losses in the near-term as significant negative evidence. Based upon a review of the four sources of income identified within ASC 740, “Accounting for Income Taxes”, the Company determined that the negative evidence outweighed the positive evidence and a full valuation allowance on its assets will be maintained. The Company will continue to assess the realizability of its assets going forward and will adjust the valuation allowance as needed.
The Company determines its uncertain tax positions based on a determination of whether and how much of a tax benefit taken by the Company in its tax filings or positions is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by the relevant income tax authorities. The Company is generally subject to examination by U.S. federal and local income tax authorities for all tax years in which loss carryforward is available.
The Company applies judgment in the determination of the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has an unrecorded tax benefit of $96,000 related to tax attributes being carried forward. The Company is generally subject to examination by U.S. federal and local income tax authorities for all tax years in which loss carryforward is available.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had U.S. federal net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards of approximately $56.6 million, which is available to reduce future taxable income. Approximately $32.3 million of NOL will expire from 2021 through 2036, and approximately $24.3 million of NOL will be carried forward indefinitely. The NOL carryforwards may become subject to an annual limitation in the event of certain cumulative changes in the ownership interest. This could limit the amount of tax attributes that can be utilized annually to offset future taxable income or tax liabilities. Subsequent ownership changes may further affect the limitation in future years.
Recent Accounting Standards Update
See Note 1: “Organization and Significant Accounting Policies - Recent Accounting Pronouncements,” to our consolidated financial statements included in this report for more information.
Results of Operations
The following discussion of the financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and the related footnotes thereto.
Revenue
Acquisitions that occurred in 2020 and 2019 resulted in increased revenue diversification compared to prior years, in which nearly all revenue was derived from our biopreservation media product line. Our revenues in 2020 and late 2019 were more diversified, both in terms of product and customer concentration, a trend we expect to continue to see in future years. In addition, we realized quarterly fluctuations based on large customer ordering patterns. This trend is expected to continue in 2021.
Revenue for years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 were comprised of the following:
(1)
2020 revenue includes service revenue related to SciSafe from October 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020.
(2)
2019 revenue includes automated thawing revenue related to Astero from April 1, 2019 through December 31, 2019; cold chain management revenue related to SAVSU from August 8, 2019 through December 31, 2019; and freezer and accessory revenue related to CBS from November 12, 2019 through December 31, 2019.
For 2020, revenue increased by $20.7 million, or 76%, compared with 2019. The increase is due to an increase in product revenue from our biopreservation media products along with the SciSafe acquisition and operating three businesses acquired in 2019 for a full year. Product revenue of our biopreservation media products in 2020 increased $7.6 million, or 32% compared with 2019. Our biopreservation media products continued to be adopted by customers in the CGT market and we realized a higher selling price per liter in 2020 compared to 2019. Service revenues generated by SciSafe post-acquisition amounted to $1.8 million. Product and rental revenues from the automated thawing, cold chain management, and freezers and accessories product lines in 2020 increased $11.4 million, or 284% compared with 2019. Revenue is impacted by the relatively high degree of customer concentration, the timing of orders, the development efforts of our customers or end-users and regulatory approvals for biologics that incorporate our products, which may result in significant quarterly fluctuations. Such quarterly fluctuations are expected, but they may not be predictive of future revenue or otherwise indicative of a trend.
Costs and Operating Expenses
Total costs and operating expenses for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were comprised of the following:
Cost of Product, Rental, and Service Revenue
In 2020, cost of product, rental, and service revenue increased $11.9 million or 136% when compared to 2019, due primarily to increased revenues as a result of increases in product revenue of our biopreservation media products, our SciSafe acquisition, and operation of the three businesses acquired in 2019 for a full year. The product lines that we acquired in 2020 and 2019 have a higher cost of product, rental, and service revenue than our biopreservation media products. We expect the cost of product, rental, and service revenue to fluctuate in future quarters based on production volumes, product mix, and the full year impact of our acquisition of SciSafe.
Cost of product, rental, and service revenue as a percentage of revenue was 43%, and 32% for 2020 and 2019, respectively. Cost of product, rental, and service revenue in 2020 and 2019 includes $411,000 and $289,000, respectively, in inventory step-up related amortization recorded in the purchase accounting of our Astero and CBS acquisitions. The increase in cost of product, rental, and service revenue as a percentage of revenue is a result of the higher costs of product, rental, and service revenue as a percentage of revenue for the product lines acquired in 2020 and 2019 through the Astero, SAVSU, CBS, and SciSafe acquisitions. Incremental costs of product, rental, and service revenue contributed by the automated thawing, cold chain management, freezer and accessories, and biological and pharmaceutical storage product lines in 2020 were $258,000, $961,000, $7.2 million, and $1.2 million, respectively.
Research and Development Expenses
During 2020 and 2019 research and development (“R&D”) expense consisted primarily of personnel-related costs, consulting and external product development services.
R&D expense increased $3.6 million in 2020, or 112%, compared with 2019. The increase is primarily due to operation of the three businesses acquired in 2019 for a full year, increased consulting and development costs in 2020 related to our acquired products, and stock compensation expense.
We expect our R&D expense to increase as we continue to expand, develop and refine the product lines we acquired in 2020 and 2019.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expense (“S&M”) consisted primarily of personnel-related costs, stock compensation expense, trade shows, sales commissions and advertising.
In 2020, S&M expense increased $1.7 million, or 36%, compared with 2019. The increase reflects the S&M costs we absorbed related to our acquisitions, stock compensation expense and an increase in personnel-related costs.
We expect S&M expense to increase, as we expand our direct selling efforts to support the broader product line offerings resulting from our 2020 and 2019 acquisitions.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative (“G&A”) expense consists primarily of personnel-related expenses, non-cash stock-based compensation for administrative personnel and members of the board of directors, professional fees, such as accounting and legal, and corporate insurance.
In 2020, G&A expenses increased by $5.7 million, or 64%, compared with 2019. The increase reflects the assumption of G&A expenses related to our 2020 and 2019 acquisitions, and the continued buildout of our administrative infrastructure, primarily through increased headcount and information technology expenditures, to support expected future growth and stock compensation expense.
We expect G&A expense to increase reflecting the infrastructure and costs related to supporting the larger expected enterprise created as a result of our 2020 and 2019 acquisitions.
Intangible asset amortization expense
Amortization expense consists of charges related to the amortization of intangible assets associated with acquisitions, Astero, SAVSU, CBS, and SciSafe in which we acquired definite-lived intangible assets.
Acquisition costs
Acquisition costs consist of legal, accounting, third-party valuations, and other due diligence costs related to our Astero, SAVSU, CBS, and SciSafe acquisitions.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration
Change in fair value of contingent consideration consists of changes in estimated fair value of our potential earnouts related to our Astero, CBS, and SciSafe acquisitions.
Other Income and Expenses
Total other expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were comprised of the following:
Change in fair value of warrant liability. Reflects the changes in fair value associated with the periodic “mark to market” valuation of certain warrants that were issued in 2014. See Note 1: “Organization and Significant Accounting Policies” of our accompanying consolidated financial statements “Certain Warrants which have Features that may Result in Cash Settlement” for more information.
Change in fair value of investments. Reflects the fair value adjustments to our investment in iVexSol convertible debt prior to it’s conversion to Series A-1 Preferred Stock. The fair value was determined by expected term of the instrument, the underlying credit worthiness of iVexSol and the valuation of various embedded features in the note, which were based on future financings of iVexSol. The expected term range of our estimate was 1 to 5 years, with projected weighting over this term.
Interest Income, net. We earn interest on cash held in our money market account. Despite having a higher average cash balance in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, yields in our money market account dropped steeply between February and March due to reduced interest rates set by the United States Federal Reserve, causing interest income to be significantly lower in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019.
Loss on equity method investment. The non-cash loss associated with our proportionate share of the net loss in our investment in SAVSU prior to our acquisition of the remaining shares of SAVSU and subsequent consolidation of SAVSU in our financial statements.
Gain on acquisition of SAVSU. The non-cash gain associated with our equity investment in SAVSU due to the acquisition of the remaining shares of SAVSU and subsequent consolidation of SAVSU in our financial statements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On December 31, 2020, we had $90.4 million in cash and cash equivalents, compared to $6.4 million at December 31, 2019. The increase in cash is primarily due to the Company selling shares of common stock in both May and July of 2020. These increases were reduced by cash payments made for the acquisition of SciSafe. Details regarding these events can be found in the following paragraphs.
On May 22, 2020, the Company closed on a share purchase agreement with Casdin Capital LLC, a current stockholder of the Company, pursuant to which Casdin invested $20.0 million in the Company at $10.50 per share.
On July 7, 2020, the Company closed its public offering of 5,951,250 shares of common stock at the public offering price of $14.50 per share, which includes the shares purchased pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriters' option to purchase up to an additional 776,250 shares of its common stock. The net proceeds from the public offering to BioLife, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated underwriter offering expenses of $6.1 million, were approximately $80.2 million.
On October 1, 2020, we acquired SciSafe for $15.0 million in cash, 611,683 shares of common stock, and up to 626,000 additional shares of common stock as contingent consideration (which payment requirement has not been triggered or otherwise paid to date).
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
In 2020, our operating activities provided cash of $6.6 million reflecting net income of $2.7 million and non-cash charges totaling $5.8 million primarily related to depreciation, amortization, changes in the fair value of investments, changes in fair value of contingent consideration, income tax benefit related to the acquisition of SciSafe, change in the fair value of the warrant liability, and stock-based compensation charges. An increase in accounts receivable used $1.8 million of cash and was primarily driven by the 76% year-to-date increase in revenues and an increase in inventory used $629,000 to support future revenue. These cash items used for operating activities were offset by cash items provided by operating activities that included an increase in accrued liabilities of $780,000. The remaining cash used in operating activities resulted from unfavorable changes in various other working capital accounts.
In 2019, our operating activities provided cash of $1.2 million, reflecting a net loss of $1.7 million and non-cash charges totaling $7.3 million primarily related to depreciation, amortization, gain on acquisition of SAVSU, changes in fair value contingent consideration, income tax benefit related to the acquisition of SAVSU, fair value change in warrant liability and stock-based compensation charges. An increase in accounts receivable used $290,000 of cash and was primarily driven by the 39% year-to-date increase in revenues and an increase in inventory used $3.7 million to support future revenue. These cash items used for operating activities were offset by cash items provided by operating activities that included an increase in accounts payable of $768,000. The remaining cash used in operating activities resulted from unfavorable changes in various other working capital accounts.
Investing Activities
Our investing activities used $24.7 million of cash during 2020. We used $15.0 million in cash for the SciSafe acquisition. We also invested $1.0 million and $995,000 in our strategic investments in iVexSol and PanTHERA, respectively. Capital expenditures, deposits on future capital expenditures, purchases of assets held for rent, and deposits made on assets held for rent used $7.8 million as we continue to invest in our manufacturing and storage facilities.
Our investing activities used $27.0 million of cash during 2019. We used $12.4 million, gained $1.3 million, and used $11.0 million in cash for the Astero, SAVSU, and CBS acquisitions, respectively. We also invested $1.0 million and $1.5 million in our strategic investments in iVexSol and Sexton Bio, respectively. Capital expenditures used $2.3 million in our manufacturing facilities and to increase SAVSU’s assets held for rent.
Financing Activities
In 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $102.1 million. We received $100.3 million from the sale of common shares and $1.5 million from the proceeds of warrant and stock option exercises. We used $483,000 for contingent consideration related to the Astero acquisition.
In 2019, cash provided by financing activities of $1.6 million of cash included $1.8 million from the proceeds of warrant and stock option exercises.
Impacts of COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak to be a pandemic. During 2020, we believe our quarterly revenues were affected by COVID-19. During the first quarter, our biopreservation media product lines benefited due to what we believe was safety stock purchasing by our customers due to COVID-19. In the second and third quarters, we believe that revenues were negatively impacted by a reduction in clinical trial progression and temporary halts. We then noticed an increase of purchasing in biopreservation media in the fourth quarter as clinical trials and research lab activity resumed with reduced restrictions. Our biological and pharmaceutical services business that we acquired in the fourth quarter was in-line with expectations and we expect increased demand for biological material storage with the reduction of COVID-19 restrictions. Our 2020 revenue was negatively affected for our automated thawing devices, cloud connected “smart” shipping containers, and freezer and storage technology lines of business by the COVID-19 pandemic due to restrictions on in-person selling, customer budget cuts for capital equipment and lack of personnel at our customer sites to receive capital equipment. We have tried and, to date, have been successful in mitigating any supply chain problems. However, we cannot be assured that a continued or prolonged global pandemic will not have a negative impact on our manufacturing and shipping processes or our product costs. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic affects our future financial results and operations will depend on future developments which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including the recurrence, severity and/or duration of the ongoing pandemic, and current or future domestic and international actions to contain and treat COVID-19.
We are following public and private sector policies and initiatives to reduce the transmission of COVID-19, such as the imposition of travel restrictions and the promotion of social distancing and work-from-home arrangements. We are taking a variety of measures to ensure the availability and functioning of our critical infrastructure, to promote the safety and security of our employees and to support the communities in which we operate. These measures include increasing our raw materials, manufacturing safe stock inventory for our biopreservation media and expanding availability of our biological and pharmaceutical storage, requiring remote working arrangements for employees who are not integral to physically making and shipping our products or who do not need specialized equipment to perform their work, restricting on-site visits by non-employees and implementing social distancing protocols and investing in personal protective equipment. Beginning April 2, 2020 face masks were required to be worn by all employees and contractors at all sites. Effective May 11, 2020, temperature screening was required upon entering our facilities where mandated by state law. Starting on May 11, 2020, our employees were required to complete daily COVID-19 exposure and symptom questionnaires where mandated, with the requirement rolling out companywide on October 13, 2020 for all locations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any special purpose entities or off-balance sheet financing arrangements.
Capital Requirements
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including the following:
●
the expansion of our cell and gene therapy tools and services business;
●
the ability to sustain product revenue and profits of our cell and gene therapy products and services;
●
The degree to which we implement additional automated production equipment throughout our facilities;
●
our ability to acquire additional cell and gene therapy products and services;
●
the scope of and progress made in our research and development activities; and
●
the success of any proposed financing efforts.
Absent acquisitions of additional products, product candidates or intellectual property, we believe our current cash balances are adequate to meet our cash needs for at least the next 12 months. We expect operating expenses in the year ending December 31, 2021 to increase as we continue to expand our CGT tools business. We expect to incur continued spending related to the development and expansion of our product lines and expansion of our commercial capabilities for the foreseeable future. Our future capital requirements may include, but are not limited to, purchases of property, plant and equipment, the acquisition of additional cell and gene therapy products and technologies to complement our existing manufacturing capabilities, and continued investment in our intellectual property portfolio.
We actively evaluate various strategic transactions on an ongoing basis, including acquiring complementary products, technologies or businesses that would complement our existing portfolio. We continue to seek to acquire such potential assets that may offer us the best opportunity to create value for our shareholders. In order to acquire such assets, we may need to seek additional financing to fund these investments. If our available cash balances and anticipated cash flow from operations are insufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements, including because of any such acquisition-related financing needs or lower demand for our products, we may seek to sell common or preferred equity or convertible debt securities, enter into a credit facility or another form of third-party funding, or seek other debt funding. The sale of equity and convertible debt securities may result in dilution to our stockholders, and those securities may have rights senior to those of our common shares. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of preferred stock, convertible debt securities or other debt financing, these securities or other debt could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. Any other third-party funding arrangement could require us to relinquish valuable rights. We may require additional capital beyond our currently anticipated amounts. Additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, if at all.