Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations together with the section titled “Selected consolidated financial data” and our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this Annual Report contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in or implied by these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section titled “Risk factors.” Please also see the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements.”
Overview
Berkeley Lights is a leading Digital Cell Biology company focused on enabling and accelerating the rapid development and commercialization of biotherapeutics and other cell-based products. The Berkeley Lights Platform captures deep phenotypic, functional and genotypic information for thousands of single cells in parallel and can also deliver the live biology customers desire in the form of the best cells. This is a new way to capture and interpret the qualitative language of biology and translate it into single-cell specific digital information, referred to as Digital Cell Biology. We currently focus on enabling the large and rapidly growing markets of antibody therapeutics, cell therapy and synthetic biology with our platform.
The Berkeley Lights Platform can be used to characterize the performance of cells relevant to the desired cell-based product early in the discovery process and then connect this phenotypic data to the genetic code for each cell. In contrast, current genomic technologies find sequences first and fail to deliver the functional information early in the process. Performing functional validation early means letting poorly performing cells fail early while rapidly advancing the best candidates forward, before incurring significant research and development expense. Our platform repeats this process of fail and advance many times throughout the process, delivering the best cells for what we believe will deliver the best product.
Our platform is a fully integrated, end-to-end solution, comprised of proprietary consumables, including our OptoSelect chips and reagent kits, advanced automation systems and advanced application and workflow software. Customers load onto our system their live cell samples, as well as media and reagents, then the cells are imported onto our OptoSelect chips where integrated workflows are performed to assess specific cell functions and attributes. Our platform captures and delivers rich single-cell data to find the best cells. Our platform leverages proprietary OptoElectro Positioning (“OEP”) technology, which enables deterministic positioning of living single cells and other micro-objects using light. OEP is a core technology of our platform and allows for a high level of control over live single cells or other micro-objects throughout the functional characterization process.
Our commercial workflows, each of which are distinct offerings, are made up of four modules we call Import, Culture, Assay and Export. These modules can be adapted, interchanged and deployed with a variety of single-cell assays to address specific applications and a variety of cell types. We believe this versatility facilitates rapid development of new workflow offerings and virtually unlimited workflow commercialization opportunities. We have developed and will continue to develop and commercialize proprietary workflows across large markets by leveraging existing workflows and assays. Over time, our goal is to enable customers to standardize many of their processes on our platform utilizing our workflows. We believe we are the only company commercializing a platform that can do this in a scalable way.
We commercially launched our platform in December of 2016, which included the Beacon system and the alpha version of our Opto Cell Line Development 1.0 workflow, targeted to the antibody therapeutics market. From the initial launch of our platform through December 31, 2020, we have commercially launched eight workflows. In June of 2019, we launched our desktop Lightning system targeted for assay development and lower throughput workflows, and in early 2020 we launched the Culture Station instrument.
Revenue increased 13% to $64.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $56.7 million in 2019, primarily due to the adoption of our platform by new customers, increased workflow utilization from existing customers further deploying our advanced automation systems across their value chains along with the associated increased usage of consumables, as well as service and extended warranty revenue largely from annual contract renewals by existing customers. Total revenue by market was $51.8 million in antibody therapeutics, $4.5 million in cell therapy and $8.0 million in synthetic biology for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $49.4 million, $2.6 million and $4.7 million, respectively, in 2019. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, revenue from North America accounted for approximately 51% and 53% of our revenue, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020, our customer base was comprised of 63 customers and included several of the largest biopharmaceutical companies in the world, as well as biotechnology companies, leading contract research organizations, synthetic biology companies and academic institutions. For each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 we added 22 new customers. While we have seen significant growth in our customer and installed base, we believe we are still in the very early stages of platform adoption, with the majority of our historical revenue derived from early adopters of our technology for research and development purposes.
As of December 31, 2020, we employed a commercial team of 85 employees, including 29 with Ph.D. degrees and many with significant industry experience. Of the 85 commercial employees, 37 were in business development, sales and marketing. As of December 31, 2020, our commercial team included 17 quota carrying sales representatives, an increase of 31% compared to 13 quota carrying sales representatives as of December 31, 2019. We follow a direct sales model in North America, certain regions in Europe and China, while also selling through third party distributors and dealers in Asia. We intend to continue making significant investments in this area for the foreseeable future. We also intend to continue to make investments in building our sales team and marketing our products and services to potential customers. We incurred aggregate general, administrative, and sales and marketing expenses of $37.7 million and $21.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We focus a substantial portion of our resources on platform, workflow and assay development, as well as on business development and sales and marketing. Our research and development efforts are geared towards developing new workflows and assay capabilities, as well as new advanced systems and OptoSelect chips and reagent kits, to meet both our customers’ needs and to address new markets. We incurred research and development expenses of $47.2 million and $38.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We generally outsource all of our production manufacturing. Design work, prototyping and pilot manufacturing are performed in-house before outsourcing to third party contract manufacturers. Our outsourced production strategy is intended to drive cost leverage and scale, and avoid the high capital outlays and fixed costs related to constructing and operating a manufacturing facility. The contract manufacturers of our systems, reagent kits and OptoSelect chip components are located in the United States, Asia and Europe. Certain of our suppliers of components and materials are single source suppliers. We perform final manufacture and assembly steps of our OptoSelect chips in-house.
We have financed our operations primarily from the issuance and sale of equity securities, borrowings under our long-term debt agreement, as well as cash flows from operations. On July 21, 2020, we closed our initial public offering (the “IPO”), in which we sold 9,315,000 shares of common stock (which included 1,215,000 shares that were sold pursuant to the full exercise of the IPO underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares) at a price to the public of $22.00 per share. We received aggregate net proceeds of $187.9 million after deducting offering costs, underwriting discounts and commissions of $17.0 million.
Since our inception in 2011, we have incurred net losses in each year. Our net losses were $41.6 million and $18.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $191.9 million and cash and cash equivalents totaling $233.4 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future. We expect our expenses will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
•attract, hire and retain qualified personnel;
•invest in processes and infrastructure to scale our platform;
•support research and development to introduce new products;
•market and sell new and existing products and services;
•protect and defend our intellectual property; and
•acquire businesses or technologies to support the growth of our business.
Access options to Digital Cell Biology enabled by the Berkeley Lights Platform
Our business model is focused on driving the adoption of the Berkeley Lights Platform and maximizing its use across our customers’ value chains. This is achieved by enabling more functional testing of single cells throughout our customers’ value chains and by finding opportunities for customers to perform single-cell functional testing earlier in their product development process to advance better product candidates. We engage with potential customers to identify a significant challenge they are facing and then evaluate which of our workflows and underlying assays can address their problem. Customers can gain access to our platform via direct purchase, subscription, or strategic partnership. In many cases we can address customers’ needs with existing or variants of existing workflows. Alternately, we may form strategic partnerships to develop substantially new workflows with our customers to address their needs. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, revenue was $44.7 million and $39.1 million, respectively, from direct purchases (or 69% and 69%, respectively), $1.1 million and $89,000, respectively, from subscription and related revenue (2% and none, respectively), and $5.8 million and $9.6 million, respectively, from strategic partnerships (or 9% and 17%, respectively).
Direct purchase: Under this option the customer acquires the platform through a one-time purchase. In addition, the customer may be required to acquire an annually renewable workflow license for any applicable workflow the customer plans to deploy. Customers can opt to buy extended warranty and service agreements from us and purchase the required Berkeley Lights consumables and reagents as needed.
Subscription: Through our recently launched subscription program, a customer is able to subscribe to a specific workflow and pay a quarterly fee over a fixed period of time which covers the annual workflow license, the advanced automation system, as well as warranty and service. In our current subscription offering, customers purchase the required Berkeley Lights consumables and reagents as needed.
Strategic partnership: This option can combine the direct purchase or subscription access option along with milestone payments for joint workflow development programs. Depending on the partnership, it may in the future include shared revenue arrangements in the form of royalties.
Under these access options we have the potential to generate recurring revenue streams in the form of OptoSelect chip and reagent kit sales, service and extended warranty arrangements, annual renewable workflow license fees, subscription fees, as well as the potential for the future sale of biological assets and royalty arrangements. Growth and predictability of recurring revenue is impacted by the mix between these access options, the total number and frequency of workflows deployed and performed, the length and magnitude of fee and subscription arrangements and their related renewal rates, and to a lesser extent, seasonal budget patterns of our customers. It is our goal and expectation that recurring revenue will grow over time, both in absolute dollars and as a percentage of our revenue.
Our sales process can vary considerably depending upon the type of customer and engagement type. Our sales process can be long, with sales cycles spanning several quarters or more, depending upon the magnitude of the transaction. Given the variability of our sales cycle and the impact of system placement mix from the different access options, as well as the number of placements that require an upfront feasibility study, we expect continued fluctuations in our revenue on a period-to-period basis until we achieve broader adoption of our platform and recurring revenue grows to a higher percentage of our revenue. We enter a given period with limited backlog and our revenue relies on a high
conversion percentage of orders to be booked and shipped in that period, which also results in somewhat limited revenue visibility from period to period.
Key factors affecting our results of operations and future performance
We believe that our financial performance has been, and in the foreseeable future will continue to be, primarily driven by multiple factors as described below, each of which presents growth opportunities for our business. These factors also pose important challenges that we must successfully address in order to sustain our growth and improve our results of operations. Our ability to successfully address these challenges is subject to various risks and uncertainties, including those described under the heading “Risk factors.”
New customer adoption of the Berkeley Lights Platform
Our financial performance has largely been driven by, and a key factor to our future success will be, our ability to increase the adoption of our platform. We plan to drive global customer adoption through business development efforts, a direct sales and marketing organization in the United States, parts of Europe, China, and third party distributors and dealers in Asia. We are investing in our direct sales organization and establishing distributors in certain global geographies. As part of this effort, we increased our quota carrying sales force by 31% in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, our installed base of advanced automation systems outside of our BioFoundry was 75 and 48, respectively. For the purposes of defining our installed base of advanced automation systems, we do not include the Culture Station as it is not a direct driver of recurring revenue.
Adoption of the platform access options we offer
We offer different access options to our platform in order to meet customer budget and business model needs. We believe this helps to drive customer adoption of our platform. Customers can access our platform with a direct platform purchase or subscription. We also form strategic partnerships to jointly develop workflows, through which the customer can gain access to our platform through a combination of direct platform purchase or subscription, milestone payments and, in the future, potentially shared revenue arrangements. Substantially all of our customers to date have chosen to access our platform with a direct platform purchase or to form a strategic partnership with us. We launched the subscription access option in February 2020 and believe that over time, a growing portion of our new customers will choose subscription. The degree to which customers adopt one access option over the other could create variations in the amount of and timing in which we recognize revenue and derive cash flow from operations. In addition, as adoption of the subscription access option increases, it will make it difficult to compare our future results with our historical results as a consequence of differing accounting treatment.
Utilization and value of our workflows
Workflows represent a source of recurring revenue from customers using our platform through increased consumables consumption and licenses. We are driving utilization of our workflows by engaging with customers leveraging our customer success organization to help them advance through the platform adoption cycle from early stage validation of the platform into an integrated solution. As our platform advances towards becoming fully integrated within customer processes, customers utilize more workflows. We also develop new workflows for use at multiple points within the discovery, development and production phases of our customers’ value chains. We increase the value of our workflows by building additional assays that can be used with a given workflow and by further integrating the workflows into our customers’ existing processes. We are also expanding the upstream and downstream reach of our workflows. This increases the workflow value to our customers and enables us to share in that value creation, which we believe will increase workflow adoption.
Adoption of our platform across existing customers’ organizations
There is an opportunity to increase broader adoption and utilization of our platform throughout our customers’ organizations by their purchasing of more systems to support multiple locations, to meet redundancy requirements, or driven by a need to increase capacity. Increased usage amongst existing customers can also occur as customers advance through the platform adoption cycle from early stage validation phase into an integrated solution.
Development and monetization of proprietary biological assets
Our ability to participate in the end-markets of cell-based products is a function of how many proprietary biological assets are generated during new workflow development in our BioFoundry. Within our Berkeley Lights BioFoundry, we develop, practice and validate workflows. In certain cases, we may use our own biology as part of this validation process. This enables us to commercialize new workflows and may also generate proprietary valuable biological assets we could sell outright or license to customers, such as functionally validated antibodies or new organisms applicable to synthetic biology. We also use our BioFoundry Innovation Lab in cooperation with third parties to develop workflows to generate proprietary biological assets for new and adjacent markets. These early third party research collaborations may take various forms, including service or capacity subscription arrangements.
Adoption of the Berkeley Lights Platform into new markets
Our market entry strategy involves identifying markets that have significant constraints, which can be addressed by our platform. This can be specific to certain diseases or pathogens and/or involve new therapeutic modalities and/or cell types. We drive our expansion into new markets by developing workflows for those markets, either by adapting existing workflows or by partnering with leaders in those markets to develop workflows that address their significant unmet needs, and have general value for other customers in that market. These partnerships
can result in joint development of specific workflows and assays involving upfront and milestone arrangements, as well as capacity subscription arrangements. Depending on the agreement, we could also negotiate end product revenue participation through royalties. Furthermore, these partnerships enable us to generate insights about a particular market, which facilitates development of workflows that we may commercialize to the market broadly.
Leverage derived from our BioFoundry research and development infrastructure
We use our Berkeley Lights BioFoundry, which we believe represents the largest single location platform capacity globally for functionally characterizing cells, to drive new workflow development and functionally characterize cells. In our BioFoundry, we practice and develop workflows and functional assays that are applicable throughout the value chain of our target markets. Our workflows are made up of modules that can be adapted, interchanged and deployed with a variety of assays. We believe this versatility facilitates rapid development of new workflow offerings and virtually unlimited workflow commercialization opportunities. There can also be significant leverage among workflows and underlying assays used to functionally characterize single cells in these markets, allowing us to leverage the components developed for one market to improve and accelerate workflow development for another market. This allows us to capture workflow synergies which facilitate adoption of our platform across markets. We have and will continue to invest significantly in expanding our assay and workflow libraries. We have grown our workflow library since the introduction of our first workflow in December of 2016, and as of December 31, 2020, we offered eight commercial workflows incorporating sixteen assays and eleven cell classes.
Further investment towards adoption of Digital Cell Biology
Driving the adoption of our platform and workflows across existing and new markets will require significant investment. We plan to further invest in research and development to support the expansion of our workflow and assay libraries as well as the addition of platform capabilities including new reagent kits and OptoSelect chips, and new advanced automation systems to address new markets and new workflows. We will continue to hire employees with the necessary scientific and technical backgrounds to enhance our existing products and help us introduce new products to market. We expect to incur additional research and development expenses and higher stock-based compensation expenses as a result. We further plan to invest in sales, marketing and business development activities to drive the commercialization of new products, migration to new markets and further growth within our existing markets. We have invested, and will continue to invest, significantly in our manufacturing capabilities and commercial infrastructure, including customer support and service. We expect to incur additional general and administrative expenses and to have higher stock-based compensation expenses as we support our growth and our continuing transition into a publicly traded company. As cost of revenue, operating expenses and capital expenditures fluctuate over time, we may experience short-term, negative impacts to our results of operations and cash flows, but we are undertaking such investments in the belief that they will contribute to long-term growth and sustainability.
Key business metrics
We regularly review the following key business metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections and make strategic decisions. We believe that the following metrics are representative of our current business; however, we anticipate these will change or may be substituted for additional or different metrics as our business grows.
(1) We define revenue from new customers as revenue from a customer for which we have not previously recorded revenue on any prior transaction.
COVID-19 update
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic and various resulting government directives, we took proactive measures to protect the health and safety of our employees, contractors, customers and visiting vendors and suppliers. We continue to monitor the implications of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, as well as our customers’ and suppliers’ businesses. Some of the measures we have taken were as follows:
•During this pandemic, we moved quickly to place platforms and to provide reagents to researchers around the world working to understand COVID-19 and identify antibodies to support the development of therapies and cures for the disease with the aim to
accelerate the discovery of neutralizing antibodies. Our platforms, assays and workflows are a useful tool for infectious disease research because they are able to be leveraged for antibody discovery using the blood of recovering patients as the foundation for therapeutics.
•Berkeley Lights has been designated an essential business that can continue operations during the COVID-19 pandemic. In early March, we promptly instituted protocols to have many personnel work remotely. At the same time, because of our continued designation as an essential business, many employees continue to come on-site to our facility in Emeryville, California to undertake research and development activities that support essential operations to, among other things, provide critical products to researchers and support the important research and development being undertaken by our customers. For those employees coming on-site, we have implemented social distancing and other protective measures in order to protect their health and safety. We have also restricted business travel and have limited access to our campus and other facilities to outside visitors other than vendors, suppliers and partners who are integral to supporting our business. To date, these arrangements have not materially affected our ability to maintain our business operations, including the operation of financial reporting systems, internal control over financial reporting and disclosure controls and procedures.
•Our production, shipping and customer service functions remain operational to maintain a continuous supply of products both to our customers and for our internal research and development activities. We are communicating regularly with our suppliers so that our supply chain remains intact and we have not yet experienced any material supply issues. Our customer service teams around the world are operating remotely and remain available to assist our customers and partners as needed and, for certain customers, our service and support team members have been required to complete country-specific quarantine requirements, which adds both time and costs to our business operations and customer responsiveness.
•Initially, as a result of travel restrictions and shelter-in-place orders, we experienced an impact on our ability to ship and install systems, as well train customers in certain geographies. In July 2020, we began developing, and continue to develop, remote learning capabilities to help our customers and partners operate their Berkeley Lights platforms and reduce the number of customer/partner on-site visits our field application scientists and field support engineers need to make in view of certain travel restrictions and country-specific quarantine requirements.
•We are actively reviewing and managing costs to navigate the current environment. However, to date, the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material adverse effect on our expenses.
While the disruption from the COVID-19 pandemic is currently expected to be temporary, there is considerable uncertainty around its duration. We expect these disruptions to impact our future operating results. However, the related financial impact and duration of these disruptions cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
Components of results of operations
Revenue
Our revenue consists of both product and service revenue, which is generated through the following revenue streams: (i) direct platform sales (advanced automation systems, fully-paid workflow license agreements and platform support), (ii) recurring revenue (annual workflow license agreements, workflow subscription agreements, consumables, service and extended or enhanced warranty contracts), and (iii) revenue from partnerships related to our joint development agreements, and to a lesser extent feasibility studies. Sales of advanced automation systems, recurring revenue from consumables, workflow subscription agreements, and workflow licenses are defined as product revenue, and revenue from joint development agreements and partnerships, service and extended or enhanced warranty contracts, feasibility studies and platform support are defined as service revenue in our consolidated results of operations.
Total revenue was $64.3 million and $56.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Total revenue was $31.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Direct platform sales: Direct platform sales are comprised of our customers, distributors and dealers directly purchasing our advanced automation systems, which include the Beacon and Lightning systems and Culture Station instrument. These direct purchases included, during our early customer engagements, a fully paid workflow license to practice the desired workflow(s) in a specific field of use. In addition, we also offer platform support to the extent customers require further system and workflow optimization following platform implementation. Direct platform sales were as follows for the periods presented:
Recurring revenue: Each platform placement, depending on the chosen access model, drives various streams of recurring revenue. With each workflow, our customers require certain consumables such as our OptoSelect chips and reagent kits to run their workflows. The OptoSelect chips can only be used with our platform and we believe there are no alternative after-market options that can be used as a substitute. Each OptoSelect chip is considered, and labeled for, single-use and only used for one workflow. Consumables are sold without the right of return and revenue is recognized upon transfer of control. We also offer our customers extended warranty and service programs for regular system maintenance and system optimization. These services are provided primarily on a fixed fee basis. We recognize revenue from the sale of an
extended warranty contract over the respective coverage period. Extended and enhanced warranty, as well as service contracts, are typically short-term in nature, generally covering a one-year period.
Recurring revenue may also include annually renewable workflow licenses as well as quarterly workflow subscription revenue from annual or multi-year subscription agreements. In late 2019, we piloted a subscription option for the antibody discovery and cell line development workflows that was formally launched in February 2020. We are still in the early commercialization phase of assessing market acceptance of the subscription access model and it is possible the model may change as we engage with and learn from initial subscription customers. Recurring revenue was as follows for the periods presented:
Revenue from joint development agreements and partnerships: Joint development agreements and partnerships, including collaboration agreements, are arrangements whereby we provide services for the development of new workflows, cell, or organism types, or deliver specific biological assets to meet specific customers’ needs. Such contracts can be executed on a time and material basis as well as include defined milestones associated with these development activities over extended periods of time, some in excess of twenty-four months. Our joint development agreements that include formal milestones typically include formal customer acceptance clauses as each milestone is completed, and an approval to proceed with the next milestone is generally required. Some development agreements may also include a prerequisite feasibility study to determine proof of concept before any work is initiated. We recognize revenue over time using an input measure of progress based on costs incurred to date as compared to the total estimated costs (i.e. percentage of completion), or in certain instances on a time-and-materials basis, depending on the terms of the development agreement. We periodically review and update our estimates which may adjust revenue recognized for the period. Revenue from joint development and partnership agreements can vary over time as different projects start and complete. On occasion, we also perform feasibility studies prior to a direct platform sale in the event customers require specific platform validation prior to purchase. Joint development agreement and partnership related revenue was as follows for the periods presented:
Costs of sales, gross profit and gross margin
Product cost of sales. Cost of sales associated with our products primarily consists of manufacturing related costs incurred in the production process, including personnel and related costs, costs of component materials, labor and overhead, packaging and delivery costs and allocated costs, including facilities and information technology. These costs also include the costs associated with the standard assurance-type product warranty provided on our platforms, which are recorded at the time of sale.
Service cost of sales. Cost of sales associated with our services primarily consists of personnel and related costs, expenses related to the development of customized platforms and workflows, feasibility studies on our platforms and service and warranty costs to support our customers. We maintain continuous efforts to increase reliability and uptime of our advanced automation systems.
Gross profit and gross margin. Gross profit is calculated as revenue less cost of sales. Gross margin is gross profit expressed as a percentage of revenue. Our gross profit in future periods will depend on a variety of factors, including: market conditions that may impact our pricing; sales mix among platform access options, including the regional mix of sales; sales mix changes among consumables, advanced automation systems and services; product mix changes between established products and new products; excess and obsolete inventories; our cost structure for manufacturing operations relative to volume; and product warranty obligations. We expect cost of sales to increase in absolute dollars in future periods as our revenue grows, and as we plan to hire additional employees to support our manufacturing, operations, service and support organizations.
Gross profit was $44.6 million compared to $43.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Operating expenses
Research and development. Research and development costs primarily consist of salaries, benefits, incentive compensation, stock-based compensation, laboratory supplies, materials expenses and allocated facilities and IT costs for employees and contractors engaged in research and product development. We expense all research and development costs in the period in which they are incurred.
We plan to continue to invest in our research and development efforts, including hiring additional employees, to enhance existing products and develop new products. As a result, we expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase in absolute dollars in future periods. We expect these expenses to vary from period to period as a percentage of revenue.
General and administrative. Our general and administrative expenses primarily consist of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation costs for employees in our executive, accounting and finance, legal and human resource functions, as well as professional services fees, such as consulting, audit, tax and legal fees, general corporate costs and allocated overhead expenses. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will continue to increase in absolute dollars, primarily due to increased headcount to support anticipated growth in the business and due to incremental costs associated with operating as a public company. We expect these expenses to vary from period to period as a percentage of revenue.
Sales and marketing. Our sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits, sales commissions and stock-based compensation costs for employees within our commercial sales functions, as well as marketing, travel expenses and allocated facilities and IT costs. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we expand our commercial sales, marketing and business development teams, increase our presence globally and increase marketing activities to drive awareness and adoption of our platform. While these expenses may vary from period to period as a percentage of revenue, we expect these expenses to increase as a percent of sales in the short-term as we continue to grow our commercial organization to support anticipated growth in the business.
We expect our aggregate stock-based compensation to continue to increase in absolute dollar terms. Furthermore, in the fourth quarter of 2020 we recorded stock-based compensation expenses of $2.4 million for the modification of certain stock options related to the retirement of one of our non-executive employees.
Other income (expense)
Interest expense. Interest expense consists primarily of interest related to borrowings under our debt obligations.
Interest income. Interest income primarily consists of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents which are invested in cash deposits and in money market funds.
Other income (expense), net. Other income (expense), net consists primarily of losses from our equity method investment and foreign currency exchange gains and losses. Foreign currency exchange gains and losses relate to transactions and asset and liability balances denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar, primarily related to our operations in the United Kingdom. We expect our foreign currency gains and losses to continue to fluctuate in the future due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Provision for income taxes
Our provision for income taxes consists primarily of foreign taxes and state taxes in the United States. As we expand the scale and scope of our international business activities, any changes in the United States and foreign taxation of such activities may increase our overall provision for income taxes in the future.
Results of operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented:
(1)Includes stock-based compensation as follows
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Product revenue increased by $8.1 million, or 19% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, was primarily driven by an increase of $3.8 million in consumables sales driven by additional demand from our customers due to the increase in our installed base, an increase of $3.3 million from platform and system sales, including sales-type lease arrangements and license arrangements related to our workflows, and an increase of $1.0 million in subscription arrangement and related revenue driven by the launch of our subscription access program in February 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020 we sold 27 platforms compared to 26 platforms during the year ended December 31, 2019. Revenue from platform and system sales in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year was impacted by the regional mix of the platform placements as well as the mix of system type placed.
Service revenue decreased by $0.5 million, or 4%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by a decrease of $3.1 million in revenues from joint development agreements primarily due to timing of development activities, including the completion of two such programs during the year ended December 31, 2020, and a decrease of $0.7 million in revenue from feasibility studies as a result of timing of such arrangements. These decreases were partially offset by an increase of $3.3 million from sales in service warranty and application support arrangements.
Costs of sales, gross profit and gross margin
Product cost of sales increased by $1.8 million, or 16%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in product cost of sales was in line with revenue growth for consumables and platforms.
Service cost of sales increased by $4.8 million, or 241%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to costs incurred for joint development agreements under which we provide services on a time-and-materials basis, as well as increased costs for extended warranty services as a result of the nature and timing of work performed under such arrangements
Gross Profit increased by $1.1 million, or 2% primarily due to increased revenue. Gross margin declined by 8 percentage points for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by reduced margins on service revenues related to the nature and timing of work performed and increased costs incurred related to the joint development agreements and programs under which we provide services on a time-and-materials basis, including the buy-out of two of the workflow programs that were developed in collaboration with Ginkgo Bioworks which, while not impacting our costs incurred, does serve to reduce revenue and gross margin related to these specific programs. Gross margin was also impacted by the regional mix of platform sales.
Operating expenses
Research and development
Research and development expenses increased by $8.8 million, or 23%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to a $4.8 million increase in personnel-related expenses, including a $3.4 million increase in stock-based compensation primarily due to increased headcount resulting from the growth of the operations as well as an option modification for a departing non-executive employee, and a $4.0 million increase in other costs, including testing and qualification materials and other costs related to various projects to develop and improve systems, workflows, consumables and assays.
General and administrative
General and administrative expense increased by $10.8 million, or 88%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to a $3.4 million increase in personnel-related expenses, including a $1.6 million increase in stock-based compensation, a $2.8 million increase in outside legal fees, including patent litigation, a $2.0 of insurance costs and increased other costs of $2.6 million, including accounting, consulting and IT services to support our continued growth and building the infrastructure needed to operate as a public company.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased by $5.3 million, or 57%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to a $4.0 million increase in personnel-related expenses, including a $1.7 million increase in stock-based compensation as a result of increased headcount, as well as expense associated with the achievement of certain criteria related to performance based awards, and a $1.9 million increase in marketing, advertising and other costs, offset by a reduction of $0.6 million in travel expenses as business travel, trade shows and other events were impacted by restrictions imposed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Interest expense
Interest expense remained flat at $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Interest expense resulted primarily from interest incurred on our loan from East West Bank, which carries a fixed rate of interest.
Interest income
Interest income decreased by $0.6 million, or 63% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower interest received on our cash and short-term deposits due to a decline in interest rates, offset by increased cash balances resulting from our IPO in July 2020.
Other income (expense), net
Other income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was mainly comprised of foreign exchange gains and losses and other miscellaneous income. Other expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily included losses associated with our equity investment in Optera, which ceased operations during fiscal 2019.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Revenue
Product revenue increased by $20.6 million, or 90%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily driven by an $18.5 million increase in direct platform sales resulting from 26 new system placements during the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to 12 new system placements for the year ended December 31, 2018. Additionally, recurring revenue increased by $2.1 million as a result of an increase in consumable sales for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, resulting from the increase in our system placements and installed base. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we maintained an installed base of 48 systems globally outside of our BioFoundry, compared to 22 systems for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Service revenue increased by $4.8 million, or 57%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The growth was primarily due to a $3.8 million increase relating to our existing milestone arrangements supporting the development of customized workflows and platforms, and a $2.5 million increase from sales of service and warranty during the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by the increase in our installed base and customers renewing their service and warranty contracts, offset by decreases in
feasibility studies and platform support arrangements of $1.5 million resulting from fewer customers requiring these arrangements during 2019 as compared to 2018.
We added 22 new customers for the year ended December 31, 2019, and 16 new customers were added for the year ended December 31, 2018. Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 was comprised of $29.6 million in revenue from those new customers versus $27.1 million from existing customers, compared to $16.2 million and $15.1 million, respectively, during the year ended December 31, 2018.
Costs of sales, gross profit and gross margin
Product cost of sales increased by $4.7 million, or 71%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in product costs of sales was in line with revenue growth for both systems and consumables and included an increase in warranty repair costs driven by the increase in our installed base. Service cost of sales increased by $0.4 million, or 24%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to a $0.7 million increase in cost for extended warranty services as the installed base matured and customers renewed their service contracts, and more customers purchased extended warranty as the standard warranty expired, as well as a $0.5 million increase in direct costs of services related to the development of customized workflows and platforms, offset by a decrease of $0.8 million in direct costs for feasibility studies and platform support resulting from fewer customers requiring such arrangements in 2019 compared to 2018.
Gross profit increased by $20.4 million, or 88%, and gross margin improved by 3 percentage points for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily due to increased revenue as well as a higher mix of milestone revenue driven by percentage of completion. Gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2017 was 77%.
Operating expenses
Research and development
Research and development expense increased by $9.3 million, or 32%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was due to a $4.6 million increase in testing and qualification materials, depreciation and other costs, and a $4.7 million increase in personnel-related expenses, including a $0.6 million increase in stock-based compensation expense, resulting from increased headcount devoted to working on various projects to develop and improve systems, workflows and assays.
General and administrative
General and administrative expense increased by $3.3 million, or 36%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was due to a $2.2 million increase in personnel-related expenses, including a $1.1 million increase in stock-based compensation, due to growth in our overall operations, and a $1.1 million increase in professional fees and other expenses related to outside legal, accounting, consulting and IT services.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased by $3.1 million, or 51%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was due to a $1.9 million increase in personnel-related expenses, including a $0.1 million increase in stock-based compensation, as a result of higher headcount to support our revenue growth, a $0.5 million increase in marketing and advertising costs, and a $0.7 million increase in other costs.
Interest expense
Interest expense decreased by $0.8 million, or 35%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease was primarily due to the repayment of our debt with TriplePoint in May 2018, which was partially offset by interest incurred on our loan from East West Bank entered into in May 2018, which served to refinance the TriplePoint loan at a lower interest rate.
Interest income
Interest income remained relatively flat for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The slight increase was primarily due to increased average cash balances year over year.
Other income (expense), net
Other expense, net increased by $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase is the result of increases in losses associated with our equity method investment, as well as certain one-time costs incurred upon the cessation of our joint venture in Optera Therapeutics Corp. in 2019.
Liquidity and capital resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $233.4 million in cash and cash equivalents which were primarily held in U.S. short-term bank deposit accounts and money market funds. Restricted cash of $0.3 million serves as collateral for our corporate credit card program. We have generated negative cumulative cash flows from operations since inception through December 31, 2020.
We expect to incur additional operating losses in the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in the research and development of our product offerings, commercialize and launch platforms, and expand into new markets. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our revenue growth rate, research and development efforts, the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, the timing and extent of additional capital expenditures to invest in existing and new facilities as well as our manufacturing operations, the expansion of sales and marketing and the introduction of new products. We have and may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in businesses, services and technologies, and any such acquisitions or investments could significantly increase our capital needs.
We currently anticipate making aggregate capital expenditures between approximately $6.5 million and $7.5 million during the next 12 months, which is expected to primarily include equipment to be used for manufacturing and research and development, as well as spend associated with the expansion of our facilities.
Based on our current business plan, we believe our existing cash and cash equivalents and anticipated cash flows from operations will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs over at least the next 12 months from the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Sources of liquidity
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily from the issuance and sale of our equity securities, borrowings under long-term debt agreements, and to a lesser extent, cash flow from operations. In July 2020, we completed our IPO, resulting in the receipt of aggregate proceeds of $187.9 million, net of offering costs, underwriter discounts and commissions of $17.0 million.
East West Bank Loan and Security Agreement
In May of 2018, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement, or the EWB Loan Agreement, with East West Bank, or EWB, which was subsequently amended in April of 2019 and March of 2020, providing us with the ability to borrow up to $20.0 million. The full amount of the loan was funded in May of 2018, and $20.0 million of term loan borrowings were outstanding as of December 31, 2020. Borrowings under the term loan mature on May 23, 2022 and accrue interest at a fixed rate of 6.73% per annum. We are required to make interest only payments on the term loan through May of 2021, after which equal monthly installments of principal and interest are due.
The EWB Loan Agreement is collateralized by substantially all of our property, except for intellectual property, which is subject to a negative pledge. The EWB Loan Agreement contains customary negative covenants that limit our ability to, among other things, incur additional indebtedness, grant liens, make investments, repurchase stock, pay dividends, transfer assets and merge or consolidate with any other entity or
to acquire all or substantially all the capital stock or property of another entity. The EWB Loan Agreement also contains customary affirmative covenants, including requirements to, among other things, deliver audited financial statements. In addition, the EWB Loan Agreement contains financial covenants that require us to maintain a certain percentage of our total cash holdings in accounts with EWB as well as maintain certain ratios of cash to cash burn. If we default under the EWB Loan Agreement and if the default is not cured or waived, the lender could cause any amounts outstanding to be payable immediately. Under certain circumstances, the lender could also exercise its rights with respect to the collateral securing such loans. Moreover, any such default would limit our ability to obtain additional financing, which may have an adverse effect on our cash flow and liquidity.
We were in compliance with all covenants under the EWB Loan Agreement as of December 31, 2020.
Cash flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities increased by $25.3 million to $35.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $10.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase resulted primarily from a higher net loss during the year ended December 31, 2020 and increased working capital requirements primarily related to an increase in inventory and accounts receivable as a result of continued growth of our business as well as an increase in deferred revenue due to the timing of revenue recognition, offset by a reduction in accruals primarily due to vendor invoicing timing and related vendor payments.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, inventories increased by $4.2 million due to an increase in raw materials and finished goods to support revenue growth and anticipated demand. Accounts receivable increased by $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to an increase in revenue and the timing of invoicing.
Net cash used in operating activities decreased by $3.0 million to $10.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $13.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2018. This decrease reflects lower net losses during the period, partially offset by increased working capital requirements primarily due to an increase in our inventory and prepaid and other current assets as a result of the continued growth of our business, in addition to a reduction in our operating lease liabilities associated with payments on our facility leases. In addition, net cash used in operating activities reflects an increase in non-cash charges of $4.2 million primarily driven by higher depreciation and stock-based compensation expenses as well as the amortization of the operating lease right-of-use asset associated with our facility leases.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $3.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $9.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by the timing of capital expenditures.
Net cash used in investing activities was $9.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $8.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily driven by higher capital expenditures.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $191.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 related to cash receipts of $187.9 million of net proceeds from our initial public offering and $3.6 million of proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon the exercise of stock options.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with $95.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 resulted from cash receipts of $1.0 million from the issuance of common stock upon exercise of stock options. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2018 resulted primarily from net cash receipts of $94.8 million from the issuance of Series E convertible preferred stock net of issuance costs, $0.6 million of net proceeds from the refinancing of our loan with TriplePoint and $0.2 million cash receipts from the issuance of common stock upon exercise of stock options.
Concentration of credit risk
Most of the Company’s customers are located in the United States. For the year ended December 31, 2020, one customer accounted for 12% of revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2019, no customer accounted for more than 10% of revenue. For the year ended December 31,
2018, one customer accounting for 12% of revenue. Three customers accounted for 42%, 21% and 15%, respectively, of accounts receivable at December 31, 2020. Four customers comprised 20%, 19%, 18% and 12%, respectively, of accounts receivable at December 31, 2019.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our commitments to settle contractual obligations as December 31, 2020:
(1)As of December 31, 2020, the outstanding balance of our term loan under the EWB Loan Agreement was $20.0 million. Borrowings under the term loan mature on May 23, 2022 and accrue interest at a fixed rate of 6.73% per annum. Upon amendment of the EWB Loan Agreement on March 27, 2020, interest only payments are due on the term loan through May 2021, after which equal monthly installments and principal and interest are due.
(2)Represents commitments under our non-cancelable office leases.
(3)Purchase obligations relate primarily to our contract manufacturer which manufactures our instruments and makes advance purchases of components based on our sales forecasts and the placement of property by us, as well as the commitments made to certain providers of components of our consumable manufacturing. To the extent components are purchased by the contract manufacturer on our behalf and cannot be used by the contract manufacturer’s other customers, we are obligated to purchase such components.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet financing arrangements or any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, including entities sometimes referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, that were established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, or GAAP. The preparation of consolidated financial statements also requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from our estimates. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected.
We believe that the accounting policies described below involve a significant degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, we believe these are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of operations. For further information, see Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Revenue recognition
We derive revenue from two primary sources, product revenues, which are comprised primarily of direct platform sales revenues and consumables revenues, and service revenues, which are comprised of revenue from joint development agreements, service and warranty, platform support and feasibility studies on our platforms. Revenues are recognized net of applicable taxes imposed on the related transaction.
We recognize revenue when we satisfy the performance obligations under the terms of a contract and control of our products and services is transferred to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive from our customers in exchange for those products and services. This process involves identifying the contract with a customer, determining the performance obligations in the contract, determining the contract price, allocating the contract price to the distinct performance obligations in the contract based on stand-alone selling price, and recognizing revenue when the performance obligations have been satisfied. A performance obligation is considered distinct from other obligations in a contract when it provides a benefit to the customer either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer and is separately identified in the contract. We consider a performance obligation satisfied once we have transferred control of a good or service to the customer, meaning the customer has the ability to use and obtain the benefit of the good or service.
Our agreements with customers often include multiple performance obligations, which can sometimes be included in separate contracts entered into within a reasonably short period of time. We consider an entire customer arrangement to determine if separate contracts should be considered combined for the purposes of revenue recognition.
In order to determine the stand-alone selling price, we conduct a periodic analysis to determine whether various goods or services have an observable stand-alone selling price as well as to identify significant changes to current stand-alone selling prices. If we do not have an
observable stand-alone selling price for a particular good or service, then the stand-alone selling price for that particular good or service is estimated using an approach that maximizes the use of observable inputs. Our process for determining stand-alone selling price requires judgment and considers multiple factors that are reasonably available and maximizes the use of observable inputs that may vary over time depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each performance obligation. We believe that this method results in an estimate that represents the price we would charge for the product offerings if they were sold separately.
For most of our performance obligations, we have established stand-alone selling price as a range rather than a single value, such range being plus or minus 15% of the weighted average of observable prices. If the contractually stated prices of all the performance obligations in a contract fall within their respective stand-alone selling price ranges, we will allocate the transaction price at the contractually stated amounts. In situations where the contractually stated price for one or more performance obligations in a contract fall(s) outside of their respective stand-alone selling price range, we will use the mid-point of the respective stand-alone selling price range for performance obligations in the contract priced outside of their respective stand-alone selling price range(s) and the contract values for performance obligations priced within their respective stand-alone selling price range(s), to allocate the transaction price on a relative stand-alone selling price basis.
Taxes, such as sales, value-add and other taxes, collected from customers concurrent with revenue generating activities and remitted to governmental authorities are not included in revenue. Shipping and handling costs associated with outbound freight are accounted for as a fulfillment cost and are included in cost of sales.
The following describes the nature of our primary types of revenue and the revenue recognition policies and significant payment terms as they pertain to the types of transactions we enter into with our customers.
Product revenues
Product revenue is comprised of two major revenue streams, direct platform sales and consumables. Direct platform sales revenues are comprised of advanced automation systems (including fully paid workflow licenses), as well as Culture Station instruments. Consumables revenues are comprised of OptoSelect chips required to run the system as well as reagent kits. Our standard arrangement with our customers is generally a purchase order or an executed contract. Revenue on product sales is recognized when control has transferred to the customer, which typically occurs when the product has been shipped to the customer, risk of loss has transferred to the customer and we have a present right to payment for the system, chip or kit, as applicable. In certain limited circumstances when a product sale includes client acceptance provisions, we will first assess such terms to determine if the control of the good is being transferred to the customer in accordance with the agreed-upon specifications in the contract. To the extent that such acceptance provisions can be objectively determined to be aligned with the standard specifications of the arrangement, are defined and easily evaluated for completion, as well as do not afford the customer any additional rights or create additional performance obligations for us, such provisions would be determined perfunctory and would not preclude revenue recognition presuming all other criteria are met. If such acceptance provisions are considered to be substantive, revenue is recognized either when client acceptance has been obtained, client acceptance provisions have lapsed, or we have objective evidence that the criteria specified in the client acceptance provisions have been satisfied. Payment terms are generally thirty to ninety days from the date of invoicing.
On a limited basis, we also enter into fixed-term sales-type lease arrangements with certain qualified customers. Revenue from sales-type lease arrangements is generally recognized in a manner consistent with platform equipment, assuming all other revenue recognition criteria have been met.
Service revenues
Service revenues primarily consist of joint development agreements, service and warranty, training and installation services, platform support and feasibility studies on our advanced automation systems and workflows. Our services are provided primarily on a fixed fee basis; from time to time these fixed fee contracts may be invoiced at the outset of the arrangements. We recognize revenue from the sale of extended warranty and enhanced service warranty arrangements over the respective period, while revenue on feasibility studies is recognized over time, using an input measure of progress based on costs incurred to date relative to total expected costs. Revenue on platform support is recognized as the services are performed. Service contracts are typically short-term in nature. Payment terms are generally thirty to ninety days from the date of invoicing.
Joint development agreements are agreements whereby we provide services for the development of customized advanced automation systems and workflows to meet a specific customer’s needs. Such contracts can be executed on a time-and-material basis as well as include defined milestones associated with these development activities over extended periods of time, some in excess of twenty-four months. Typically, there are formal customer acceptance clauses as each milestone is completed, and an approval to proceed with the next milestone is generally required. We recognize revenue over time, using an input measure of progress based on costs incurred to date relative to total expected costs. Payment terms are generally thirty to ninety days from the achievement of each milestone.
We place a constraint on a variable consideration estimate that focuses on possible future downward revenue adjustments (i.e., revenue reversals) if there is uncertainty that could prevent a faithful depiction of the consideration that we expect to be entitled to. The constraint estimate is reassessed at each reporting date until the uncertainty is resolved.
Contract assets and contract liabilities
Contract assets include amounts where revenue recognized exceeds the amount invoiced to the customer and the right to payment is not solely subject to the passage of time. Contract liabilities consist of fees invoiced or paid by our customers for which the associated services have not been performed and revenue has not been recognized based on our revenue recognition criteria described above. Such amounts are reported as
deferred revenue on our consolidated balance sheets. Deferred revenue that is expected to be recognized during the following twelve months is recorded as a current liability and the remaining portion is recorded as non-current.
Contract assets and contract liabilities are reported in a net position on an individual contract basis at the end of each reporting period. Contract assets are classified as current or long-term on our consolidated balance sheet based on the timing of when we expect to complete the related performance obligations and invoice the customers. Contract liabilities are classified as current or long-term on our consolidated balance sheet based on the timing when the revenue recognition associated with the related customer payments and invoicing is expected to occur.
Costs to obtain or fulfill a contract
Origination costs relate primarily to the payment of incentive bonuses that are directly related to sales transactions. Fulfillment costs generally include the direct cost of services such as platform support and feasibility studies.
Origination and fulfillment costs that are internal to us are generally expensed when incurred because most of those costs are incurred concurrently with the delivery of the related goods and services, which are predominantly recognized at a point in time or are short-term in nature. The origination costs that are related to long-term development agreements are capitalized and amortized over the relevant service period.
Stock-based compensation
We maintain an incentive compensation plan under which incentive stock options and nonqualified stock options are granted primarily to employees and non-employee consultants.
Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date, based on the fair value of the award, and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period. The fair value of stock-based awards to employees is estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. We record forfeitures as they occur.
Stock-based compensation expense for non-employee stock options is measured at the grant date based on fair market value using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and is recorded as the options vest. Prior to January 1, 2019, nonemployee stock options subject to vesting were revalued periodically over the requisite service period, which was generally the same as the vesting term of the award. From January 1, 2019, the grant date fair market value of non-employee stock options is recognized in the consolidated statements of operations on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period and forfeitures are recognized as they occur.
Common stock valuation
There was no public market for our common stock prior to our IPO. As such, the estimated fair value of our common stock was determined at each grant date by our board of directors, with input from management, based on the information known to us on the grant date and upon a review of any recent events and their potential impact on the estimated per share fair value of our common stock. As part of these fair value determinations, our board of directors obtained and considered valuation reports prepared by a third party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Technical Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation.
Beginning March 31, 2018, in contemplation of a possible IPO, we estimated the enterprise value of our business using a hybrid approach in determining the fair value of our common stock that includes a probability-weighted expected return method, or PWERM, and an option pricing method, or OPM. Under a PWERM, the fair market value of the common stock is estimated based upon an analysis of future values for the enterprise assuming various future outcomes. Within one of those potential outcomes, we utilized the OPM. The OPM treats the rights of the holders of convertible preferred stock and common stock as equivalent to that of call options on any value of the enterprise above certain break points of value based upon the liquidation preferences of the holders of preferred stock, as well as their rights to participation and conversion. Based on the timing and nature of an assumed liquidity event in each scenario, a discount for lack of marketability either was or was not applied to each scenario, as appropriate. We then probability-weighted the value of each expected outcome to arrive at an estimate of fair value per share of common stock.
In addition to considering the results of these third party valuation reports, our board of directors used assumptions based on various objective and subjective factors, combined with management judgment, to determine the fair value of our common stock as of each grant date, including:
•the prices at which we sold shares of preferred stock and the superior rights and preferences of the preferred stock relative to our common stock at the time of each grant;
•external market conditions affecting the life sciences research and development industry and trends within the industry;
•our stage of development and business strategy;
•our financial condition and operating results, including our levels of available capital resources, and forecasted results;
•developments in our business;
•the progress of our research and development efforts;
•equity market conditions affecting comparable public companies; and
•general United States market conditions and the lack of marketability of our common stock.
Application of these approaches involves the use of estimates, judgment and assumptions that are subjective, such as those regarding our expected future revenue, expenses and future cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable companies and the probability of possible future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions or the relationships between those assumptions impact our valuations as of each valuation date and may have a material impact on the valuation of our common stock.
Common stock valuations after our IPO
For valuations after the completion of our IPO, the fair value of each share of underlying common stock is determined based on the reported closing price of our common stock on the date of grant.
JOBS Act accounting election
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this exemption from new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, we will be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not “emerging growth companies.”
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.