ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Current Business Trends - COVID-19
In December 2019, a novel coronavirus disease (“COVID-19”) was reported and in January 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) declared it a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. On February 28, 2020, the WHO raised its assessment of the COVID-19 threat from high to very high at a global level due to the continued increase in the number of cases and affected countries. On March 11, 2020, the WHO characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic.
During the second quarter of 2020, the Company implemented remote work arrangements for non-production personnel, adopted robust safety, social distancing and temperature screening protocols throughout its manufacturing sites and enacted other measures to be able to deliver products to meet customer orders on a timely basis. While the pandemic has had varying levels of impact to demand trends, to date it has not materially affected our ability to maintain business operations, including the operation of financial reporting systems, internal control over financial reporting, and disclosure controls and procedures. The Company has enacted various return-to-work protocols for non-production personnel.
During April 2020 and through the first part of May 2020, the majority of the United States, the Company’s primary commercial market, was subject to various levels of government shelter-in-place or other lockdown orders. During this time, we experienced some customer order delays and intermittent manufacturing interruptions. As the lock-downs were lifted and customers adapted to remote work and field safety protocols, order demand gradually improved. Our operations returned to a more normalized level of output as the lockdowns lifted at the end of the second quarter and into the third quarter of 2020. Municipal water order trends have been more resilient in their sequential performance while flow instrumentation orders showed less resiliency and will likely be negatively affected for a longer period, albeit flow instrumentation orders were improved slightly over the second quarter of 2020.
As a result of COVID-19, the Company implemented certain cost contingency actions, including travel restrictions, a hiring freeze, reductions in discretionary spending, short-term reduced work hour furloughs globally and executive salary reductions. The temporary actions generally lasted nine weeks, ending in mid-June 2020. The Company continues to manage hiring and discretionary spending actions in light of continuing market uncertainty. Our Board of Directors and Company management continues to monitor the rapidly changing implications of COVID-19 and is prepared to take additional cost actions if warranted.
On March 27, 2020, the “Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act” was signed into law. The Act includes provisions relating to refundable payroll tax credits, deferment of the employer portion of certain payroll taxes, net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property. In accordance with the CARES Act the Company delayed federal tax installment payments to the third quarter of 2020. The CARES Act is not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
It remains difficult to estimate the severity and duration of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s business, financial position or results of operations. The magnitude of the impact will be determined by the duration and span of the pandemic, operational disruptions including those resulting from government actions, delivery interruptions due to component supply availability or logistical challenges, the timeline of an effective and broadly available vaccine and the overall impact on the economy. The Company has contingency plans in place to adequately respond to a wide range of potential economic scenarios and our Board of Directors continues to monitor and evaluate the ongoing situation.
Long Term Business Trends
Across the globe, increasing regulations and a focus on sustainability are driving companies and utilities to better manage critical resources like water, monitor their use of hazardous materials and reduce exhaust gases. Some customers measure fluids to identify leaks and/or misappropriation for cost control or add measurement points to help automate manufacturing. Other customers employ measurement to comply with government mandates and laws including those associated with process and discharge water quality monitoring. The Company provides flow measurement technology to measure water, oil, chemicals and other fluids, gases and steams. This technology is critical to provide baseline usage data and to quantify reductions as customers attempt to reduce consumption. For example, once water usage metrics are better understood, a strategy for water-use reduction can be developed with specific water-reduction initiatives targeted to those areas where it is most viable. With the Company’s technology, customers have found costly leaks, pinpointed equipment in need of repair, and identified areas for process improvements.
Increasingly, customers in the utility water market are interested in more frequent and diverse data collection and the use of water metering and quality analytics to evaluate water distribution activity. Specifically, AMI technology enables water utilities to capture readings from each meter at more frequent and variable intervals. There are more than 50,000 water utilities in the United States and the Company estimates that approximately 65% of them have converted to a radio solution. The Company believes it is well positioned to meet this continuing conversion trend with its comprehensive radio and software solutions.
In addition, certain water utilities are converting from mechanical to static meters. Ultrasonic water metering maintains a high level of measurement accuracy over the life of the meter, reducing a utility’s non-revenue water. The Company has over a decade of proven reliability in the market with its ultrasonic meters and has recently launched its next generation of ultrasonic metering with its D-Flow technology, which the Company believes increases its competitive differentiation. While the introduction of ultrasonic technology into North America may increase competition, it also opens up further geographic penetration opportunities for the Company as previously described.
For over 115 years, the Company has offered innovative flow metering and control solutions for smart water management, smart buildings and smart industrial processes. The acquisition of s::can GmbH and subsidiaries (“s::can”), a leading provider of online water quality monitoring solutions, adds real-time water quality parameters to our capabilities and enhances the scope of actionable data for our customers to help measure and protect resources for a smarter world. The combined solutions from Badger Meter and s::can offer technology that measures both the quantity and quality of liquids.
Finally, the concept of “Smart Cities” is one avenue to affect efficient city operations, conserve resources and improve service and delivery. Smart water solutions (“Smart Water”) are those that provide actionable information through data analytics from an interconnected and interoperable network of sensors and devices that help people and organizations efficiently use and conserve one of the world’s most precious resources. Badger Meter is well positioned to benefit from the advancement of Smart Water applications within the Smart Cities framework. Cities have a keen interest in Smart Water as it provides both a revenue base, quality monitoring and conservation outcome. Badger Meter is one of approximately a dozen firms, and the only smart water company, that participates in the AT&T Smart City Alliance. By leveraging this alliance, the Company has been able to gain access and sell its broad smart water solutions to higher level decision makers within a city such as the mayor’s office. In addition, it allows Badger Meter to keep abreast of emerging cellular technology changes which the Company believes is the premier infrastructure-free AMI solution.
Revenue and Product Mix
As the industry continues to evolve, the Company has been at the forefront of innovation across metering, radio and software technologies in order to meet its customers’ increasing expectations for accurate and actionable data. As technologies such as ORION Cellular and BEACON AMA managed solutions have become more readily adopted, the Company’s revenue from Software as a Service (SaaS) has increased significantly, albeit from a small base, and is margin accretive.
In addition, the Company has expanded its smart water offering with the addition of online water quality monitoring solutions, adding real-time water quality parameters to augment the scope of actionable data for water utility and industrial customers to optimize their operations.
The Company also seeks opportunities for additional revenue enhancement. For instance, the Company has made inroads into the Middle East market with its ultrasonic meter technology and is pursuing other geographic expansion opportunities. Additionally, the Company is periodically asked to oversee and perform field installation of its products for certain customers. In these cases, the Company assumes the role of general contractor and either performs the installation or hires installation subcontractors and supervises their work.
Acquisitions
On November 2, 2020, the Company acquired 100% of the outstanding stock of s::can headquartered in Vienna, Austria. s::can specializes in optical water quality sensing solutions that provide real-time measurement of a variety of parameters in water and wastewater utilizing in-line monitoring systems.
The total purchase consideration for s::can was $30.6 million, which included $29.1 million in cash and $1.5 million in payments that are anticipated to be made in the first quarter of 2021, which are recorded in payables on the Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2020. The Company's preliminary allocation of the purchase price at December 31, 2020 included $3.1 million of receivables, $4.3 million of inventory, $1.2 million of other assets, $12.7 million of intangibles and $17.4 million of goodwill that is not deductible for tax purposes. The intangible assets acquired are primarily customer relationships and developed technology with an estimated average useful life of 12 years. The Company also assumed $3.6 million of accounts payable, $3.2 million of deferred tax liabilities and $1.3 million of other liabilities as part of the acquisition. The preliminary allocation of the purchase price to the assets acquired was based upon the estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had not
completed its analysis for estimating the fair value of the assets acquired. This acquisition is further described in Note 3 “Acquisitions” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
On April 2, 2018, the Company acquired 100% of the outstanding stock of Innovative Metering Solutions, Inc. (“IMS”) of Odessa, Florida, which was one of the Company's distributors serving Florida.
The total purchase consideration was approximately $12.0 million, which included $7.7 million in cash, a $0.3 million working capital adjustment, a balance sheet holdback of $0.7 million and a $3.3 million settlement of pre-existing Company receivables. The working capital adjustment was settled in the second quarter of 2018 and the balance sheet holdback was paid in the second quarter of 2019. As of March 31, 2019, the Company had completed its analysis for estimating the fair value of the assets acquired with no additional adjustments. This acquisition is further described in Note 3 “Acquisitions” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
In the first quarter of 2019 and the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company made separate payments of contingent acquisition consideration of $1.0 million related to the May 1, 2017 acquisition of 100% of the outstanding common stock of D-Flow Technology AB (“D-Flow”) of Lulea, Sweden. These were the final payments associated with the acquisition.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net Sales
Net sales in 2020 increased $0.9 million, or less than 1%, to $425.5 million from $424.6 million in 2019. Sales into the utility water market were $344.3 million, an increase of 4% over the prior year’s $330.7 million. The increase was attributable to higher sales of advanced technology products including ORION Cellular LTE-M endpoints, E-Series Ultrasonic water meters as well as increased BEACON SaaS revenue associated with data collection and software analytics. It also included approximately $2.5 million of sales related to s::can, acquired on November 2, 2020. These favorable trends more than offset the short term decline in orders that occurred in April and May 2020 from the stay-at-home orders throughout much of the United States in response to COVID-19. Sales of products into the global flow instrumentation end markets were $81.2 million, 13.6% lower than the prior year’s $94.0 million due to significantly reduced activity across the array of industrial end markets served and also the result of widespread COVID-19 shelter-in-place and lockdown restrictions.
Net sales in 2019 decreased $9.1 million, or 2%, to $424.6 million from $433.7 million in 2018. Sales into the utility water market were $330.7 million, a decrease of 1% compared to the prior year’s $334.7 million, while sales into the flow instrumentation end markets were $93.9 million, a 5% decrease from 2018 sales of $99.0 million. Utility water sales benefitted from higher sales of smart water solutions in North America where sales increased 1% year-over-year, however, sales into international markets, primarily the Middle East, declined significantly as a $5.5 million sale from 2018 did not repeat. While the Company continued to benefit from favorable market demand, it experienced a mid-year pause in certain order activity as a result of new product launches, most notably commercial ultrasonic meters and next generation cellular radio offerings. Sales of products into the global flow instrumentation end markets declined due to sluggish global industrial activity across multiple end markets served.
Operating Earnings
Operating earnings in 2020 were $65.2 million, or 15.3% of sales, compared to $62.1 million, or 14.6% of sales, in 2019. Gross margin increased $4.7 million, and as a percent of sales increased from 38.5% in 2019 to 39.5% in 2020. The improvement was due to higher volumes and improved sales mix as noted above, along with favorable pricing actions. These benefits were modestly offset by a net increase in warranty provisions year-over-year, including a $3.5 million cellular network sunset provision recorded in the fourth quarter of 2020. Selling, engineering and administration (“SEA”) expenses were $103.1 million or 24.2% of sales compared to $101.4 million or 23.9% of sales in the comparable prior year period. The increase was primarily due to higher personnel, research and development and business optimization investments, as well as the inclusion of s::can. These increases were partially offset by the net benefit of COVID-19 cost reduction actions and lower pandemic-impacted expenses such as travel and convention costs.
Operating earnings in 2019 were $62.1 million or 14.6% of sales, compared to $56.9 million, or 13.1% of sales, in 2018. Gross margin increased $1.2 million, despite lower sales volumes, and increased as a percent of sales from 37.4% in 2018 to 38.5% in 2019. This was largely the result of improved utility sales mix attributed to selling more meters with radios, SaaS revenues, and favorable regional sales mix. In addition, gross margins benefitted from positive price/cost dynamics due primarily to lower commodity costs in 2019, particularly brass. SEA expenses declined $4.1 million year-over-year, which included $2.6 million of executive retirement charges incurred in the prior year which did not repeat. The remaining decrease in SEA was associated with tighter discretionary spending controls that more than offset normal inflation for employee salaries and benefits as well as higher engineering expenses to support product innovation and development.
Interest Expense, Net
Net interest expense was less than $0.1 million in 2020 compared to $0.3 million in 2019 and $1.2 million in 2018. The decreases were due to the repayment of borrowings using cash from operations.
Income Taxes
There were no significant variations in income taxes as a percentage of earnings before income taxes which were 24.1%, 23.4% and 22.5% for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Earnings and Diluted Earnings per Share
For 2020, the increase in operating earnings and lower interest expense resulted in net earnings of $49.3 million compared to $47.2 million in 2019. On a diluted basis, earnings per share were $1.69 in 2020 compared to $1.61 in 2019.
For 2019, the increase in operating earnings and lower interest expense, along with the non-recurring pension termination charges in 2018, resulted in net earnings of $47.2 million compared to $27.8 million in 2018. On a diluted basis, earnings per share were $1.61 in 2019 compared to $0.95 in 2018.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The main sources of liquidity for the Company are cash from operations and borrowing capacity. In addition, depending on market conditions, the Company may access the capital markets to strengthen its capital position and to provide additional liquidity for general corporate purposes.
Primary Working Capital
We use primary working capital (PWC) as a percentage of sales as a key metric for working capital efficiency. We define this metric as the sum of receivables and inventories less payables, divided by annual net sales. The following table shows the components of our PWC (in millions):
Overall PWC decreased $3.4 million as the Company undertook several working capital improvement actions during the year, reducing PWC by $8.8 million, which was partially offset by the acquisition of s::can which added $5.4 million of PWC. Receivables at December 31, 2020 were $61.7 million compared to $61.4 million at the end of 2019. Excluding s::can, a decrease of $3.0 million was due to robust collection efforts and active monitoring processes instituted during the year. The Company believes its receivables balance is fully collectible. Inventories at December 31, 2020 were $81.6 million, a modest decrease from $81.9 million at December 31, 2019, with the acquisition of s::can offsetting a core inventory reduction of $4.6 million resulting from improved inventory planning actions. Payables at December 31, 2020 were $34.9 million, up from $31.5 million at the end of 2019 with the majority of the increase due to the acquisition of s::can.
Cash Provided by Operations
Cash provided by operations in 2020 was $89.6 million compared to $80.7 million in 2019. The increase from 2019 was driven primarily by improved working capital management as well as higher operating earnings. Operating cash flow was more than adequate to fund the acquisition of s::can ($29.1 million, net of cash acquired), capital expenditures of $9.1 million along with dividends of $20.3 million and $3.1 million in share repurchases to partially offset equity compensation dilution. The remaining cash flow was used to reduce short term borrowings and add to cash balances.
Cash provided by operations in 2019 was $80.7 million compared to $60.4 million in 2018. The increase from 2018 was driven primarily by improved working capital management as well as higher operating earnings (excluding the non-cash pension termination settlement charges). Operating cash flow was more than adequate to fund capital expenditures of $7.5 million along with dividends of $18.6 million and $5.2 million in share repurchases to offset equity compensation dilution. The remaining cash flow was used to reduce short term borrowings and add to cash balances.
Capital expenditures were $9.1 million, $7.5 million and $8.6 million in fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Capital expenditures for fiscal 2021 are expected to be in the $10-12 million range, but could vary depending on timing of R&D projects, growth opportunities and the amount of assets purchased.
Short-term debt decreased to $0 from $4.5 million at December 31, 2019 due to the strong cash flow from operations. At the end of 2020, the Company was in a net cash position of $72.3 million.
The Company’s financial condition remains strong. In June 2018, the Company amended its May 2012 credit agreement with its primary lender and extended its term until September 2021. The credit agreement includes a $125.0 million line of credit that supports commercial paper (up to $70.0 million) and includes $5.0 million of a Euro line of credit. While the facility is unsecured, there are a number of financial covenants with which the Company must comply, and the Company was in compliance as of December 31, 2020. The Company intends to enter into a new credit facility in 2021, prior to the expiration of existing agreement. The Company believes that its operating cash flows, available borrowing capacity, and its ability to raise capital provide adequate resources to fund ongoing operating requirements, future capital expenditures and the development of new products. The Company had $133.5 million of unused credit lines available at December 31, 2020.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
The Company had no off-balance sheet arrangements at December 31, 2020.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
The following table includes the Company's significant contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020. There are no material undisclosed guarantees.
Other than items included in the preceding table, as of December 31, 2020, the Company had no additional material purchase obligations other than those created in the ordinary course of business related to inventory and property, plant and equipment, which generally have terms of less than 90 days. The Company also has long-term obligations related to its postretirement plans which are discussed in detail in Note 7 “Employee Benefit Plans” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K. Postretirement medical claims are paid by the Company as they are submitted, and they are anticipated to be $0.4 million in 2021 based on actuarial estimates; however, these amounts can vary significantly from year to year because the Company is self-insured.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND USE OF ESTIMATES
The Company's accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K. As discussed in Note 1, the preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. The Company's more significant estimates relate primarily to the following judgmental reserves: allowance for doubtful accounts, reserve for obsolete inventories, and warranty and after-sale costs reserve. Each of these reserves is evaluated quarterly and is reviewed with the Company's internal Disclosure Committee and the Audit and Compliance Committee of the Board of Directors. The basis for these reserve amounts is determined by analyzing the anticipated exposure for each account, and then selecting the most likely amount based upon historical experience and various other considerations that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. These methods have been used for all years in the presented financials and have been used consistently throughout each year. Actual results may differ from these estimates if actual experiences vary from the Company's assumptions.
The criteria used for calculating each of the reserve amounts vary by type of reserve. For the allowance for doubtful accounts reserve, significant past due balances are individually reviewed for collectability, while the balance of accounts is reviewed in conjunction with applying historical write-off ratios. The calculation for the obsolete and excess inventories reserve is determined by analyzing the relationship between the age and quantity of items on hand versus estimated usage to determine if excess quantities exist. The calculation for warranty and after-sale costs reserve uses criteria that include known potential warranty issues on past sales as well as historical claim experience and current warranty trends. The changes in the balances of these reserves at December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year were due to normal business conditions and developments. While the Company continually strives to improve its estimates, no significant changes in the underlying processes are expected for 2021.
The Company also uses estimates in four other significant areas: (i) stock-based compensation, (ii) acquisitions, (iii) income taxes, and (iv) evaluating goodwill, at least annually, for impairment.
The total cost of the Company's stock-based awards is equal to the grant date fair value per award multiplied by the number of awards granted, adjusted for forfeitures. Forfeitures are initially estimated based on historical Company information and subsequently updated over the life of the awards to ultimately reflect actual forfeitures, which could have an impact on the amount of stock compensation cost recognized from period to period. The grant date fair value of stock options relies on assumptions including the risk-free interest rate, dividend yield, market volatility and expected option life.
The Company records assets and liabilities acquired in a business combination at fair value. The excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair value is recorded as goodwill. Acquired intangible assets, excluding goodwill, are valued using a discounted cash flow methodology which is based on future cash flows that are specific to the type of intangible asset purchased.
In calculating the provision for income taxes on an interim basis, the Company uses an estimate of the annual effective tax rate based upon the facts and circumstances known at each interim period. On a quarterly basis, the actual effective tax rate is adjusted as appropriate based upon the actual results compared to those forecasted at the beginning of the fiscal year. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The reserve for uncertain income tax positions is a matter of judgment based on an evaluation of the individual facts and circumstances of each tax position in light of all available evidence, including historic data and current trends. A tax benefit is recognized when it is “more likely than not” to be sustained based solely on the technical merits of each tax position. The Company evaluates and updates all of these assumptions quarterly.
Goodwill impairment, if any, is determined by comparing the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying value and is reviewed at least annually. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
OTHER MATTERS
The Company is subject to contingencies related to environmental laws and regulations. A future change in circumstances with respect to these specific matters or with respect to sites formerly or currently owned or operated by the Company, off-site disposal locations used by the Company, and property owned by third parties that is near such sites, could result in future costs to the Company and such amounts could be material. Expenditures for compliance with environmental control provisions and regulations during 2020, 2019 and 2018 were not material.
See the “Special Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements” at the front of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 for a discussion of risks and uncertainties that could impact the Company's financial performance and results of operations.
MARKET RISKS
In the ordinary course of business, the Company is exposed to various market risks. The Company operates in an environment where competition varies from moderate to strong. The Company believes it currently provides the leading technology in water meters and radio systems for water utilities. A number of the Company's competitors in certain markets have greater financial resources. Competitors also include alliance partners that sell products that do or may compete with our products. As the global water metering market begins to shift to adopt static metering technology, the number of competitors may increase. We believe new static metering market entrants lack brand recognition and product breadth and do not have the appropriate utility sales channels to meaningfully compete in the North American market. In addition, the market's level of acceptance of the Company's newer product offerings, including the BEACON AMA system, may have a significant effect on the Company's results of operations. As a result of significant research and development activities, the Company enjoys favorable patent positions for several of its products.
The Company's ability to generate operating income and to increase profitability depends somewhat on the general conditions of the United States and foreign economies, including to some extent such things as the length and severity of global economic downturns; the timing and size of governmental programs such as annual federal funding and periodic stimulus fund programs, as well as the impact of government budget cuts or partial shutdowns of governmental operations; international or civil conflicts that affect international trade; the ability of municipal water utility customers to authorize and finance purchases of the Company's products; the Company's ability to obtain financing; housing starts in the United States; and overall industrial activity. In addition, changes in governmental laws and regulations, particularly laws dealing with the content or handling of materials, customs or trade practices, may impact the results of operations. These factors are largely beyond the Company's control and depend on the economic condition and regulatory environment of the geographic region of the Company's operations.
The Company relies on single suppliers for certain castings and components in several of its product lines. Although alternate sources of supply exist for these items, the loss of certain suppliers could temporarily disrupt operations in the short term.
The Company attempts to mitigate these risks by working closely with key suppliers, purchasing minimal amounts from alternative suppliers and by purchasing business interruption insurance where appropriate.
Raw materials used in the manufacture of the Company's products include purchased castings made of metal or alloys (such as brass, which uses copper as its main component, aluminum, stainless steel and cast iron), plastic resins, glass, microprocessors and other electronic subassemblies, and components. The Company does not hold significant amounts of precious metals. The price and availability of raw materials is influenced by economic and industry conditions, including supply and demand factors that are difficult to anticipate and cannot be controlled by the Company. Commodity risk is managed by keeping abreast of economic conditions and locking in purchase prices for quantities that correspond to the Company's forecasted usage.
The Company's foreign currency risk relates to the sales of products to foreign customers and purchases of material from foreign vendors. The Company uses lines of credit with U.S. and European banks to offset currency exposure related to European receivables and other monetary assets. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company's foreign currency net monetary assets were partially offset by comparable debt resulting in no material exposure to the results of operations. The Company believes the effect of a change in foreign currency rates will not have a material adverse effect on the Company's financial position or results of operations, either from a cash flow perspective or on the financial statements as a whole.
The Company typically does not hold or issue derivative instruments and has a policy specifically prohibiting the use of such instruments for trading purposes.