Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. All information presented herein is based on the Company’s fiscal year, which ends August 31. Unless otherwise stated, references to particular years, quarters, months or periods refer to the Company’s fiscal years ended in September and the associated quarters, months and periods of those fiscal years.
Overview
On April 6, 2020, the Company redomiciled in the State of Delaware by merging with a Delaware subsidiary named RESS Merger Corp., which was the successor in the merger. Thereafter, effective July 15, 2020, the Company effected a holding company reorganization pursuant to Section 251(g) of the Delaware General Corporation Law under which RESS Merger Corp. merged with RESS of Delaware, Inc., a Delaware subsidiary, and all shareholders of RESS Merger Corp. received one share of common stock of Sandy Springs Holdings, Inc., another Delaware subsidiary, for each share that they previously held in RESS Merger Corp., and RESS Merger Corp. becoming a subsidiary of Sandy Springs Holdings, Inc.
Effective July 17, 2020, the Company divested RESS of Delaware, Inc. to Sterling Acquisitions I, Inc. (“Sterling”), which is owned by the chief executive officer of the Company, pursuant to an agreement under Sterling (i) purchased Ten Million (10,000,000) common shares of the Company for an aggregate price of Ten Dollars ($10), and (ii) was issued Ten Million (10,000,000) Class A Warrants at an aggregate price of Ten Dollars ($10), and (iii). Ten Million (10,000,000) Class B Warrants at an aggregate price of Ten Dollars ($10). In addition, the Company agreed to pay a fee of $1,000 to Sterling to cover the expenses associated with the maintenance of RESS of Delaware, Inc. until such time as a certificate of dissolution is filed with the state of Delaware.
On June 25, 2020, the Board of Directors and the shareholders of the Company approved a 1 for 40,000 reverse-split, with all fractional shares rounded up to the nearest whole share, and immediately after the completion of the reverse split, effected a 200 for 1 forward stock split. The net effect of the splits as a 1 for 200 reverse-split of the Company’s common shares. The stock splits were effective April 27, 2021.
By a written consent dated July 16, 2021, holders of a majority of the Company’s issued and outstanding common stock approved a resolution to appoint Jonathan Bates, Raymond Mow, Michael Maloney and Seth Bayles to the board of directors of the Company, and to appoint Jonathan Bates as Chairman, Seth Bayles as Corporate Secretary, Raymond Mow as Chief Financial Officer, and Ryan Ramnath as Chief Operating Officer (collectively, the “New O&Ds”). Erik S. Nelson remained a director and the chief executive officer. At the same time, the shareholders approved the issuance of 32,994,999 shares of common stock in the Company’s offering of common stock at $0.015 per share, and the grant of 4,750,000 shares for services, which were valued at $0.015 per share. As a result of the foregoing stock issuances, the New O&Ds (or entities controlled by them) collectively acquired 24,893,877 shares of common stock, which represents 60.4% of the issued and outstanding shares as of December 1, 2021.
The appointment of certain of the New O&Ds to the Company’s board, and issuance to the New O&Ds of a controlling interest in the Company, were made in order to enable the Company to enter the business of creating a hosting center for Bitcoin mining computers primarily utilizing immersion cooling technology, as well mining the Bitcoin digital currency for its own account. Prior to the change of control to the New O&Ds, the Company was a shell company.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Results of Operations for Years Ended August 31, 2021 and 2020.
Revenues
The Company did not generate any revenues during the years ended August 31, 2021 or 2020. The Company does not believe that revenues in the 2021 fiscal year are reflective of future revenues, as the Company expects to begin revenue generating operations in the second quarter of fiscal 2022.
Operating Expenses
During the year ended August 31, 2021 the Company incurred $131,815 in operating expenses compared to $-0- in operating expense during the prior year ended August 31, 2020. Operating expenses for the 2021 fiscal year were primarily comprised of $71,250 in stock based compensation expense to certain directors and consultants for services, legal and accounting fees, Delaware taxes and other fees associated with being a public company. The higher level of operating expenses in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 is attributable to expenses incurred to as part of the Company’s entry into the bitmine hosting business. The Company expects that operating expenses will be trend materially higher in future periods as the Company begins paying regular compensation to existing officers and directors, hires additional employees, and incurs other costs associated with the commencement of operations.
Other Income (Expense)
During the year ended August 31, 2021 the Company incurred $22,424 in other expenses, as compared to $1,558 of other expenses during the prior year ended August 31, 2020. In each year, other expenses consisted of interest accrued on loans made to the Company be entities affiliated with management. The higher level of interest expense in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 is attributable to higher loan balances in 2021 as the Company borrowed money to finance its entry into the bitmine hosting business.
Net Income (Loss)
During the year ended August 31, 2021 the Company incurred a net loss of ($154,239), or ($0.02) per share, as compared to a net of loss of ($1,558) during the prior year ended August 31, 2020. The increase in the Company’s net loss in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 is attributable to the factors discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of August 31, 2021, the Company had $218,737 in cash on hand.
During the year ended August 31, 2021 the Company had a net loss of $154,239.
Cash flows used in operating activities was $76,361 for the year ended August 31, 2021 compared to cash flows used of $-0- for the year ended August 31, 2020. The increase in cash flows used in operating activities for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 is primarily attributable to our operating loss of $154,539 of which $71,250 of that loss was non-cash stock-based compensation.
Cash flows used in investing activities were $427,296 for the year ended August 31, 2021 compared to cash flows used in investing activities of $-0- for the year ended August 31, 2020. The entire increase during fiscal 2021 period compared to fiscal 2020 in cash flows used by investing activities is due to the purchase of, or payment of deposits on, $427,296 in Bitmine equipment.
Cash flows provided by financing activities were $720,464 for the year ended August 31, 2021 compared to cash flows provided by financing activities of $-0- for the year ended August 31, 2020. The increase in cash flows provided by financing activities in fiscal 2021 is attributable to $493,615 received from the private placement of common stock and $226,849 in related party loans, net of repayment.
A significant component of the Company’s current liquidity is derived from a Line of Credit Agreement with Innovative Digital Investors Emerging Technology, L.P., a limited partnership controlled by Jonathan Bates, our Chairman. The Line of Credit Agreement was initially entered into on July 22, 2021, and was amended and restated in its entirety on August 4, 2021 and on September 29, 2021 (as amended and restated, the “LOC Agreement”). The LOC Agreement, as most recently amended, provides for loans of up to $2,500,000 at the request of the Company to finance the purchase of equipment necessary for the operation of the Company’s business. Loans under the LOC Agreement accrue interest at fifteen percent (15%) per annum, compounded on a 30/360 monthly basis until the loans have been repaid in full. The Company has the right to draw down funds under the LOC Agreement until December 31, 2021. The amount drawn, plus all accrued interest therein, is repayable in full on April 1, 2022. The principal amount due under the line of credit was $1,747,296 at December 1, 2021.
The Company believes that the accessibility to this Line of Credit will enable it to purchase equipment it can either resell at a profit or can be used to generate revenue through the mining of Bitcoin and other crypto-currencies. Additionally, the Company believes that this revenue combined with cash on hand will provide it sufficient liquidity to fund its operations for the next 12 months. Nevertheless, in order to expedite the Company’s entry into the bitmine hosting business, and to ensure that the Company has adequate cash reserves, the Company has engaged an investment banker and is pursuing additional capital-raising alternatives, including the potential issuance of common stock in a private placement, or the issuance of convertible notes or preferred stock. There is no assurance that the Company will be able to raise additional capital or that the terms of any capital raise are not dilutive to current shareholders or carry other terms that are unfavorable to the Company and its shareholders.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on the Company’s financial condition, changes in financial condition, and results of operations, liquidity or capital resources.
Related Party Transactions
Starting in 2020, Coral Investment Partners, LP, a partnership controlled by Erik Nelson, agreed to make loans to the Company from time to time pursuant to a demand promissory note that bore interest at 24% per annum. The amount due at August 31, 2020 was principal of $50,447 and interest of $1,558. The amount due of principal of $87,447 and interest of $19,476. was repaid in full in the quarter ended August 31, 2021.
On July 22, 2021, the Company entered into a Line of Credit Agreement with Innovative Digital Investors Emerging Technology, L.P., a limited partnership controlled by Jonathan Bates, our Chairman, and Raymond Mow, our chief financial officer and a director. The Line of Credit Agreement was amended and restated in its entirety on August 4, 2021 and on September 29, 2021 (as amended and restated, the “LOC Agreement”). The LOC Agreement, as most recently amended, provides for loans of up to $2,500,000 at the request of the Company to finance the purchase of equipment necessary for the operation of the Company’s business. Loans under the LOC Agreement accrue interest at fifteen percent (15%) per annum, compounded on a 30/360 monthly basis until the loans have been repaid in full. The Company has the right to draw down funds under the LOC Agreement until December 31, 2021. The amount drawn, plus all accrued interest therein, is repayable in full on April 1, 2022. The principal amount due under the line of credit was $1,747,296 at December 1, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies
General
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of our financial statements requires management to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, net sales and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We describe in this section certain critical accounting policies that require us to make significant estimates, assumptions and judgments. An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are uncertain at the time the estimate is made and if different estimates that reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting estimates that are reasonably likely to occur periodically, could materially impact the financial statements. Management believes the following critical accounting policies reflect its most significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the financial statements. For further information on the critical accounting policies, see Note 1 of the Financial Statements.
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”), which is the source of authoritative accounting principles recognized by the FASB to be applied by nongovernmental entities in the preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) in the United States.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amount of expenses during the reporting period. The most significant estimates relate to income taxes and contingencies. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience, known or expected trends, and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable given the quality of information available as of the date of these financial statements. The results of these assumptions provide the basis for making estimates about the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Cash and cash equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid temporary cash investments with an original maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents. On August 31, 2021, and August 31, 2020, the Company’s cash equivalents totaled $218,737 and $1,930, respectively.
Stock-based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation using the fair value method following the guidance outlined in Section 718-10 of the FASB ASC for disclosure about stock-based compensation. This section requires a public entity to measure the cost of employee and non-employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of the award (with limited exceptions). That cost will be recognized over the period during which service is provided. No compensation cost is recognized for equity instruments for which service is not provided or rendered.
Related party transactions
The Company follows ASC 850, Related Party Disclosures, for the identification of related parties and disclosure of related party transactions. In accordance with ASC 850, the Company’s financial statements include disclosures of material related party transactions, other than compensation arrangements, expense allowances, and other similar items in the ordinary course of business, as well as transactions that are eliminated in the preparation of financial statements.
Net Loss per Share
Net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average common shares outstanding during the period as defined by ASC Topic 260, “Earnings per Share.” Basic earnings per common share calculations are determined by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the year. Diluted earnings per common share calculations are determined by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common shares and dilutive common share equivalents outstanding. As of August 31, 2021 there were no common stock equivalents that were dilutive.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are provided for the tax effects of transactions reported in the financial statements and consist of taxes currently due plus deferred taxes related primarily to differences between depreciation which is deductible for tax purposes prior to being deductible for book purposes. The deferred tax assets and liabilities represent the future tax return consequences of those differences, which will either be taxable or deductible when the assets and liabilities are recovered or settled. Deferred taxes also are recognized for operating losses that are available to offset future taxable income.
From time to time, the Company may have differences in computing the book and tax bases of property and equipment; reserves for bad debts; capitalized overhead included in inventories; bonus plan payables, and accrued wages to shareholders/employees. Deferred tax expense or benefit is the result of the changes in the deferred tax assets, net of the valuation reserve, and liabilities.
The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification Topic 740 (“FASB ASC 740”), Income Taxes, which clarifies the accounting and disclosure requirements for uncertainty in tax positions. It requires a two-step approach to evaluate tax positions and determine if they should be recognized in the financial statements. The two-step approach involves recognizing any tax positions that are “more likely than not” to occur and then measuring those positions to determine if they are recognizable in the financial statements. Management regularly reviews and analyzes all tax positions and has determined that no uncertain tax positions requiring recognition have occurred.
In general, the Company’s income tax returns are subject to examination by the taxing authorities for three years after they were filed. The Company has not filed any tax returns.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
All other newly issued accounting pronouncements, but not yet effective, have been deemed either immaterial or not applicable.