Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our audited Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements and other disclosures included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including the disclosures under “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In particular, we encourage you to review the risk factor related to the impact of the coronavirus pandemic, “The COVID-19 pandemic could materially adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition.” These risks and uncertainties could cause actual results to differ significantly from those projected in forward-looking statements contained in this report or implied by past results and trends. Forward-looking statements are statements that attempt to forecast or anticipate future developments in our business, financial condition or results of operations. See the section titled “Forward-Looking Statements” that appears at the beginning of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These statements, like all statements in this report, speak only as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (unless another date is indicated), and, except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update or revise these statements in light of future developments. Our Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared in accordance with United States (U.S.) generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and are presented in U.S. Dollars (USD).
Overview
We are a global biotechnology company that develops and commercializes innovative therapies for people with serious and life-threatening rare diseases and medical conditions. We select product candidates for diseases and conditions that represent a significant unmet medical need, have well-understood biology and provide an opportunity to be first-to-market or offer a significant benefit over existing products.
Our portfolio consists of several commercial products and multiple clinical and preclinical product candidates for the treatment of various diseases. A summary of our commercial products, as of December 31, 2020, is provided below:
(1)See “Government Regulation-Orphan Drug Designation” in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion
(2)See “Government Regulation- Healthcare Reform” in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion
(3)For the treatment of Mucopolysaccharidosis I (MPS I)
(4)For the treatment of late infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type 2 (CLN2)
(5)For the treatment of phenylketonuria (PKU)
(6)For the treatment of Mucopolysaccharidosis VI (MPS VI)
(7)For adult patients with PKU
(8)For the treatment of Mucopolysaccharidosis IV Type A (MPS IVA)
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
(In millions of U.S. Dollars, except as otherwise disclosed)
A summary of our on-going major development programs as of December 31, 2020, is provided below:
Uncertainty Relating to the COVID-19 Pandemic
The outbreak of novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues to affect economies and business around the world. Our global revenue sources, mostly in the form of demand interruptions such as missed patient infusions and delayed treatment starts for new patients, and our overall business operations were impacted by COVID-19 during the year ended December 31, 2020 and we anticipate a continued impact on our financial results in fiscal year 2021. The extent and duration of such effects are highly uncertain and difficult to predict. We are actively monitoring and managing our response and assessing actual and potential impacts to our operating results and financial condition, as well as developments in our business, which could further impact the developments, trends and expectations described below. See the risk factor related to the impact of the coronavirus pandemic, “The COVID-19 pandemic could materially adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition.” described in “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Developments
We continued to grow our commercial business and advance our product candidate pipeline during 2020. We believe that the combination of our internal research programs, acquisitions and partnerships will allow us to continue to develop and commercialize innovative therapies for people with serious and life-threatening rare diseases and medical conditions. Below is a summary of key business developments:
Continued Emphasis on Research and Development
•Vosoritide - In February 2021, we announced that the FDA granted priority review designation for our New Drug Application (NDA) for vosoritide, an investigational, once daily injection analog of C-type Natriuretic Peptide (CNP) for children with achondroplasia, the most common form of disproportionate short stature in humans.
In December 2020, we announced results from our pivotal global Phase 3 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of vosoritide in approximately 121 children with achondroplasia ages 5-14 for two years. The data demonstrated that children in the open-label long-term extension of the Phase 3 study maintained an increase in Annual Growth Velocity through the second year of continuous treatment. An analysis comparing 52 children who were randomized and treated with vosoritide for two years to 38 children from the run-in study who were randomized to receive placebo with an untreated observation period of two years showed improvement in one-year height change in the treated group relative to the untreated group. The one-year height change improvement in the second year of treatment, 1.79 cm, was similar to the one-year height change improvement in the first year of treatment, 1.73 cm. The cumulative height gain over the 2-year period for treated children was 3.52 cm more than untreated children.
In 2020, marketing applications for vosoritide were validated and accepted by the EMA and FDA, respectively. The Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP) opinion is expected in Europe in June 2021. The U.S. NDA for vosoritide is under review by the FDA with a Prescription Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA) Target Action Date of August 20, 2021. Vosoritide has Orphan Drug designation from the FDA and EMA.
•BMN 307 - In February 2021, we announced that we plan to dose escalate participants in PHEarless, the Phase 1/2 study of BMN 307 our gene therapy candidate for PKU based on encouraging Phe lowering and safety signals observed in study participants who were treated with the lowest dose. Both the FDA and EMA have granted BMN 307 Orphan Drug Status. Additionally, the FDA has granted fast track designation to BMN 307. All subjects participating in the PHEarless study are receiving product made at commercial scale from our gene therapy manufacturing facility.
•Valoctocogene roxaparvovec - In January 2021, we announced topline results from our ongoing global Phase 3 study of valoctocogene roxaparvovec, an investigational gene therapy for the treatment of adults with severe hemophilia A. All 134 study participants received a single dose of valoctocogene roxaparvovec and completed a year or more of follow-up. Data from the study in the pre-specified primary analysis for Annualized Bleeding Rate (ABR) showed that a single dose of valoctocogene roxaparvovec significantly reduced ABR by 84% compared
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
(In millions of U.S. Dollars, except as otherwise disclosed)
with prior treatment with prophylactic Factor VIII infusions from 4.8 (median 2.8) bleeding episodes per year at baseline to 0.8 (median 0.0). These results were from a pre-specified group of 112 participants in a non-interventional prospective baseline observational study with a median follow-up of 60.1 weeks after dosing with valoctocogene roxaparvovec. Of the 112 rollover study participants, 80% were bleed-free starting at week five after treatment.
Valoctocogene roxaparvovec also significantly reduced the mean annualized Factor VIII usage in the rollover population by 99%, from 135.9 (median 128.6) to 2.0 (median 0.0) infusions per year. At the end of the first year post-infusion with valoctocogene roxaparvovec, 132 participants in the modified intent-to-treat (mITT) population had a mean endogenous Factor VIII expression level of 42.9 (SD 45.5, median 23.9) IU/dL, as measured by the chromogenic substrate assay, supporting the clinical benefits observed with significant reduction of bleeding episodes and Factor VIII infusion rate. Factor VIII expression declined at a slower rate compared to the Phase 1/2 study, and remained in a range to provide hemostatic efficacy. In the 17 participants who comprise a subset of the mITT population and had been dosed at least two years prior to the data cut date, Factor VIII expression declined from a mean of 42.2 (SD 50.9, median 23.9) IU/dL at the end of year one to a mean of 24.4 (SD 29.2, median 14.7) IU/dL at the end of year two with continued hemostatic efficacy demonstrated by a mean ABR of 0.9 (median 0.0) bleeding episodes per year
In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recommended that we complete the Phase 3 study and submit two-year follow-up safety and efficacy data on all study participants. We plan to meet with FDA to review the two-year data request and share the Phase 3 results announced in January 2021. We are targeting resubmission of the Marketing Authorization Application (MAA) with these results to the European Medicines Agency (EMA) in the second quarter of 2021 pending confirmation in presubmission meetings.
•BMN 255 - In January 2021, we announced that we filed an Investigational New Drug application (IND) for BMN 255, a small molecule for the treatment of a subset of chronic renal disease. BMN 255 was driven by genetic discoveries for both mechanism and for identifying individuals for treatment.
•Palynziq - In October 2020 we announced that the FDA approved our supplemental BLA to increase the maximum allowable dose of Palynziq Injection for treatment of adults with PKU to 60 mg daily. Previously, the maximum dose was 40 mg daily. In the Phase 3 PRISM studies, 19% of study participants required a 60 mg dose to achieve adequate response to Palynziq.
Palynziq is indicated to reduce blood Phe concentrations in adults with PKU, who have uncontrolled blood Phe concentrations greater than 600 μmol/L on existing management. Palynziq, a PEGylated recombinant phenylalanine ammonia lyase enzyme, is the first and only approved enzyme substitution therapy to target the underlying cause of PKU by helping the body to break down Phe.
•BMN 331 - In July 2020, we began IND-enabling studies for our third gene therapy product candidate, BMN 331, for the treatment of hereditary angioedema.
•BMN 351 - IND-enabling studies are underway for BMN 351, an oligonucleotide therapy that has demonstrated a high-level of protein expression in pre-clinical models for the treatment of Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy. We intend to determine the timing of a potential IND filing at the end of the year based on the results of these studies.
•Gene therapy manufacturing facility - In January 2020, we announced significant improvements in productivity at our gene therapy facility which has the potential to support the commercial production of multiple gene therapy products to meet global commercial demand, depending on dose and production mix.
2021 Outlook
In 2021, we will continue to focus on our key operating objectives which include continued progression of our product pipeline and continued uptake of our commercial products. From a research and development (R&D) perspective, we expect to continue to invest in our various ongoing clinical studies which support both our commercial products and research and early development pipeline. We expect to move forward on a number of late-stage clinical studies for new product candidates and plan to file marketing applications for various therapeutic areas.
From a commercial perspective, we expect to continue to build-out our commercial organization to support the commercialization of Palynziq and incur pre-commercialization expenses related to vosoritide.
While the continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global business environment remains uncertain, we expect the conditions and effects of the pandemic on our business will persist. We expect significant declines in Kuvan revenues in the U.S. due to the October 2020 loss of market exclusivity and plan to implement strategies to retain market share aimed to mitigate a complete loss of market share. We expect to experience continued growth in our base business for the other commercial products.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
(In millions of U.S. Dollars, except as otherwise disclosed)
We continue to monitor conditions in the macroeconomic environment that could affect our ability to achieve our goals, such as the continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business, changes in the reimbursement and payer landscape, changes in economic conditions in certain key markets, particularly in Europe and Latin America, patent expiration of competitive products and the launch of generic competitors, government pricing pressures internationally and the potential volatility in foreign currency exchange rates. We will adjust our business processes, as appropriate, to attempt to mitigate these risks to our business.
We expect that our product pipeline investments and expanding commercial infrastructure will enable us to execute on our 2021 operating objectives.
2020 Financial Highlights
Key components of our results of operations include the following:
The increase in Net Income for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily attributed to:
•an increase in the benefit from income taxes primarily due to the completion of an intra-entity transfer of certain intellectual property rights to an Irish subsidiary, to better align ownership of the intellectual property rights with how our business operates, resulting in a tax benefit of $835.1 million based on the fair value of the transferred intellectual property rights;
•decreased R&D expense primarily due to lower clinical activity spend for valoctocogene roxaparvovec and for tralesinidase alfa which was licensed to a third-party in the fourth quarter of 2019; and
•an increase in the gain of nonfinancial assets due primarily to the divestiture and sale of Firdapse in 2020; partially offset by
•decreased gross profits due primarily to $87.2 million of inventory charges recorded in 2020 related to pre-launch valoctocogene roxaparvovec inventory reserves due to regulatory responses received in the third quarter of 2020 requesting additional data extending anticipated regulatory approval timelines; and
•higher SG&A expense primarily due to an increase in pre-commercial activities related to valoctocogene roxaparvovec and vosoritide.
See “Results of Operations” below for additional information related to the Net Income (Loss) fluctuations presented above.
Our cash, cash equivalents and investments totaled $1.4 billion as of December 31, 2020, compared to $1.2 billion as of December 31, 2019. We have historically financed our operations primarily through our cash flows from operating activities and the issuance of common stock and convertible debt. We will be highly dependent on our net product revenues to supplement our current liquidity and fund our operations for the foreseeable future. We may in the future elect to supplement this with further debt or equity offerings or commercial borrowing. Further, depending on market conditions, our financial position and performance and other factors, we may in the future choose to use a portion of our cash, cash equivalents or investments to repurchase our convertible debt or other securities. See “Financial Position, Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for a further discussion of our liquidity and capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies, Estimates and Judgments
In preparing our Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP and pursuant to the rules and regulations promulgated by the Securities and Exchange Commission (the SEC), we make assumptions, judgments and estimates
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
(In millions of U.S. Dollars, except as otherwise disclosed)
that can have a significant impact on our net income/loss and affect the reported amounts of certain assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and discuss our critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The full extent to which the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition, including revenues, expenses, reserves and allowances, manufacturing, clinical trials and research and development costs will depend on future developments that continue to remain highly uncertain at this time. As events continue to evolve and additional information becomes available, our estimates may change materially in future periods.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 3 to our accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the critical accounting policies below reflect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
•Revenue Recognition and Related Allowances
•Inventory Produced Prior to Regulatory Approval
•Valuation of Goodwill and Acquired Intangible Assets
•Valuation of Contingent Consideration
•Income Taxes
Historically, our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to our critical accounting policies have not differed materially from actual results.
Revenue Recognition and Related Allowances
Net Product Revenues - We recognize revenue when the customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. For Aldurazyme revenues, we receive a payment ranging from 39.5% to 50% on worldwide net Aldurazyme sales by Sanofi Genzyme (Genzyme) depending on sales volume, which is included in Net Product Revenues in our Consolidated Statements of Operations. We recognize our best estimate of the entire revenue that we expect to receive when the product is released and control is transferred to Genzyme. We record Aldurazyme net product revenues based on the estimated variable consideration payable when the product is sold through by Genzyme. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. Differences between the estimated variable consideration to be received from Genzyme and actual payments received are not expected to be material. If actual results vary from our estimates, we will make adjustments, which would affect Net Product Revenues and earnings in the period such variances become known.
Gross-to-Net Sales Adjustments - We record product sales net of estimated mandatory and supplemental discounts to government payers, in addition to discounts to private payers, and other related charges. Rebates, cash discounts and distributor fees represent the majority of our gross-to-net deductions and are recorded in the same period the related sales occur. Rebates include amounts paid to Medicaid, other government programs, certain managed care providers, as well as foreign government rebates. Rebates, cash discounts and distributor fees are estimates based on contractual arrangements or statutory obligations, which may vary by product and payer. Estimation requires evaluation of our historical experience, customer mix, current contractual and statutory obligations, specific known market events and trends and industry data. We evaluate our customer mix to estimate which sales will be subject to these revenue dilutive items and consider changes to government program guidelines that would impact the actual rebates and/or our estimates of which sales qualify for such rebates.
We update our estimates and assumptions each quarter based on actual historical experience, current contractual and statutory requirements, specific known market events and trends and forecasted customer buying and payment patterns and record any necessary adjustments to our reserves to reflect current information. We believe the methodologies that we use to estimate allowances are reasonable and appropriate given the facts and circumstances. However, actual results may differ significantly from our estimates.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
(In millions of U.S. Dollars, except as otherwise disclosed)
The following table summarizes the consolidated activities and ending balances of all our gross-to-net sales adjustments:
Inventory Produced Prior to Regulatory Approval
When future commercialization for a product candidate is considered probable and management believes that material uncertainties related to the ultimate regulatory approval have been significantly reduced and we expect to realize economic benefit in the future, we capitalize pre-launch or pre-qualification manufacturing costs prior to regulatory approval. For inventories that are capitalized in preparation of product launch, management considers a number of factors based on the information available at the time, including the product candidate’s current status in the drug development and regulatory approval process, results from the related pivotal clinical trial, results from meetings with relevant regulatory agencies prior to the filing of regulatory applications, historical experience, as well as potential impediments to the approval process such as product safety or efficacy, as well as commercialization and market trends.
In applying the lower of cost or net realizable value to pre-launch inventory, we estimate a range of likely commercial prices based on our comparable commercial products and consider the product candidate’s stability data for all of the pre-approval production to date to determine whether there is adequate expected shelf life for the capitalized pre-launch production costs. If the criteria for capitalizing inventory produced prior to regulatory approval are not met, we recognize such costs as R&D expense in the period incurred. As of December 31, 2020, there were no pre-launch inventory costs on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Valuation of Goodwill and Acquired Intangible Assets
We have recorded goodwill and acquired intangible assets primarily related to in-process research and development (IPR&D) projects through acquisitions accounted for as business combinations. When identifiable intangible assets, including IPR&D, are acquired, we determine the fair value of these assets as of the acquisition date. Discounted cash flow models are typically used in these valuations if quoted market prices are not available, and the models require significant estimates and assumptions including but not limited to:
•estimating the time and resources needed to complete the development and approval of product candidate;
•estimating future cash flows from product sales;
•developing appropriate probability of success rates for unapproved product candidates considering their stages of development;
•projecting timing of regulatory approval; and
•risks related to the viability of and potential alternative treatments in any future target markets.
Goodwill represents the excess of purchase price over fair value of net assets acquired in a business combination accounted for by the acquisition method of accounting and is not amortized, but subject to impairment testing. We review our goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets for impairment annually in the fourth quarter, or more frequently if warranted by events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
We assess goodwill impairment by comparing the fair value of our single reporting unit with its carrying amount. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss equal to the difference will be recorded.
We assess impairment of indefinite-lived intangible assets first by performing a qualitative assessment. If the qualitative assessment indicates that it is more likely than not that the fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets is less than its carrying amount, then we will perform a quantitative assessment and record an impairment loss. We assess definite-lived intangible assets for recoverability when there is an indication of impairment by comparing the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset or asset group and its eventual disposition to the carrying amount of the asset or asset group. Any excess of the carrying value of the asset or asset group over its estimated fair value is recognized as an impairment loss. As of December 31, 2020, we had no indefinite-lived intangible assets on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
(In millions of U.S. Dollars, except as otherwise disclosed)
Valuation of Contingent Consideration
Significant estimates and judgments are required in determining the acquisition fair value of any contingent obligations incurred in connection with an acquisition. We estimate the fair value of contingent consideration utilizing a probability-based income approach inclusive of an estimated discount rate. Each period we reassess the fair value of the contingent consideration associated with certain acquisitions and record increases in the fair value as contingent consideration expense and record decreases in the fair value as a reduction of contingent consideration expense. Changes in the fair value of the contingent consideration can result from changes to one or multiple inputs including the estimated probability with respect to regulatory approval, changes in the assumed timing of when milestones are likely to be achieved and changes in assumed discount periods and rates. Accordingly, subsequent changes in the underlying facts and circumstances could result in changes to our estimates and assumptions, which could have a material impact on the estimated future fair values of contingent consideration.
We believe the fair value used to record contingent consideration incurred in connection with business combinations is based on reasonable estimates and assumptions given the facts and circumstances as of the related valuation date.
Income Taxes
We calculate and provide for income taxes in each of the tax jurisdictions in which we operate. Our Consolidated Balance Sheets reflect net deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are measured using enacted tax rates. The net deferred tax assets primarily represent the tax benefit of tax credits and timing differences between book and tax recognition of certain revenue and expense items, net of a valuation allowance. When it is more likely than not that all or some portion of deferred tax assets may not be realized, we establish a valuation allowance for the amount that may not be realized. We utilize financial projections to support our net deferred tax assets, which contain significant assumptions and estimates of future operations. If such assumptions were to differ significantly, it may have a material impact on our ability to realize our deferred tax assets. Changes in our valuation allowance will result in a change to tax expense.
We establish liabilities or reduce assets for certain tax positions when we believe those certain tax positions are not more likely than not to be sustained if challenged. Each quarter, we evaluate these uncertain tax positions and adjust the related tax assets and liabilities in light of changing facts and circumstances.
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and various foreign jurisdictions, including Ireland. Due to economic and political conditions, various countries are actively considering changes to existing tax laws. We cannot predict the form or timing of potential legislative changes that could have a material adverse impact on our results of operations. In addition, significant judgment is required in determining our worldwide provision for income taxes. For example, the 2020 income tax benefit included a $835.1 million deferred tax benefit related to an intra-entity transfer of certain intellectual property rights to an Irish subsidiary. The transaction resulted in a step-up of the Irish tax-deductible basis, and the Irish subsidiary recognized a deferred tax asset for the book and tax basis difference of the transferred intellectual property rights. The tax deductions related to the amortization of these intangible assets will be recognized in the future and any amortization not deducted for tax purposes will be carried forward indefinitely under Irish tax laws. We expect to be able to realize the deferred tax asset resulting from this transaction and have not recorded a valuation allowance as of December 31, 2020. Management is not aware of any potential changes that would have a material effect on our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 4 to our accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements and our expectation of their impact, if any, on our results of operations and financial condition.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
(In millions of U.S. Dollars, except as otherwise disclosed)
Results of Operations
Net Income (Loss)
Net Income (Loss) consisted of the following:
Our Net Income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $859.1 million, compared to Net Loss of $23.8 million and $77.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The changes in Net Income (Loss) were primarily a result of the following:
Net Product Revenues
Net Product Revenues consisted of the following:
2020 compared to 2019
The increase in Net Product Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily attributed to the following:
•Palynziq: the increase was attributed to a combination of revenue from more patients achieving maintenance dosing and new patients initiating therapy in the U.S.;
•Brineura: the increase was primarily attributed to growth in the number of patients in all regions;
•Aldurazyme: the increase was attributed to timing of product fulfillment to Genzyme;
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
(In millions of U.S. Dollars, except as otherwise disclosed)
•Naglazyme: the increase was primarily attributed to increased orders from the Middle East and growth in North America; partially offset by
•Firdapse: the decrease was primarily attributed to the divestiture and sale of the Firdapse business in January 2020; and
•Kuvan: the decrease was primarily attributed to the U.S. loss of market exclusivity in October 2020 resulting in generic competition.
2019 compared to 2018
The increase in Net Product Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to 2018 was primarily attributed to the following:
•Palynziq: the increase was attributed to a combination of revenue from more patients achieving maintenance dosing and new patients initiating therapy in the U.S. as the product launched in the third quarter of 2018;
•Vimizim: the increase was primarily attributed to increased sales volume due to patient growth in the U.S. and orders from Latin America;
•Brineura: the increase was primarily attributed to growth in the number of patients in all regions;
•Kuvan: the increase was primarily attributed to increased sales volume due to patient growth in North America and in European markets;
•Naglazyme: the increase was primarily attributed to increased sales volume driven by orders from Latin America; partially offset by
•Aldurazyme: the decrease was primarily attributed to timing of product fulfillment to Genzyme.
In certain countries, such as in Latin America, governments place large periodic orders for Naglazyme and Vimizim. The timing of these large government orders can be inconsistent and can create significant period to period variation in our revenues.
We anticipate the COVID-19 pandemic will have a continued impact on future Net Product Revenues in 2021 as many of our products are administered via infusions in a clinic or hospital setting and/or by a healthcare professional. Although we are working with our patient community and health care providers to find alternative arrangements where necessary, such as providing infusions at home, the revenue from the doses of our products that are missed by patients and the lost revenue from delayed treatment starts for new patients will never be recouped. See the risk factor “The COVID-19 pandemic could materially adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition” in “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
In October 2020, we lost U.S. market exclusivity for Kuvan which adversely affected revenues in the fourth quarter of 2020. We have been preparing for this loss of exclusivity which will continue to result in a reduction in market share and adversely affect our revenue and results of operations in 2021. See the risk factor “The sale of generic versions of Kuvan by generic manufacturers may adversely affect our revenues and results of operations” in “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information. Additionally, the responses received from the FDA and EMA requesting additional safety and efficacy data from our valoctocogene roxaparvovec Phase 3 studies have extended our anticipated regulatory approval timelines which will have a negative impact on net product revenue growth for 2021.
We face exposure to movements in foreign currency exchange rates, primarily the Euro. We use foreign currency exchange contracts to hedge a percentage of our foreign currency exposure. The following table shows our Net Product Revenues denominated in USD and foreign currencies:
The net impact of foreign currency exchange rates on product sales denominated in currencies other than USD during 2020 and 2019 was unfavorable by $23.3 million and $24.8 million respectively, which was primarily driven by a weakening, relative to the USD, of currencies in Latin American markets such as Brazil, Colombia and Argentina.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (continued)
(In millions of U.S. Dollars, except as otherwise disclosed)
See “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk” in Part II,