ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Included in ITEM 8 are the audited Consolidated Financial Statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 ("Financial Statements").
Statements made in this Form 10-K that are not historical or current facts, which represent the Company's expectations or beliefs including, but not limited to, statements concerning the Company's operations, performance, financial condition, business strategies, and other information, involve substantial risks and uncertainties. The Company's actual results of operations, most of which are beyond the Company's control, could differ materially. These statements often can be identified by the use of terms such as "may," "will," "expect," "believe," anticipate," "estimate," or "continue" or the negative thereof. We wish to caution readers not to place undue reliance on any such forward looking statements, which speak only as of the date made. Any forward-looking statements represent management's best judgment as to what may occur in the future. However, forward looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and important factors beyond our control that could cause actual results and events to differ materially from historical results of operations and events and those presently anticipated or projected.
These factors include adverse economic conditions, entry of new and stronger competitors, inadequate capital, unexpected costs, failure (or delay) to gain product or regulatory approvals in the United States (or particular states) or foreign countries, loss (permanently or for any extended period of time) of the services of members of the Company’s small core management team (all of whom are age 70 or older) and failure to capitalize upon access to new markets. Additional risks and uncertainties that may affect forward looking statements about Bion's business and prospects include the possibility that markets for nutrient reduction credits (discussed below) and/or other ways to monetize nutrient reductions will be slow to develop (or not develop at all), the existing default by PA1 on its loan secured by the Kreider 1 system, the possibility that competitors will develop more comprehensive and/or less expensive environmental solution, delays in market awareness of Bion and our Systems, uncertainties and costs related to research and development efforts to update and improve Bion’s technologies and applications thereof, and/or delays in Bion's development of JVs, Projects and failure of marketing strategies, each of which could have both immediate and long term material adverse effects by placing us behind our competitors and requiring expenditures of our limited resources.
THESE RISKS, UNCERTAINTIES AND FACTORS BEYOND OUR CONTROL ARE MAGNIFIED DURING THE CURRENT UNCERTAIN PERIOD RELATED TO THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC AND THE UNIQUE ECONOMIC, FINANCIAL, GOVERNMENTAL AND HEALTH-RELATED CONDITIONS IN WHICH THE COMPANY, THE ENTIRE COUNTRY AND THE ENTIRE WORLD NOW RESIDE. TO DATE THE COMPANY HAS EXPERIENCED DIRECT IMPACTS IN VARIOUS AREAS INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION: I) GOVERNMENT-ORDERED SHUTDOWNS WHICH HAVE SLOWED THE COMPANY’S RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS AND OTHER INITIATIVES, II) SHIFTED FOCUS OF STATE AND FEDERAL GOVERNMENT WHICH IS LIKELY TO NEGATIVELY IMPACT THE COMPANY’S LEGISLATIVE INITIATIVES IN PENNSYLVANIA AND WASHINGTON DC, III) STRAINS AND UNCERTAINTIES IN BOTH THE EQUITY AND DEBT MARKETS HAVE MADE DISCUSSION AND PLANNING OF FUNDING OF THE COMPANY AND ITS INITIATIVES AND PROJECTS WITH INVESTMENT BANKERS, BANKS AND POTENTIAL STRATEGIC PARTNERS MORE TENUOUS, IV) STRAINS AND UNCERTAINTIES IN THE AGRICULTURAL SECTOR AND MARKETS HAVE MADE DISCUSSION AND PLANNING OF FUNDING OF THE COMPANY AND ITS INITIATIVES AND PROJECTS MORE DIFFICULT AS FUTURE INDUSTRY CONDITIONS ARE NOW MORE DIFFICULT TO ASSESS/PREDICT, V) CONSTRAINTS DUE TO PROBLEMS EXPERIENCED IN THE GLOBAL INDUSTRIAL SUPPLY CHAIN, VI) DUE TO THE AGE AND HEALTH OF OUR CORE MANAGEMENT TEAM, ALL OF WHOM ARE AGE 70 OR OLDER AND HAVE HAD ONE OR MORE EXISTING HEALTH ISSUES, THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC PLACES THE COMPANY AT GREATER RISK THAN WAS PREVIOUSLY THE CASE (TO A HIGHER DEGREE THAN WOULD BE THE CASE IF THE COMPANY HAD A LARGER, DEEPER AND/OR YOUNGER CORE MANAGEMENT TEAM), AND VII) THERE ALMOST CERTAINLY WILL BE OTHER UNANTICIPATED CONSEQUENCES FOR THE COMPANY AS A RESULT OF THE CURRENT PANDEMIC EMERGENCY AND ITS AFTERMATH.
Bion disclaims any obligation subsequently to revise any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of such statements or to reflect the occurrence of anticipated or unanticipated events.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements filed with this Report.
BUSINESS OVERVIEW
Our patented and proprietary technology provides economically sustainable comprehensive environmental solutions to one of the greatest water air and water quality problems in the U.S. today: pollution from large-scale livestock production facilities (also known as “Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations” or “CAFOs”). Application of our technology and technology platform can simultaneously mitigate environmental problems and improve operational/resource efficiencies by recovering high-value co-products from the CAFOs’ waste stream that have traditionally been wasted or underutilized, including renewable energy, nutrients (including ammonia nitrogen and phosphorus) and water.
During the 2016 to 2021 fiscal years, the Company focused a large portion of its activities on developing, testing and demonstrating the 3rd generation of its technology and technology platform (“3G Tech”) with emphasis on increasing the efficiency of production of valuable co-products from the waste treatment process, including ammonia nitrogen in the form of organic ammonium bicarbonate products. The Company’s initial ammonium bicarbonate liquid product completed its Organic Materials Review Institute (“OMRI”) application and review process with approval during May 2020. An application for our first solid ammonium bicarbonate product - AD Nitrogen - has been filed and is in the review process (see discussion at “Organic Fertilizer products” at Item 1 above).
Bion is now focused primarily on: i) development/construction of its initial commercial-scale 3G Tech installation, ii) developing applications and markets for its organic fertilizer products and its sustainable (conventional and organic) animal protein products, and iii) initiation and development of joint ventures (“JVs” as discussed above) (and related projects) based on the augmented capabilities of our 3G Tech, while (iv) continuing to pursue development opportunities related to large retrofit projects (such as the Kreider poultry project JV described above) and ongoing R&D activities.
The $175 billion U.S. livestock industry is under intense scrutiny for its environmental and public health impacts - its ‘environmental sustainability’-- at the same time it is struggling with declining revenues and margins (derived in part from clinging to its historic practices and resulting limitations and impacts) which threaten its ‘economic sustainability’. Its failure to adequately respond to consumer concerns ranging including food safety, environmental impacts, and humane treatment of animals have provided impetus for plant-based alternatives such as Beyond Meat and Impossible Burger (and many others) being marketed as “sustainable” alternatives for this growing consumer segment of the market.
The Company believes that its 3G Tech, in addition to providing superior environmental remediation, creates opportunities for large scale production of i) verifiably sustainable-branded livestock products and ii) verifiably sustainable organic-branded livestock products that will command premium pricing (in part due to ongoing monitoring and third-party verification of environmental performance which will provide meaningful assurances to both consumers and regulatory agencies). Each of these two distinct market segments (which the Company intends to pursue in parallel) presents a large production/marketing opportunity for Bion. Our 3G Tech will also produce (as co-products) biogas and valuable organic fertilizer products, which can be utilized in the production of organic grains for use as feed for raising organic livestock (some of which may be utilized in the Company’s JV projects) and/or marketed to the growing organic fertilizer market.
During the 2021 fiscal year, Bion completed a series of core optimization trials of its 3G Tech platform that were required to move forward with its initial commercial scale 3G Tech project. As described in more detail in Item 1above, Bion is now engaged in activities to develop a sustainable beef demonstration facility on approximately four (4) leased acres near Fair Oaks, Indiana. The project, as presently planned, will include a covered barn for up to 300 head of cattle, designed to allow daily manure production to flow into Bion’s 3G Tech waste treatment/resource recovery platform that includes an anaerobic digester (“AD”) to generate biogas and CO2, followed by Bion’s patented 3G Tech ammonia recovery process to produce organic ammonium bicarbonate and nutrient-rich solids.
We believe that Bion’s 3G Tech platform, coupled with common-sense policy changes to U.S. clean water strategy that are already underway, will combine to provide a pathway to true economic and environmental sustainability with ‘win-win’ benefits for at least a premium sector of the livestock industry, the environment, and the consumer.
Bion’s business model and technology can open up the opportunity for JVs (in various contractual forms) between the Company and large livestock/food/fertilizer industry participants, based upon the supplemental cash flow generated by implementation our 3G Tech business model (described and discussed below) which will support the costs of technology implementation (including related debt). We anticipate this will result in long term value for Bion. Long term, Bion anticipates that the sustainable branding opportunity may expand to represent the single largest contributor to the economic opportunity provided by Bion.
During 2018 the Company had its first patent issued on its 3G Tech and has continued its work to expand its patent coverage for our 3G Tech. During October 2020, the Company the Company’s third 3G patent, which patent significantly expands the breadth and depth of the Company’s 3G Tech coverage. The Company has filed and anticipates filing additional patent applications (and/or continuations of existing patents) related to its technology developments during the next 12 months. The 3G Tech platform has been designed to maximize the value of co-products produced during the waste treatment/recovery processes, including pipeline-quality renewable natural gas and organic commercial fertilizer products. All processes will be verifiable by third-parties (including regulatory authorities, certifying boards and consumers) to comply with environmental regulations and trading programs and meet the requirements for: a) renewable energy credits, b) organic certification of the fertilizer coproducts and c) the USDA PVP ‘Environmentally Sustainable’ branding program (See discussion at Item 1 above and elsewhere herein.) Bion anticipates moving forward with the development process of its initial large-scale commercial installations of its 3G technology during the 2022 calendar year on a JV basis.
In parallel, Bion has worked (which work continues) to advance public policy initiatives that will potentially create markets (in Pennsylvania and other states) that will utilize taxpayer funding for the purchase of verified pollution reductions from agriculture (“credits”) by the state (or others) through competitively-bid procurement programs. Such credits can then be used as a ‘qualified offset’ by an individual state (or municipality) to meet its federal clean water mandates at significantly lower cost to the taxpayer. Competitive procurement of verified credits is now supported by US EPA, the Chesapeake Bay Commission, national livestock interests, and other key stakeholders. Legislation in Pennsylvania to establish the first such state competitive procurement program passed the Pennsylvania Senate by a bi-partisan majority during March 2019. However, the Covid-19 pandemic and related financial/budgetary crises have subsequently slowed progress for this and other policy initiatives and, as a result, it is not currently possible to project the timeline for this and other similar initiatives (see discussion at Item 1 above and below herein).
The livestock industry is under tremendous pressure (from regulatory agencies, a wide range of advocacy groups, institutional investors and the industry’s own consumers) to adopt sustainable practices. Environmental cleanup is inevitable - policies are already changing. Bion’s 3G technology was developed for implementation on large scale livestock production facilities, where scale drives lower treatment costs and efficient production of co-products. We believe that scale, coupled with Bion’s verifiable treatment technology platform, will create a transformational opportunity to integrate clean production practices at (or close to) the point of production-the source from which most of the industry’s environmental impacts are initiated. Bion intends to assist the forward-looking segment of the livestock industry in actually bringing animal protein production in line with Twenty-first Century consumer demands for sustainability.
Bion’s 3G Tech and technology platform are designed to capture four revenue streams under one umbrella and provide the basis for joint ventures between the Company and larger livestock producers seeking to produce environmental/sustainable product lines. The revenue streams are: a) renewable energy and associated greenhouse gas credits (including US Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) and/or Low Carbon Fuel Standard (LCFS) credits)(the value and availability of which will vary based on livestock type, geographical locations, and state regulatory programs), b) verified nutrient reductions (primarily nitrogen and phosphorus) that can be used as qualified offsets to the federal Chesapeake Bay mandate and US EPA TMDL (‘total maximum daily limit’) requirements (the value of which will vary based on livestock type, geographical locations, and state regulatory programs), c) co-products consisting of high value fertilizer for use in organic food production for human consumption and/or to grow feed for use by livestock in Projects, and d) an environmentally sustainable USDA certification that will be incorporated into a “brand” that can address the consumer concerns regarding food safety and sustainability (based on incorporation of all of the third party verified data for greenhouse gas reductions, nutrient reductions and fertilizer products into a digital register). The Company believes that the “branding” opportunity will offer large scale livestock producer / processor / distributors of livestock products the opportunity to differentiate and identify their products in the marketplace and, thereby creates the opportunity to achieve “premium pricing” by addressing consumer concerns related to safety and sustainability in a manner similar to the premiums achieved by organic producers.
Operational results from the initial commercial system (Kreider 1 utilizing our 2G Tech) confirmed the ability of Bion’s technologies to meet nutrient reduction goals at commercial scale for an extended period of operation. Bion’s 3G Tech platform (and the new variations under development) center on its patented and proprietary processes that separate and aggregate the various assets in the CAFO waste stream so they become benign, stable and/or transportable. Bion systems can: a) remove up to 95% of the nutrients (primarily nitrogen and phosphorus) in the effluent, b) reduce greenhouse gases by 90% (or more) including elimination of virtually all ammonia emissions, c) while materially reducing pathogens, antibiotics and hormones in the livestock waste stream. Our core technology and its primary CAFO applications were now proven in the Kreider 1 commercial operations. It has been accepted by the Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) and other regulatory agencies and it is protected by Bion’s portfolio of U.S. and international patents (both issued and applied for).
Currently, our research and development activities are underway to improve, update and commercialization of our 3G Tech systems (which is ready to be implemented) during the current fiscal year to meet the needs of JVs in various geographic and climate areas with nutrient release constraints and to increase the recovery and generation of valuable co-products while adding the capability to treat dry (poultry) waste streams in addition to wet manure streams at lower capital costs and operating costs
Bion business activity is focused on development of its initial 3G Tech installation and using applications of its 3G Tech for utilization in JVs and Projects (including Integrated Projects) in which the Company will participate as developer, technology provider and direct participant. Currently our efforts and funds are being expended on pre-development activities related to: 1) sustainable/organic grain-finished beef JV and 2) the Kreider 2 poultry JV.
KREIDER 1 (HISTORY AND STATUS)
During 2008 the Company commenced actively pursuing the opportunity presented by environmental retrofit and remediation of the waste streams of existing CAFOs which effort has met with very limited success to date. The first commercial activity in this area is represented by our agreement with Kreider Farms (“KF”), pursuant to which the Kreider 1 system to treat KF's dairy waste streams to reduce nutrient releases to the environment while generating marketable nutrient credits and renewable energy was designed, constructed and entered full-scale operation during 2011. On January 26, 2009 the Board of the Pennsylvania Infrastructure Investment Authority (“Pennvest”) approved a $7.75 million loan to Bion PA 1, LLC (“PA1”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, for the initial Kreider Farms project (“Kreider 1 System”). After substantial unanticipated delays, on August 12, 2010 PA1 received a permit for construction of the Kreider 1 System based our 2G Tech (which the Company is no longer implementing). Construction activities commenced during November 2010. The closing/settlement of the Pennvest Loan took place on November 3, 2010. PA1 finished the construction of the Kreider 1 System and entered a period of system ‘operational shakedown’ during May 2011. The Kreider 1 System reached full, stabilized operation by the end of the 2012 fiscal year. During 2011 the PADEP re-certified the nutrient credits for this project. The PADEP issued final permits for the Kreider 1 System (including the credit verification plan) on August 1, 2012 on which date the Company deemed that the Kreider 1 System was ‘placed in service’. As a result, PA1 commenced generating nutrient reduction credits for potential sale while continuing to utilize the Kreider 1 System to test improvements and add-ons. However, to date liquidity in the Pennsylvania nutrient credit market has failed to develop significant breadth and depth, which limited liquidity/depth has negatively impacted Bion’s business plans and has resulted in insurmountable challenges to monetizing the nutrient reductions created by PA1’s existing Kreider 1 project and Bion’s other proposed projects. These difficulties have prevented PA1 from generating any material revenues from the Kreider 1 project to date and raise significant questions as to when, if ever, PA1 will be able to generate such revenues from the Kreider 1 System which has now been inactive for several years. PA1 had sporadic discussions/negotiations with Pennvest related to forbearance and/or re-structuring its obligations pursuant to the Pennvest Loan for more than 7 years. In the context of such discussions/negotiations, PA1 elected not to make interest payments to Pennvest on the Pennvest Loan since January 2013. Additionally, the Company has not made any principal payments, which were to begin in fiscal 2013, and, therefore, the Company has classified the Pennvest Loan as a current liability as of June 30, 2021. Due to the failure of the Pennsylvania nutrient reduction credit market to develop, the Company determined that the carrying amount of the property and equipment related to the Kreider 1 project exceeded its estimated future undiscounted cash flows based on certain assumptions regarding timing, level and probability of revenues from sales of nutrient reduction credits and, therefore, PA1 and the Company recorded impairments related to the value of the Kreider 1 assets of $1,750,000 and $2,000,000 at June 30, 2015 and June 30, 2014, respectively. During the 2016 fiscal year, PA1 and the Company recorded an impairment of $1,684,562 to the value of the Kreider 1 assets which reduced the value on the Company’s books to zero. This impairment reflects management’s judgment that the salvage value of the Kreider 1 assets roughly equals PA1’s contractual obligations related to the Kreider 1 System, including expenses related to decommissioning of the Kreider 1 System.
On September 25, 2014, Pennvest exercised its right to declare the Pennvest Loan in default and accelerated the Pennvest Loan and demanded that PA1 pay $8,137,117 (principal, interest plus late charges) on or before October 24, 2014. PA1 did not make the payment and does not have the resources to make the payments demanded by Pennvest. PA1 commenced discussions and negotiations with Pennvest concerning this matter but Pennvest rejected PA1’s proposal made during the fall of 2014. PA1 made a new proposal to Pennvest during September 2021 which proposal is presently under consideration by Pennvest.PA1 provides Pennvest with its financial statements (which include a description of system status) annually. During the 2021 fiscal year, Pennvest’s auditors requested a ‘corrective action plan’ and PA1 informed Pennvest that “… there is no viable corrective action plan for the Pennvest Loan (‘Loan’). The facility funded by the Loan has been shut down for many years (which has been disclosed in the annual financial reports to Pennvest and in public filings by the parent of PA1) and the technology utilized in the facility is now obsolete. The facility has not been commercially operated for approximately six years and has generated zero income. We recommend that Pennvest take appropriate steps to remove and sell the equipment.” Pennvest recently responded favorably to the approach of selling the equipment but no actions have yet taken place. PA1 and the Company are currently discussing proposals with Pennvest seeking full resolution to these matters. The Company anticipates additional communication with Pennvest on this matter during the current year. It is not possible at this date to predict the final outcome of this matter, but the Company believes it is likely that that the equipment will be sold with the proceeds delivered to Pennvest during our current fiscal year. However, the resolution of these matters including the manner and means of such equipment sale has not been agreed upon as of this date. PA1 will evaluate the appropriate manner to resolve/wrap-up its business over the balance of this calendar year.
The economics (potential revenues, profitability and continued operation) of the Kreider 1 System were based almost entirely on the long-term sale of nutrient (nitrogen and/or phosphorus) reduction credits to meet the requirements of the Chesapeake Bay environmental clean-up. See below for further discussion.
During August 2012, the Company provided Pennvest (and the PADEP) with data demonstrating that the Kreider 1 System met the ‘technology guaranty’ standards which were incorporated in the Pennvest financing documents and, as a result, the Pennvest Loan has been (and is now) solely an obligation of PA1 since that date. However, the Company’s consolidated balance sheet as of June 30, 2021 reflects the Pennvest Loan as a liability of $9,868,495 despite the fact that the obligation (if any) solely an obligation of PA 1.
PA1 is currently maintaining some equipment at the Kreider 1 System pending its potential inclusion within the Kreider 2 Project discussed below.
3G TECH KREIDER 2 POULTRY PROJECT
Bion has done extensive pre-development work related to a waste treatment/renewable energy production facility to treat the waste from KF’s approximately 6+ million chickens (planned to expand to approximately 9-10 million) (and potentially other poultry operations and/or other waste streams) ('Kreider Renewable Energy Facility' or ‘ Kreider 2 Project’). On May 5, 2016, the Company executed a stand-alone joint venture agreement with Kreider Farms covering all matters related to development and operation of Kreider 2 system to treat the waste streams from Kreider’s poultry facilities in Bion PA2 LLC (“PA2”). During May 2011 the PADEP certified a smaller version of the Kreider 2 Project (utilizing our 3G Tech) for 559,457 nutrient credits under the old EPA’s Chesapeake Bay model. The Company has been in ongoing discussions with the PADEP regarding the appropriate credit calculation methodology for large-scale technology-based nutrient reduction installations such as the KF2 Project utilizing our 3G Tech platform. Based on these discussions and the size of the Kreider 2 Project, we anticipate that when designs are finalized, the Kreider 2 Project will be re-certified for a far larger number of credits (management’s current estimates are between 2-4 million (or more) nutrient reduction credits for treatment of the waste stream from Kreider’s poultry pursuant to the Company’s subsequent amended application pursuant to the amended EPA Chesapeake Bay model and agreements between the EPA and PA. Note that this Project, if it is constructed, may be expanded in the future to treat wastes from other local and regional CAFOs (poultry and/or dairy---including the Kreider Dairy) and/or additional Kreider poultry expansion (some of which may not qualify for nutrient reduction credits). A review process to clarify certain issues related to credit calculation and verification commenced during 2014 based on Bion’s 2G Tech but was been placed on hold. The Company anticipates if and when PA2 re-commences work on the Kreider 2 Project, it will submit a new application based on our 3G Tech. Site specific design and engineering work for this facility have not commenced, and the Company does not yet have financing in place for the Kreider 2 Project. This opportunity is being pursued through PA2. If there are positive developments related to the market for nutrient reductions in Pennsylvania, of which there is no assurance, the Company intends to pursue development, design and construction of the Kreider 2 Project with a goal of achieving operational status for its initial modules during then following calendar year. The economics (potential revenues and profitability) of the Kreider 2 Project, despite its proposed use of Bion’s 3G Tech for increased recovery of marketable by-products, are based in material part the long-term sale of nutrient (nitrogen and/or phosphorus) reduction credits to meet the requirements of the Chesapeake Bay environmental clean-up. However, liquidity in the Pennsylvania nutrient credit market has not yet developed significant breadth and depth, which lack of liquidity has negatively impacted Bion’s business plans and will most likely delay PA2’s Kreider 2 Project and other proposed projects in Pennsylvania.
Note that while Bion believes that the Kreider 2 Project and/or subsequent Bion Projects in PA and the Chesapeake Bay Watershed will eventually generate revenue from the sale of: a) nutrient reductions (credits or in other form), b) renewable energy (and related credits), c) sales of fertilizer products, and/or d) potentially, in time, credits for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, plus e) license fees related to a ‘sustainable brand’, the Covid-19 pandemic has delayed legislative efforts needed to commence its development. We believe that the potential market is very large, but it is not possible to predict the exact timing and/or magnitude of these potential markets at this time.
SUSTAINABLE/ORGANIC GRAIN-FINISHED BEEF JV OPPORTUNITY
Bion believes there is a potentially large opportunity to develop JVs to produce sustainable/organic grain-finished beef in the Midwest and elsewhere and has actively engaged in discussions regarding pursuit of this opportunity with multiple parties over the past two years. (See extended discussion at Item 1 above).
PUBLIC POLICY INITIATIVES
A substantial portion of our activities involve public policy initiatives (by the Company and other stakeholders) to encourage the establishment of appropriate public policies and regulations (at federal, regional, state and local levels) to facilitate cost effective environmental clean-up and, thereby, support our business activities. Bion has been joined by National Milk Producers Federation, Land O’Lakes, JBS and other national livestock interests to support changes to our nation’s clean water strategy that will allow states to acquire low-cost nutrient reductions through a competitive procurement process, in a similar manner to how government entities now acquire many other goods and services on behalf of the taxpayer. As developing markets for nutrient reductions become fully-established, Bion anticipates a robust business opportunity to retrofit existing CAFOs and develop Projects, based primarily on the sale of nutrient credits that provide cost-effective alternatives to today’s high-cost and failing clean water strategy.
To date the market for long-term nutrient reduction credits in Pennsylvania (‘PA’) has been very slow to develop and the Company’s activities have been negatively affected by such lack of development. However, Bion is confident that once these markets are established, the credits it produces will be competitive in the credit trading markets, based on its cost to remove nitrogen from the livestock waste stream, compared to the cost to remove nitrogen through various other treatment activities.
Several independent studies have calculated the average cost to remove nitrogen through various sector practices. Reports prepared for the PA Senate (2008), Chesapeake Bay Commission (2012) and PA legislature (2013; described below), as well as the Maryland Chesapeake Bay Financing Strategy Report (2015), demonstrate that the cost to remove nitrogen (per pound on average) from agriculture is $44 to $54, municipal wastewater: $28 to $43, and storm water: $386 to $633. Pursuant to the PA legislative Report, by replacing sector allocation (for all sectors) with competitive bidding, up to 80 percent savings could be achieved in PA’s Chesapeake Bay compliance costs ($1.5 billion annually) by 2025. If the legislative study had focused on the cost differentials of competitive bidding compared only with storm water, the relative savings would be substantially greater.
Since these studies were completed, most of the larger (Tier 1) municipal wastewater treatment plants in PA have been upgraded, at a cost of approximately $2.5 billion (vs initial 2004 PA DEP cost estimates of $376 million). US EPA is now focused on PA’s storm water allocation (3.5 million pounds (per last published data)) and has this sector on ‘backstop level actions’, the highest level of EPA-oversight and the final step before sanctions. In the same 2004 PA DEP cost estimate that led to the more than a $2 billion underestimate/miscalculation in municipal wastewater plant upgrade costs, the estimate for storm water cost was $5.6 billion. In April 2017, US EPA sent a Letter of Expectation to PA DEP, expressing the agency’s support for the use of nutrient credit trading and competitive bidding to engage the private-sector to lower costs. The letter specifically encouraged the use of credit trading to offset the state’s looming storm water obligations.
The Company believes that: i) the April 2015 release of a report from the Pennsylvania Auditor General titled “Special Report on the Importance of Meeting Pennsylvania’s Chesapeake Bay Nutrient Reduction Targets” which highlighted the economic consequences of EPA-imposed sanctions if the state fails to meet the 2017 TMDL targets, as well as the need to support using low-cost solutions and technologies as alternatives to higher-cost public infrastructure projects, where possible, and ii) Senate Bill 575 (introduced in April 2019 as successor to prior SB 799 (which was passed by PA Senate during January 2018 but was not voted on in the House)) which, if adopted, will establish a program that will allow the Pennsylvania’s tax- and rate-payers to meet significant portions of their EPA-mandated Chesapeake Bay pollution reductions at significantly lower cost by purchasing verified reductions (by competitive bidding) from all sources, including those that Bion can produce through livestock waste treatment, represent visible evidence of progress being made on these matters in Pennsylvania. SB 575 was passed by the PA Senate in 2019 and introduced in the PA House which is scheduled to be taken up the bill during its current session which is now underway. Such legislation (which has bi-partisan support), if passed and signed into law (of which there is no assurance), will potentially enable Bion (and others) to compete for public funding on an equal basis with subsidized agricultural ‘best management practices’ and public works and storm water authorities. Note, however, that there is opposition to currently filed SB 475 and SB832 (as was the case for SB 575 and its predecessors) from threatened stakeholders committed to the existing status quo approaches--- a significant portion of which was focused on attacking (in often inaccurate and/or vilifying ways) Bion in/through social media and internet articles, blogs, press releases, twitter posts and re-tweets, rather than engaging the substantive issues. Further note that the current COVID-19 crisis has shifted government, legislative and budget focuses in PA in manners which may delay our efforts. If SB 475 and/or SB832 (or similar legislation) is passed (on a stand-alone basis or as part of a larger piece of legislation) and implemented (in a form which maintains its core provisions), Bion expects that the policies and strategies being developed in PA will not only benefit the Company’s existing and proposed PA projects, but will also subsequently provide the basis for a larger Chesapeake Bay watershed strategy and, thereafter, a national clean water strategy.
THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC HAS FURTHER INCREASED UNCERTAINTIES RE SB 575 AND ALL POLICY INITIATIVES. SEE FURTHER DISCUSSION IN ITEM 1 ABOVE.
The Company believes that Pennsylvania is ‘ground zero’ in the long-standing clean water battle between agriculture and the further regulation of agriculture relative to nutrient impacts. The ability of Bion and other technology providers to achieve verified reductions from agricultural non-point sources can resolve the current stalemate and enable implementation of constructive solutions that benefit all stakeholders, providing a mechanism that ensures that taxpayer funds will be used to achieve the most beneficial result at the lowest cost, regardless of source. All sources, point and non-point, rural and urban, will be able to compete for tax payer-funded nitrogen reductions in a fair and transparent process; and since payment from the tax and rate payers would now be performance-based, these providers will be held financially accountable.
We believe that the overwhelming environmental, economic, quality of life and public health benefits to all stakeholders in the watershed, both within and outside of Pennsylvania, make the case for adoption of the strategies outlined in the Report less an issue of ‘if’, but of ‘when and how’. The adoption of a competitive procurement program will have significant positive impact on technology providers that can deliver verified nitrogen reductions such as Bion, by allocating existing tax- and rate-payer clean water funding to low-cost solutions based upon a voluntary and transparent procurement process. The Company believes that implementation of a competitively-bid nutrient reduction program to achieve the goals for the Chesapeake Bay watershed can also provide a working policy model and platform for other states to adopt that will enhance their efforts to comply with both current and future requirements for local and federal estuarine watersheds, including the Mississippi River/Gulf of Mexico, the Great Lakes Basin and other nutrient-impaired watersheds. (Note, however, that current COVID-19 crisis has shifted government, legislative and budget focuses in manners which may delay the fruition of our efforts.)
The Company currently anticipates that a Sustainable/Organic Grain-Fed Beef JV is likely to be its initial full-scale 3G Project (but the Kreider 2 poultry JV in PA remains a possibility). Now that Bion has commenced development of its initial 3G Tech installation by leasing land and beginning the site-specific design and permitting processes, we believe it will be possible to commence development of a full-scale 3G Project during late 2022 calendar year, but further delays are possible. It is not possible at this time to firmly predict where the initial JVs and Projects will be developed or the order in which Projects will be developed. All potential Projects are in very early discussion and pre-development stages and may never progress to actual development or may be developed after other Projects not yet under active consideration.
Bion intends to carry out its business plan to move forward on multiple JVs/Projects during the 2022-2026 period to create a pipeline of Projects. Management has a 5-year development target (through calendar year 2026) of commencing approximately 3-8 or more JVs/Projects of various sizes (and potentially in multiple species) pursuant to joint ventures (or similar agreements). Management hopes to have identified and begun development work related to 3 (or more) Projects over the next 3 years. At the end of the 5-year period, Bion projects that 3-5 or more of these JVs/Projects will be in commercial operation in 3 or more states, and the balance would be in various stages ranging from partial operation to early development stage. It is possible that one or more Projects will be developed in joint ventures specifically targeted to meet the growing animal protein demand outside of the United States (including without limitation Asia, Europe and/or the Middle East). No JVs/Projects (including Integrated Projects) have been developed to date.
The Company’s audited financial statements for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 were prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern. The Company has incurred net losses of approximately $3,451,000 and $4,553,000 during the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Report of the Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm on the Company’s consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended June 30, 2021 includes a “going concern” explanatory paragraph which means that there are factors that raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. At June 30, 2021, the Company had a working capital deficit and a stockholders’ deficit of approximately $6,614,000 and $11,445,000, respectively. Management’s plans with respect to these matters are described in this section and in our consolidated financial statements (and notes thereto), and this material does not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. However, there is no guarantee that we will be able to raise sufficient funds or further capital for the operations planned in the near future.
COVID-19 PANDEMIC RELATED MATTERS:
The Company faces risks and uncertainties and factors beyond our control that are magnified during the current Covid-19 pandemic and the unique economic, financial, governmental and health-related conditions in which the Company, the country and the entire world now reside. To date the Company has experienced direct impacts in various areas including but without limitation: i) government ordered shutdowns which have slowed the Company’s research and development projects and other initiatives, ii) shifted focus of state and federal governments which is likely to negatively impact the Company’s legislative initiatives in Pennsylvania and Washington D. C., iii) strains and uncertainties in both the equity and debt markets which have made discussion and planning of funding of the Company and its initiatives and projects with investment bankers, banks and potential strategic partners more tenuous, iv) strains and uncertainties in the agricultural sector and markets have made discussion and planning more difficult as future industry conditions are now more difficult to assess and predict, v) constraints due to problems experienced in the global industrial supply chain, vi) due to the age and health of our core management team, all of whom are age 70 or older and have had one or more existing health issues, the Covid-19 pandemic places the Company at greater risk than was previously the case (to a higher degree than would be the case if the Company had a larger, deeper and/or younger core management team), and vii) there almost certainly will be other unanticipated consequences for the Company as a result of the current pandemic emergency and its aftermath.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Revenue Recognition
The Company currently does not generate revenue and if and when the Company begins to generate revenue the Company will comply with the provisions of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606 “Revenue from Contracts with Customers”.
Stock-based compensation
The Company follows the provisions of ASC 718, which generally requires that share-based compensation transactions be accounted and recognized in the statement of income based upon their grant date fair values.
Derivative Financial Instruments:
Pursuant to ASC Topic 815 “Derivatives and Hedging” (“Topic 815”), the Company reviews all financial instruments for the existence of features which may require fair value accounting and a related mark-to-market adjustment at each reporting period end. Once determined, the Company assesses these instruments as derivative liabilities. The fair value of these instruments is adjusted to reflect the fair value at each reporting period end, with any increase or decrease in the fair value being recorded in results of operations as an adjustment to fair value of derivatives.
Warrants:
The Company has issued warrants to purchase common shares of the Company. Warrants are valued using a fair value based method, whereby the fair value of the warrant is determined at the warrant issue date using a market-based option valuation model based on factors including an evaluation of the Company’s value as of the date of the issuance, consideration of the Company’s limited liquid resources and business prospects, the market price of the Company’s stock in its mostly inactive public market and the historical valuations and purchases of the Company’s warrants. When warrants are issued in combination with debt or equity securities, the warrants are valued and accounted for based on the relative fair value of the warrants in relation to the total value assigned to the debt or equity securities and warrants combined.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements:
In June 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-07 “Compensation - Stock Compensation - Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting” to simplify the accounting for share based payments granted to nonemployees and was adopted by the Company effective July 1, 2019. Under this guidance, payments to nonemployees are aligned with the requirements for share-based payments granted to employees. The adoption of this guidance did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements as previously issued share-based payments to nonemployees had already reached a measurement date.
YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 2021 COMPARED TO THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 2020
Revenue
Total revenues were nil for both the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
General and Administrative
Total general and administrative expenses were $2,078,000 and $3,090,000 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
General and administrative expenses, excluding stock-based compensation charges of $850,000 and $1,931,000, were $1,228,000 and $1,159,000 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, representing a $69,000 increase. Salaries and related payroll tax expenses were $319,000 and $266,000 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, representing a $53,000 increase due to a consultant being partially paid as an employee and a bonus given to Smith for payroll taxes during the year ended June 30, 2021. Consulting costs were $391,000 and $458,000 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in consulting costs is partially due a consultant being paid as an employee and the absence of political consulting to further the environmental mandates in Pennsylvania during the years ended June 30, 2021. Investor relations expenses were $149,000 and $72,000 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and the increase is due to a new contract with an investor relations firm during the latter part of fiscal year 2021. Travel costs were $13,000 and $28,000 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, with the decrease due to travel restrictions during the pandemic.
General and administrative stock-based employee compensation for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 consists of the following:
Stock-based compensation charges were $850,000 and $1,931,000 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The fair value of stock options expensed for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 was $816,000 and $355,000, respectively. The Company granted 960,000 and 2,210,000 fully vested options during the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Compensation expense relating to the change in fair value from the modification of option terms was $9,000 and $511,000 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, as the Company granted an extension of certain option expiration dates and modified selected exercise prices for 50,000 and 7,121,600 options during the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. During the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, the Company extended expiration dates of warrants for certain employees and consultants which resulted in the recognition of $25,000 and $1,065,000, respectively, in non-cash compensation.
Depreciation
Total depreciation expense was $827 and $1,248 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Research and Development
Total research and development expenses were $749,000 and $1,124,000 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Research and development expenses, excluding stock-based compensation expenses of $202,000 and $646,000 were $547,000 and $478,000 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Salaries and related payroll tax expenses were $94,000 and $80,000 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Consulting costs were $214,000 and $218,000 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company also incurred $144,000 and $112,000 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively in the development of new components of the pilot program for its anaerobic digestate process. The overall increase in research and development expenses were attributable, in part, to increased cash availability during the latter part of fiscal year 2021.
Research and development stock-based employee compensation for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 consists of the following:
Stock-based compensation expenses were $202,000 and $646,000 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company expensed $202,000 and $74,000 for the fair value of stock options that vested during the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company granted 960,000 and 2,210,000 fully vested options during the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, a portion of which was allocated to research and development. The compensation expense of nil and $115,000 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively was for the change in fair value from modification of options terms is due to a research and development employee and consultant having certain option exercise prices reduced during the year ended June 30, 2020. During the year ended June 30, 2020, the Company extended expiration dates of warrants for certain research and development employees and consultants which resulted in the recognition of $457,000 in non-cash compensation, while no such modifications were made for the year ended June 30, 2021.
Loss from Operations
As a result of the factors described above, the loss from operations was $2,828,000 and $4,215,000 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Other Expense
Other expense was $623,000 and $338,000 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Interest expense of $187,000 and $36,000 was recorded during the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, due to the modification of warrant expiry dates for warrants held by investors and brokers. Interest expense related to convertible notes was $197,000 and $159,000 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively and the increase is attributable to higher convertible note balances. Offsetting higher interest expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $35,000 on forgiveness of debt due to the Company’s PPP loan being forgiven by the Small Business Administration. During the year ended June 30, 2020, the Company recognized other income of $122,000 due to the extinguishment of liabilities due to the legal release of certain accounts payable and $6,000 due to the grant of an Economic Impact Disaster Loan.
Net Loss Attributable to the Noncontrolling Interest
The net loss attributable to the noncontrolling interest was $3,000 and $8,000 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Net Loss Attributable to Bion’s Common Stockholders
As a result of the factors described above, the net loss attributable to Bion’s stockholders was $3,448,000 and $4,546,000 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and the net loss per basic common share was $0.10 and $0.16 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The Company's consolidated financial statements for the year ended June 30, 2021 have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the settlement of liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. The Report of our Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm on the Company's consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended June 30, 2021 includes a "going concern" explanatory paragraph which means that the auditors stated that conditions exist that raise substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern.
Operating Activities
As of June 30, 2021, the Company had cash of approximately $4,216,000. During the year ended June 30, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $1,389,000, primarily consisting of cash operating expenses related to salaries and benefits, and other general and administrative costs such as insurance, legal, accounting, consulting and investor relations expenses. As previously noted, the Company is currently not generating significant revenue and accordingly has not generated cash flows from operations. The Company does not anticipate generating sufficient revenues to offset operating and capital costs for a minimum of two to five years. While there are no assurances that the Company will be successful in its efforts to develop and construct its Projects and market its Systems, it is certain that the Company will require substantial funding from external sources. Given the unsettled state of the current credit and capital markets for companies such as Bion, there is no assurance the Company will be able to raise the funds it needs on reasonable terms.
Financing Activities
During the year ended June 30, 2021, the Company received gross cash proceeds of $1,860,000 from the sale of 3,720,000 units which consists of one share of the Company’s restricted common stock and one warrant to purchase one share of the Company’s restricted common stock for $0.75 per share through December 2021. The Company paid cash commissions related to the sale of units of $161,000. During the year ended June 30, 2021, 300,000 shares of the Company’s restricted company stock were sold to an investor for $300,000. The Company also received $3,049,490 in gross proceeds from the exercise of 4,065,988 warrants into shares of the Company’s common stock and paid approximately $4,000 in cash commissions related to the exercise of warrants.
As of June 30, 2021, the Company has debt obligations consisting of: a) deferred compensation of $479,200, b) convertible notes payable - affiliates of $4,793,000, and c) a loan payable and accrued interest of $9,868,000 (owed solely by PA1).
Plan of Operations and Outlook
As of June 30, 2021, the Company had cash of approximately $4,216,000.
The Company continues to explore sources of additional financing to satisfy its current operating requirements as it is not currently generating any significant revenues. During fiscal years 2021 and 2020, the Company has faced progressively less difficulty in raising equity funding (but substantial equity dilution has gone along with the larger amounts of equity financing during the periods). However, the Company anticipates substantial increases in demands for capital and operating expenditures as it moves toward commercial implementation of its 3G Tech and development of JVs and, therefore, is likely to continue to face, significant cash flow management challenges due to limited capital resources and working capital constraints which have only recently begun to be alleviated. As a result, the Company has faced, and continues to face, significant cash flow management challenges due to material working capital constraints. To partially mitigate these working capital constraints, the Company's core senior management and some key employees and consultants have been deferring all or part of their cash compensation and/or are accepting compensation in the form of securities of the Company (Notes 4 and 6 to Financial Statements) and members of the Company's senior management have from time to time made loans to the Company. During the year ended June 30, 2018 senior management and certain core employees and consultants agreed to a one-time extinguishment of liabilities owed by the Company which in aggregate totaled $2,404,000. As of June 30, 2021, such deferrals totaled approximately $5,272,000 (including accrued interest and deferred compensation converted into promissory notes but excluding conversions of deferred compensation into the Company's common stock by officers, employees and consultants that have already been completed). The extended constraints on available resources have had, and continue to have, negative effects on the pace and scope of the Company's effort to develop its business. The Company made reductions in its personnel during the years ended June 30, 2014 and 2015 and again in 2018. The constraint on available resources has had, and continues to have, negative effects on the pace and scope of the Company’s efforts to develop its business. The Company has had to delay payment of trade obligations and has had to economize in many ways that have potentially negative consequences. If the Company is able to continue its recent increased success in its efforts to raise needed funds during the remainder of the current fiscal year (and subsequent periods), of which there is no assurance, management will not need to consider deeper cuts (including additional personnel cuts) and curtailment of ongoing activities including research and development activities.
The Company will need to obtain additional capital to fund its operations and technology development, to satisfy existing creditors, to develop JVs, Projects (including Integrated Projects) and CAFO Retrofit waste remediation systems (including the Kreider 2 facility) and to continue to maintain equipment at the Kreider 1 facility (subject to agreements being reached with Pennvest as discussed above). The Company anticipates that it will seek to raise from $5,000,000 to $50,000,000 or more (debt and equity) during the next twelve months. However, as discussed above, there is no guarantee that we will be able to raise sufficient funds or further capital for the operations planned in the near future.
The Company is not currently generating any significant revenues. Further, the Company’s anticipated revenues, if any, from existing projects, JVs and proposed projects will not be sufficient to meet the Company’s anticipated operational and capital expenditure needs for many years. During the year ended June 30, 2021 the Company raised gross proceeds of approximately $5,209,000 through the sale of its securities and paid commissions of approximately $165,000, and anticipates raising additional funds from such sales and transactions. However, there is no guarantee that we will be able to raise sufficient funds or further capital for the operations planned in the near future.
Because the Company is not currently generating significant revenues, the Company will need to obtain additional capital to fund its operations and technology development, to satisfy existing creditors, to develop Projects and to sustain operations at the KF 1 facility.
The first commercial activity in the Retrofit segment is represented by our agreement with Kreider Farms ("KF"), pursuant to which the Kreider 1 system to treat KF's dairy waste streams to reduce nutrient releases to the environment while generating marketable nutrient credits and renewable energy was designed, constructed and entered full-scale operation during 2011. On January 26, 2009 the Board of the Pennsylvania Infrastructure Investment Authority ("Pennvest") approved a $7.75 million loan to Bion PA 1, LLC ("PA1"), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, for the initial Kreider Farms project ("Kreider 1 System"). After substantial unanticipated delays, on August 12, 2010 PA1 received a permit for construction of the Kreider 1 system. Construction activities commenced during November 2010. The closing/settlement of the Pennvest Loan took place on November 3, 2010. PA1 finished the construction of the Kreider 1 System and entered a period of system 'operational shakedown' during May 2011. The Kreider 1 System reached full, stabilized operation by the end of the 2012 fiscal year. During 2011 the PADEP re-certified the nutrient credits for this project. The PADEP issued final permits for the Kreider 1 System (including the credit verification plan) on August 1, 2012 on which date the Company deemed that the Kreider System was 'placed in service'. As a result, PA1 commenced generating nutrient reduction credits for potential sale while continuing to utilize the Kreider 1 system to test improvements and add-ons. However, to date liquidity in the Pennsylvania nutrient credit market has been slow to develop significant breadth and depth, which limited liquidity/depth has negatively impacted Bion's business plans and has resulted in challenges to monetizing the nutrient reductions created by PA1's existing Kreider 1 project and Bion's other proposed projects. These difficulties have prevented PA1 from generating any material revenues from the Kreider 1 project to date and raise significant questions as to when, if ever, PA1 will be able to generate such revenues from the Kreider 1 system. PA1 has had sporadic discussions/negotiations with Pennvest related to forbearance and/or re-structuring its obligations pursuant to the Pennvest Loan for more than 7 years. In the context of such discussions/negotiations, PA1 elected not to make interest payments to Pennvest on the Pennvest Loan since January 2013. Additionally, the Company has not made any principal payments, which were to begin in fiscal 2013, and, therefore, the Company has classified the Pennvest Loan as a current liability as of June 30, 2021. Due to the failure of the PA nutrient reduction credit market to develop, the Company determined that the carrying amount of the property and equipment related to the Kreider 1 project exceeded its estimated future undiscounted cash flows based on certain assumptions regarding timing, level and probability of revenues from sales of nutrient reduction credits and, therefore, PA1 and the Company recorded impairments related to the value of the Kreider 1 assets of $1,750,000 and $2,000,000 at June 30, 2015 and June 30, 2014, respectively. During the 2016 fiscal year, PA1 and the Company recorded an impairment of $1,684,562 to the value of the Kreider 1 assets which reduced the value on the Company's books to zero. This impairment reflects management's judgment that the salvage value of the Kreider 1 assets roughly equals PA1's contractual obligations related to the Kreider 1 system, including expenses related to decommissioning of the Kreider 1 system.
On September 25, 2014, Pennvest exercised its right to declare the Pennvest Loan in default and accelerated the Pennvest Loan and demanded that PA1 pay $8,137,117 (principal, interest plus late charges) on or before October 24, 2014. PA1 did not make the payment and does not have the resources to make the payments demanded by Pennvest. PA1 commenced discussions and negotiations with Pennvest concerning this matter but Pennvest rejected PA1’s proposal made during the fall of 2014. PA1 made a new proposal to Pennvest during September 2021 which proposal is presently under consideration by Pennvest. PA1 provides Pennvest with its financial statements (which include a description of system status) annually. During the 2021 fiscal year, Pennvest’s auditors requested a ‘corrective action plan’ and PA1 informed Pennvest that “… there is no viable corrective action plan for the Pennvest Loan (‘Loan’). The facility funded by the Loan has been shut down for many years (which has been disclosed in the annual financial reports to Pennvest and in public filings by the parent of PA1) and the technology utilized in the facility is now obsolete. The facility has not been commercially operated for approximately six years and has generated zero income. We recommend that Pennvest take appropriate steps to remove and sell the equipment.” Pennvest recently responded favorably to the approach of selling the equipment but no actions have yet taken place. PA1 and the Company are currently discussing proposals with Pennvest seeking full resolution to these matters. The Company anticipates additional communication with Pennvest on this matter during the current year. It is not possible at this date to predict the final outcome of this matter, but the Company believes it is likely that that the equipment will be sold with the proceeds delivered to Pennvest during our current fiscal year. However, the resolution of these matters including the manner and means of such equipment sale has not been agreed upon as of this date. PA1 will evaluate the appropriate manner to resolve/wrap-up its business over the balance of this calendar year.
The economics (potential revenues, profitability and continued operation) of the Kreider 1 System were based almost entirely on the long-term sale of nutrient (nitrogen and/or phosphorus) reduction credits to meet the requirements of the Chesapeake Bay environmental clean-up. See below for further discussion.
During August 2012, the Company provided Pennvest (and the PADEP) with data demonstrating that the Kreider 1 system met the 'technology guaranty' standards which were incorporated in the Pennvest financing documents and, as a result, the Pennvest Loan is now solely an obligation of PA1.
As indicated above, the Company anticipates that it will seek to raise from $5,000,000 to $50,000,000 or more (from debt, equity, joint venture, strategic partnering, etc.) during the next twelve months, some of which may be in the context of joint ventures for the development of one or more large scale projects. We reiterate that there is no assurance, especially in the extremely unsettled capital markets that presently exist for companies such as Bion, that the Company will be able to obtain the funds that it needs to stay in business, finance its Projects and other activities, continue its technology development and/or to successfully develop its business.
There is extremely limited likelihood that funds required during the next twelve months or in the periods immediately thereafter will be generated from operations and there is no assurance that those funds will be available from external sources such as debt or equity financings or other potential sources. The lack of additional capital resulting from the inability to generate cash flow from operations and/or to raise capital from external sources would force the Company to substantially curtail or cease operations and would, therefore, have a material adverse effect on its business. Further, there can be no assurance that any such required funds, if available, will be available on attractive terms or that they will not have a significantly dilutive effect on the Company's existing shareholders. All of these factors have been exacerbated by the extremely limited and unsettled credit and capital markets presently existing for companies such as Bion.
Covid-19 pandemic related matters:
The Company faces risks and uncertainties and factors beyond our control that are magnified during the current Covid-19 pandemic and the unique economic, financial, governmental and health-related conditions in which the Company, the country and the entire world now reside. To date the Company has experienced direct impacts in various areas including but without limitation: i) government ordered shutdowns which have slowed the Company’s research and development projects and other initiatives, ii) shifted focus of state and federal governments which is likely to negatively impact the Company’s legislative initiatives in Pennsylvania and Washington D. C., iii) strains and uncertainties in both the equity and debt markets which have made discussion and planning of funding of the Company and its initiatives and projects with investment bankers, banks and potential strategic partners more tenuous, iv) strains and uncertainties in the agricultural sector and markets have made discussion and planning more difficult as future industry conditions are now more difficult to assess and predict, v) constraints due to problems experienced in the global industrial supply chain, vi) due to the age and health of our core management team, all of whom are age 70 or older and have had one or more existing health issues, the Covid-19 pandemic places the Company at greater risk than was previously the case (to a higher degree than would be the case if the Company had a larger, deeper and/or younger core management team), and vii) there almost certainly will be other unanticipated consequences for the Company as a result of the current pandemic emergency and its aftermath.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
We have the following material contractual obligations (in addition to employment and consulting agreements with management and employees):
During 2008 the Company commenced actively pursuing the opportunity presented by environmental retrofit and remediation of the waste streams of existing CAFOs which effort has met with very limited success to date. The first commercial activity in this area is represented by our agreement with Kreider Farms ("KF"), pursuant to which the Kreider 1 system to treat KF's dairy waste streams to reduce nutrient releases to the environment while generating marketable nutrient credits and renewable energy was designed, constructed and entered full-scale operation during 2011. On January 26, 2009 the Board of the Pennsylvania Infrastructure Investment Authority ("Pennvest") approved a $7.75 million loan to Bion PA 1, LLC ("PA1"), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, for the initial Kreider Farms project ("Kreider 1 System"). After substantial unanticipated delays, on August 12, 2010 PA1 received a permit for construction of the Kreider 1 system. Construction activities commenced during November 2010. The closing/settlement of the Pennvest Loan took place on November 3, 2010. PA1 finished the construction of the Kreider 1 System and entered a period of system 'operational shakedown' during May 2011. The Kreider 1System reached full, stabilized operation by the end of the 2012 fiscal year. During 2011 the PADEP re-certified the nutrient credits for this project. The PADEP issued final permits for the Kreider 1 System (including the credit verification plan) on August 1, 2012 on which date the Company deemed that the Kreider System was 'placed in service'. As a result, PA1 commenced generating nutrient reduction credits for potential sale while continuing to utilize the Kreider 1 system to test improvements and add-ons. However, to date liquidity in the Pennsylvania nutrient credit market has been slow to develop significant breadth and depth, which limited liquidity/depth has negatively impacted Bion's business plans and has resulted in challenges to monetizing the nutrient reductions created by PA1's existing Kreider 1 project and Bion's other proposed projects. These difficulties have prevented PA1 from generating any material revenues from the Kreider 1 project to date and raise significant questions as to when, if ever, PA1 will be able to generate such revenues from the Kreider 1 system. PA1 has had sporadic discussions/negotiations with Pennvest related to forbearance and/or re-structuring its obligations pursuant to the Pennvest Loan for more than 7 years. In the context of such discussions/negotiations, PA1 elected not to make interest payments to Pennvest on the Pennvest Loan since January 2013. Additionally, the Company has not made any principal payments, which were to begin in fiscal 2013, and, therefore, the Company has classified the Pennvest Loan as a current liability as of June 30, 2021. Due to the failure of the PA nutrient reduction credit market to develop, the Company determined that the carrying amount of the property and equipment related to the Kreider 1 project exceeded its estimated future undiscounted cash flows based on certain assumptions regarding timing, level and probability of revenues from sales of nutrient reduction credits and, therefore, PA1 and the Company recorded impairments related to the value of the Kreider 1 assets of $1,750,000 and $2,000,000 at June 30, 2015 and June 30, 2014, respectively. During the 2016 fiscal year, PA1 and the Company recorded an impairment of $1,684,562 to the value of the Kreider 1 assets which reduced the value on the Company's books to zero. This impairment reflects management's judgment that the salvage value of the Kreider 1 assets roughly equals PA1's contractual obligations related to the Kreider 1 system, including expenses related to decommissioning of the Kreider 1 system.
On September 25, 2014, Pennvest exercised its right to declare the Pennvest Loan in default and accelerated the Pennvest Loan and demanded that PA1 pay $8,137,117 (principal, interest plus late charges) on or before October 24, 2014. PA1 did not make the payment and does not have the resources to make the payments demanded by Pennvest. PA1 commenced discussions and negotiations with Pennvest concerning this matter but Pennvest rejected PA1’s proposal made during the fall of 2014. PA1 made a new proposal to Pennvest during September 2021 which proposal is presently under consideration by Pennvest. PA1 provides Pennvest with its financial statements (which include a description of system status) annually. During the 2021 fiscal year, Pennvest’s auditors requested a ‘corrective action plan’ and PA1 informed Pennvest that “… there is no viable corrective action plan for the Pennvest Loan (‘Loan’). The facility funded by the Loan has been shut down for many years (which has been disclosed in the annual financial reports to Pennvest and in public filings by the parent of PA1) and the technology utilized in the facility is now obsolete. The facility has not been commercially operated for approximately six years and has generated zero income. We recommend that Pennvest take appropriate steps to remove and sell the equipment.” Pennvest recently responded favorably to the approach of selling the equipment but no actions have yet taken place. PA1 and the Company are currently discussing proposals with Pennvest seeking full resolution to these matters. The Company anticipates additional communication with Pennvest on this matter during the current year. It is not possible at this date to predict the final outcome of this matter, but the Company believes it is likely that that the equipment will be sold with the proceeds delivered to Pennvest during our current fiscal year. However, the resolution of these matters including the manner and means of such equipment sale has not been agreed upon as of this date. PA1 will evaluate the appropriate manner to resolve/wrap-up its business over the balance of this calendar year.
The economics (potential revenues, profitability and continued operation) of the Kreider 1 System were based almost entirely on the long-term sale of nutrient (nitrogen and/or phosphorus) reduction credits to meet the requirements of the Chesapeake Bay environmental clean-up.
During August 2012, the Company provided Pennvest (and the PADEP) with data demonstrating that the Kreider 1 system met the 'technology guaranty' standards which were incorporated in the Pennvest financing documents and, as a result, the Pennvest Loan is now solely an obligation of PA1.
The Company is currently maintaining some equipment at the Kreider 1 System in a limited manner.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements (as that term is defined in Item 303 of Regulation S-K) that are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, revenue or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.