ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) covers information pertaining to the Company as of March 31, 2021 and 2020. Except as otherwise noted, the financial information contained in this MD&A and in the financial statements has been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. All amounts are expressed in U.S. dollars unless otherwise noted.
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of any contingent liabilities at the financial statement date and reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. On an on-going basis we review our estimates and assumptions. The estimates were based on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results are likely to differ from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions, but we do not believe such differences will materially affect our financial position or results of operations.
Forward Looking Statements
Certain information contained in this MD&A includes “forward-looking statements.” Statements which are not historical reflect our current expectations and projections about our future results, performance, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations, prospects and opportunities and are based upon information currently available to us and our management and their interpretation of what is believed to be significant factors affecting our existing and proposed business, including many assumptions regarding future events. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “will” “should,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “predict,” “potential,” “continue,” or similar terms, variations of such terms or the negative of such terms. These statements are only predictions and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties, and other factors. Although forward- looking statements, and any assumptions upon which they are based, are made in good faith, and reflect our current judgment, actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in such statements. Actual results, performance, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations, prospects and opportunities could differ materially and perhaps substantially from those expressed in, or implied by, these forward- looking statements as a result of various risks, uncertainties and other factors, including those risks described in detail in the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K entitled “Risk Factors” as well as elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In light of these risks and uncertainties, and especially given the nature of our existing and proposed business, there can be no assurance that the forward-looking statements contained in this section and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K will in fact occur. Potential investors should not place undue reliance on any forward- looking statements. Except as expressly required by the federal securities laws, there is no undertaking to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, changed circumstances or any other reason.
Company Overview
Bionik Laboratories Corp. is a healthcare company focused on improving the quality of life of millions of people with neurological or mobility impairments by combining artificial intelligence and innovative robotics technology and data solutions to help individuals from hospital to home to regain mobility, enhance autonomy, and regain self- esteem.
The Company uses artificial intelligence and machine learning technologies to make rehabilitation methods and processes smarter and more intuitive to deliver greater recovery for patients with neurological or mobility impairments. These technologies allow large amounts of data to be collected and processed in real-time, enabling appropriately challenging and individualized therapy during every treatment session. This is the foundation of the InMotion therapy. The Company’s rehabilitation therapy robots are built on an artificial intelligence platform, measuring the position, the speed, and the acceleration of the patients’ arm 200 times per second. The artificial intelligence platform is designed to adapt in real time to the patient’s needs and progress while providing quantifiable feedback of a patient’s progress and performance, in a way that the Company believes a trained clinician cannot.
Based on this foundational work, the Company has a portfolio of products and solutions focused on upper extremity rehabilitation for stroke and other mobility-impaired individuals, including InMotion robots currently in the market. Additionally, we launched our new software platform, InMotion Connect which is providing the ability for hospital management to access remotely to management dashboards presenting the utilization data of each of their InMotion robotic devices and their robotic devices productivity. Customized reporting capabilities in the platform focus on facility and organization measurement dashboards to support effective decision making for clinicians and for hospital management.
Currently, we receive revenues from the sale of our InMotion robots to our customers both in the U.S. and internationally. We also record revenues associated with our extended warranties that customers will purchase with the sale of our InMotion robots as well as from the sale of the InMotion Connect hardware and the subscription fees associated with the utilization of the InMotion Connect Pulse solution in the U.S.
We currently sell our products directly or can introduce customers to a third-party finance company to lease at a monthly fee over the term or other fee structure for our products to hospitals, clinics, distribution companies and/or buying groups that supply those rehabilitation facilities.
Our strategic business focus is on the following key areas:
· Continuing to expand our distribution channels in the United States and internationally;
· Continue to enhance our InMotion Connect software with solutions that serve clinical rehabilitation providers; and
· Continue to drive efficiencies with our outsourced manufacturing partner to support the expected increase in product demand and introduction of new products.
We believe our business provides a platform for growth. We continue to make investments in our enhancements of our existing products and the future development of new products.
We currently hold an intellectual property portfolio that includes 5 U.S. patents and 1 U.S. patents pending, 5 of which are pending internationally, as well as other patents under development. We may file provisional patents from time to time, which may expire if we do not pursue full patents within 12 months of the filing date. Two provisional patents have recently been converted into full patents, pertaining to Bionik’s InMotion Home, and InMotion Connect platform, each of which has been filed as a full patent prior to the 12-month provisional deadline. The provisional patents may not be filed as full patents and new provisional patents may be filed as the technology changes. Additionally, we hold exclusive licenses to three additional patents.
Business Developments
In December 2018, we entered into a Sale of Goods Agreement (the “Agreement”) with CHC Management Services, LLC, or Kindred, pursuant to which, among other things, Kindred agreed to purchase from us in a first phase a minimum of 21 of the Company’s InMotion® ARM Interactive Therapy Systems - a minimum of one for each of Kindred’s existing and soon-to-open affiliated inpatient rehabilitation hospitals and similar facilities described in the Agreement, and in a second phase a minimum of one InMotion® ARM Interactive Therapy System for each similar future facility of Kindred, during the four-year minimum term of the Agreement. As of March 31, 2021, 26 InMotion® robots have been sold in total to Kindred.
In September 2019, we commenced an up to $7.0 million convertible note offering (previously set at $3.0 million), of which $1.6 million was raised through March 31, 2021. All of these convertible notes were converted on March 31, 2021 into 181,463 shares of our common stock. In addition, on March 23, 2020, we borrowed $2,000,000 evidenced by a term promissory note from an existing stockholder and lender of the Company.
On October 5, 2020 as approved by the stockholders of the Company at the annual meeting of stockholders held on October 5, 2020, the Company filed a Certificate of Amendment to its Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation, as amended with the Secretary of State of Delaware to decrease the authorized number of shares of (i) common stock of the Company from 500,000,000 to 13,000,000 and (ii) preferred stock of the Company from 10,000,000 to 5,000,000.
In June 2020, we launched our InMotion Connect platform, which consists of a hardware device connected to the InMotion Robot as well as a subscription to InMotion Connect Pulse. This platform provides anonymized data allowing us to focus activity to increase adoption and utilization of InMotion robotic technologies across healthcare systems.
In the recent months, we implemented a machine learning prototype predictive model for the classification of the level of responsiveness of the InMotion® therapy outcomes. This solution was developed with Bitstrapped, a Toronto-based data engineering firm specializing in machine learning infrastructure through their partnership with Google Cloud Platform. This prototype enables us to continually train the model on anonymized data collected in real-time with InMotion Connect in rehabilitation facilities and track improvements in performance. This is the first step to a machine learning platform being developed as funds allow.
Covid-19 Pandemic
As a result of extended shutdowns of businesses around the world due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have seen a slowdown in our business as most of the capital expenditure programs of the healthcare facilities that make up our customer base have been put on hold or has been significantly curtailed. This, along with our typically long sales cycle, has affected our ability to generate revenues in recent months. As a result, we took the following steps to address the decrease in revenue, as follows:
Effective April 1, 2020, we furloughed nine employees in the United States and temporarily laid-off one employee in Canada. Additionally, our senior management agreed to a salary deferral of between 30-50%. Our remaining employees in the U.S. received base salary reductions of between 30%-50%. In Canada, our remaining employees received a reduction in base salary and hours of 45%. As a result of obtaining the U.S. and Canadian government’s programs described below, U.S. employees with salaries less than $100,000 annually were returned to full salary and with salaries exceeding $100,000 annually were increased to 75% of their normal base salary. Most Canadian employees were returned to their normal base salary. Senior managements salaries were restored in December 2020 until March 2021, when certain senior management salaries were reduced between 30%-50% for 3 months.
On May 6, 2020, our U.S. subsidiary received funding in the original principal amount of $0.5 million pursuant to the federal Paycheck Protection Program under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act, which is administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration. The loan was funded by Bank of America, N.A. pursuant to the terms of a Promissory Note dated as of May 1, 2020. We have used the proceeds from this funding for eligible purposes, including to retain workers and maintain payroll or make mortgage interest payments, lease payments, and utility payments. We applied for forgiveness of this debt with the SBA and as of May 23, 2021, have received forgiveness of the loan and all interest.
Our Canada operations secured $93,000 of government financial relief under the Canadian Emergency Wage Subsidy, which is available monthly until June 2021, which was used to return the salaries of many of our Canadian non-management employees back to their full amount.
The Company has reduced working on its research and development projects to focus on the further development of InMotion® Connect™ and artificial intelligence and machine learning analysis.
Revenues
We generate revenues primarily from sales of our InMotion Arm, InMotion Arm/Hand and InMotion Connect devices, as well as various parts and accessories, which we refer to collectively as our product sales. We also generate revenues from services, including product warranty revenues, and from subscriptions sales from InMotion Connect solutions. Our business model generally does not involve separate contracts entered into at or near the same time; nor does our business model involve incremental future discounts offered to the same customer. We do not offer a right of cancellation, termination, refund or return. During the year ended March 31, 2021, we derived approximately 72% of our revenues from product sales, 19% of our revenues from the sale of services and extended warranties and 9% from the subscription sales associated with our Pulse solutions. During the year ended March 31, 2020, we derived approximately 90% of our revenues from product sales and 10% of our revenues from the sale of services and extended warranties.
We recognize revenue from sales of our products, parts and accessories in accordance with the Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Revenue Recognition Topic 606. We recognize revenue from sales of our products, parts and accessories when title and risk of ownership has been transferred, which is upon shipment, provided there are no uncertainties regarding customer acceptance, and the following factors are present:
· Identification of the contract with the customer;
· Identification of the performance obligation in the contract;
· Determination of the transaction price;
· Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligation in the contract; and
· Recognition of revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied
Revenues from the sale of services and extended warranty contracts are deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis over the contract period as services are provided.
We recognize subscription revenues over the course of the period that the software subscription is available to the customer.
Cost of Revenues
Our cost of revenues consists primarily of material, labor and manufacturing overhead expenses from our contract manufacturer and includes the cost of components and subassemblies supplied by our third-party suppliers. Cost of revenues also includes certain warranty expenses associated with maintaining our standard warranties within the first 12 months that a customer owns our product.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Our sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries, commissions and other personnel-related expenses, for employees engaged in sales, marketing and support of our products, trade show, promotional and public relations expenses and management and administration expenses in support of sales and marketing.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist of salaries and other personnel-related expenses, for employees primarily engaged in research, development and engineering activities, materials used and other overhead expenses incurred in connection with the design and development of our products and, from time to time, expenses associated with collaborative research and development agreements that we may enter into. We expense all of our research and development costs as incurred.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative costs include payroll, employee benefits, and other personnel-related costs associated with administrative and support staff, as well as legal and accounting costs, insurance costs, and other administrative fees.
Impairment of Goodwill & Intangible Assets
Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets consists of impairment charges associated with certain intangible assets. Management assesses its intangible assets for impairment annually or as triggering events arise.
Share-Based Compensation Expense
Our share-based compensation expense consists of equity instruments that are issued to our employees and directors that have vested in the current period presented by using the black-scholes fair-value method.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net consists primarily of interest charges on loans and convertible loan offerings that we may enter into from time to time with various lenders and shareholders.
Other Expense (Income), net
Other expense (income), net consists primarily of foreign currency remeasurement gains or losses and other miscellaneous income and expense items.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2021 Compared to the Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2020
The following table contains selected statement of operations data, which serve as the basis of the discussion of our results of operations for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively:
Revenues
Total revenues for the year ended March 31, 2021 decreased by $1.0 million, or 45%, to $1.2 million, as compared to revenues of $2.2 million for the year ended March 31, 2020.
The change in total revenues was attributable to a number of factors:
· Our product revenues decreased by $1.1 million, or 56%, for the year ended March 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended March 31, 2020 due to the decrease in units sold. The decrease is primarily driven by the COVID-19 pandemic, however our average selling price per unit has increased during the 2021 period as compared to the 2020 period.
· The increase in our subscription sales is due to our 22 InMotion Connect™ solutions subscriptions that were sold to Kindred as this product was launched during the year ended March 31, 2021.
· Our service, extended warranty and other revenues were consistent with the year ended March 31, 2020, being up approximately 9%.
Cost of Revenues
Total cost of revenues decreased $0.6 million, or 70%, to $0.3 million for the 2021 period, as compared to $0.9 million for the 2020 period. The decrease was primarily associated with a decrease in unit product sales along with 2 robots being provided as upgrades at no sales value during the 2020 period, in connection with a commitment made by the Company. In the 2021 period, an adjustment was made to decrease the warranty reserve in conjunction with the lower number of units sold over the last 12 months due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses decreased $1.2 million, or 53%, to $1.0 million for the 2021 period, as compared to $2.2 million for the 2020 period. The decrease was due to a $0.7 million decrease in payroll and payroll related expenses as our headcount was reduced due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our sales and marketing efforts decreased $0.1 million from expenses related to trade shows and other marketing efforts as the pandemic prevented any of these from happening in the field during the 2021 period. Commission expense decreased $0.1 million due to the decrease in sales in the 2021 period compared to the 2020 period. Installation expenses were down by $0.1 million from the 2020 period due to a reduced number of robots installed at customer sites.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses decreased $2.4 million, or 62%, to $1.5 million for the 2021 period, as compared to $3.9 million for the 2020 period. The decrease was due to a $1.3 million decrease in payroll and payroll related expenses as our headcount was reduced due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our research and development efforts decreased $1.1 million from expenses related to the development of the InMotion ConnectTM in the 2020 period compared to having it completed by the 2021 period.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses decreased $0.8 million, or 18%, to $3.8 million for the 2021 period, as compared to $4.6 million for the 2020 period. The decrease is associated with a $0.4 million decrease in payroll and payroll related expenses as our headcount was reduced due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our bad debt expense decreased by $0.2 million in the 2021 period due to a charge associated with a receivable balance owed by our Chinese JV partner in the 2020 period, that was subsequently terminated in May 2020. Our consulting fees decreased by $0.2 million associated with a reduction of costs due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Impairment of Goodwill & Intangible Assets
Following the decline of Company sales associated with the global pandemic, we determined there are events and changes in circumstances that indicate the goodwill and other intangible assets are impaired. Accordingly, during the third quarter of the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, we evaluated the ongoing value of our goodwill and other intangible assets. Based on this evaluation, we determined that the intangible assets were no longer recoverable and were in fact impaired and recorded an impairment charge of $0.4 million during the year ended March 31, 2021. Further, we determined that the goodwill with the carrying value of $11.1 million was impaired and recorded an impairment charge to the estimated fair value of $6.8 million in the year ended March 31, 2021. Fair value was based on expected future cash flows using Level 3 inputs under ASC 820. The cash flows are those expected to be generated by the market participants, discounted at the weighted average cost of capital.
As noted in our significant accounting policies, we have one reporting unit and its carrying value was compared to its estimated fair value. During the third quarter of the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, we estimated its fair value using an income approach. The income approach is based on the present value of future cash flows, which are derived from long term financial forecasts, and requires significant assumptions and judgement including among others, a discount rate and a terminal value.
The present value of future cash flows was determined by discounting estimated future cash flows, which included long-term growth rate of 3%, at a weighted average cost of capital (discount rate) of 27%, which considered the risk of achieving the projected cash flows, including the risk applicable to the reporting unit, industry and market as a whole.
During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, it was determined that our goodwill was impaired and $11.2 million impairment charge was recorded. It was also determined in the same period that technology and other assets were impaired a $2.7 million charge was recorded.
At March 31, 2020, following the decline of Company sales, management determined there were events and changes in circumstances that indicate goodwill, technology and other assets are impaired. Accordingly, the Company evaluated the ongoing value of the goodwill, technology and other assets. Based on this evaluation, the Company determined that trademark, patents and customer relationship with a carrying amount of $2.5 million, $0.8 million and $0.9 million, respectively, were no longer recoverable and were in fact impaired and wrote them down to their estimated fair value of $0.9 million, $0.5 million and $0.1 million, respectively. Further, the Company determined that goodwill with a carrying value of $22.3 million was in fact impaired and wrote it down to the estimated fair value of $11.1 million. Fair value was based on expected future cash flows using Level 3 inputs under ASC 820. The cash flows are those expected to be generated by the market participants, discounted at the weighted average cost of capital. Because of deteriorating market conditions (i.e., less marketplace demand), it is reasonably possible that the estimate of expected future cash flows may change in the near term resulting in the need to adjust our determination of fair value.
For the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, we estimated our fair value using an income approach. The income approach is based on the present value of future cash flows, which are derived from long term financial forecasts, and requires significant assumptions including among others, a discount rate and a terminal value.
The present value of future cash flows was determined by discounting estimated future cash flows, which included long-term growth rate of 3%, at a weighted average cost of capital (discount rate) of 24%, which considered the risk of achieving the projected cash flows, including the risk applicable to the reporting unit, industry and market as a whole.
We recognize one reporting unit and the carrying value was compared to the estimated fair value.
Share-based Compensation expense
Share-based compensation expense decreased $1.0 million, or 54%, to $0.8 million for the 2021 period, as compared to $1.8 million for the 2020 period. The decrease is associated with fewer options outstanding in the current year period compared to the prior year period due to the reduced headcount as well as a lower number of options vesting in the current period compared to the prior period.
Interest Expense, net
The interest expense for both periods represents the interest associated with the loans and convertible loans that the company has with certain of its shareholders. Interest expense, net increased by $0.2 million due to loans being outstanding longer in the 2021 period as compared to the 2020 period.
Other (income), net
For the year ending March 31, 2021 other (income), net consists of net foreign currency losses offset with CEWS relief from the Canadian authorities associated with the COVID-19 pandemic relief bill. For the year ending March 31, 2020, other income, net consisted of net foreign currency gains along with a research and development tax credit from the Canadian Revenue Agency for $0.1 million.
Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2020 Compared to the Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2019
The following table contains selected statement of operations data, which serve as the basis of the discussion of our results of operations for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively:
Revenues
Total revenues for the year ended March 31, 2020 decreased by $1.1 million, or 34%, to $2.2 million, as compared to revenues of $3.2 million for the year ended March 31, 2019.
The change in total revenues was attributable to a number of factors:
· Our product revenues decreased by $1.2 million, or 38%, for the year ended March 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended March 31, 2019 due to the decrease in units sold. During the 2019 period one customer purchased 21 units and that did not occur during the 2020 period.
· Our service, extended warranty and other revenues increased by $0.1 million from the 2019 period to the 2020 period. The increase is due to increased extended warranty sales recognized in the 2020 period.
Cost of Revenues
Total cost of revenues decreased $0.7 million, or 45%, to $0.9 million for the 2020 period, as compared to $1.6 million for the 2019 period. The decrease was primarily associated with a decrease in unit product sales along with an inventory write down of $0.1 million during the 2019 period.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses decreased $0.2 million, or 7%, to $2.2 million for the 2020 period, as compared to $2.3 million for the 2019 period. The decrease was due to a $0.2 million decrease in payroll and payroll related expenses as our headcount was reduced slightly.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased $0.7 million, or 23%, to $3.9 million for the 2020 period, as compared to $3.2 million for the 2019 period. The increase in our research and development efforts is primarily due to a third-party contract to assist in the development of our InMotion Connect.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $0.3 million, or 8%, to $4.6 million for the 2020 period, as compared to $4.2 million for the 2019 period. The increase is associated with a slightly higher administrative costs in the 2020 period as compared to the 2019 period.
Impairment of Goodwill & Intangible Assets
As a result of a valuation that was completed, it was determined that goodwill was impaired and an impairment charge of $11.2 million was recorded for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020. Technology and other assets were impaired and $2.7 million of an impairment charge was also recorded for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020.
For the year ended March 31, 2020, following the decline of revenues, management determined there were events and changes in circumstances that indicate goodwill, technology and other assets were impaired. Accordingly, we evaluated the ongoing value of the goodwill, technology and other assets. Based on this evaluation, we determined that trademark, patents and customer relationship with a carrying amount of $2.5 million, $0.8 million and $0.9 million, respectively, were no longer recoverable and were in fact impaired and wrote them down to their estimated fair value of $0.9 million, $0.5 million and $0.1 million, respectively.
We also determined that goodwill with a carrying value of $22.3 million was in fact impaired and wrote it down to the estimated fair value of $11.1 million. Fair value was based on expected future cash flows using Level 3 inputs under ASC 820. The cash flows are those expected to be generated by the market participants, discounted at the weighted average cost of capital. Because of deteriorating market conditions (i.e., less marketplace demand), it is reasonably possible that the estimate of expected future cash flows may change in the near term resulting in the need to adjust our determination of fair value.
To complete this exercise, we estimated the fair value using an income approach. The income approach is based on the present value of future cash flows, which are derived from long term financial forecasts, and requires significant assumptions including among others, a discount rate and a terminal value.
The present value of future cash flows was determined by discounting estimated future cash flows, which included long-term growth rate of 3%, at a weighted average cost of capital (discount rate) of 24%, which considered the risk of achieving the projected cash flows, including the risk applicable to the reporting unit, industry and market as a whole.
Share-based Compensation expense
Share-based compensation expense increased $0.4 million, or 32%, to $1.8 million for the 2020 period, as compared to $1.3 million for the 2019 period. The increase is associated with increased option grants in the 2020 period as compared to the 2019 period.
Interest Expense, net
For the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, we incurred interest expense of $0.2 million compared to $0.3 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2019. The decrease in interest expense, net, relates to the lowering of the interest rate from 3% to 1% per month.
Other (income) expense, net
For the year ended March 31, 2020, other (income) expense, net consisted of net foreign currency gains along with a research and development tax credit from the Canadian Revenue Agency for $0.1 million. For the year ended March 31, 2019, other (income) expense, net consisted of $3.3 million accretion expense due to the anti-dilution feature recorded in connection with our convertible debt financing, this is partially offset by a $2.4 million gain on the mark-to-market reevaluation of the shares to be issued. The gain was recorded due to not having enough authorized shares to issue shares of common stock upon conversion of our convertible promissory notes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have funded operations through the issuance of capital stock, loans, grants, and investment tax credits received from the Government of Canada. We require cash to pay our operating expenses, including research and development activities, fund working capital needs and make capital expenditures. At March 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents were $0.6 million. Our cash and cash equivalents are predominantly cash in operating accounts.
Based on our current burn rate, we need to raise additional capital in the short term to fund operations, hire necessary employees we lost as a result of COVID-19 related furloughs and other terminations, and meet expected future liquidity requirements, as well as to repay our remaining existing indebtedness (including our funding from the CARES Act, if and to the extent the loan is not forgiven), or we will be required to curtail or terminate some or all of our product lines or our operations. We are continuously in discussions to raise additional capital, which may include or be a combination of convertible or term loans and equity which, if successful, will enable us to continue operations based on our current burn rate, for the next 12 months; however, we cannot give any assurance at this time that we will successfully raise all or some of such capital or any other capital.
There can be no assurance that necessary debt or equity financing will be available, or will be available on terms acceptable to us, in which case we may be unable to meet our obligations or fully implement our business plan, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classification of liabilities that may result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Additionally, we will need additional funds to respond to business opportunities including potential acquisitions of complementary technologies, protect our intellectual property, develop new lines of business, and enhance our operating infrastructure. While we may need to seek additional funding for any such purposes, we may not be able to obtain financing on acceptable terms, or at all. In addition, the terms of our financings may be dilutive to, or otherwise adversely affect, holders of our common stock. We will also seek additional funds through arrangements with collaborators or other third parties. However, the recent COVID-19 pandemic has presented unprecedented challenges to businesses and the investing landscape around the world. Therefore, there can be no assurance that our plans will be successful. We may not be able to negotiate any such arrangements on acceptable terms, if at all. If we are unable to obtain additional funding on a timely basis, we may be required to curtail or terminate some or all of our product lines or our operations.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to slow its spread, the global credit and financial markets have experienced extreme volatility, including diminished liquidity and credit availability, declines in consumer confidence, declines in economic growth, increases in unemployment rates and uncertainty about economic stability. There can be no assurance that further deterioration in credit and financial markets and confidence in economic conditions will not occur. If equity and credit markets deteriorate, it may make any necessary debt or equity financing more difficult to obtain, more costly and/or more dilutive. Any of these actions could materially harm our business, results of operations and future prospects.
During the year ended March 31, 2021, we received $1.5 million, in addition to a $70,000 previously loaned to us, pursuant to a $7.0 million convertible note offering. The convertible notes bore interest at a fixed rate at 1% per month. The convertible loans with a balance of $1.7 million converted into our common stock on the March 31, 2021 maturity date, at a conversion price of $8.55 per shares in the event of an investment on or prior to December 31, 2019, and $9.50 per share in the event of an investment after December 31, 2019 or into 181,463 shares of our common stock.
On February 24, 2021, we entered into a Term Loan and Security Agreement where we may borrow up to $3.0 million from lenders from time to time. We borrowed $0.5 million on February 24, 2021 and another $0.5 million on March 18, 2021 from existing shareholders. The loan bears interest at a fixed rate of 1% per month. The principal amount and interest on the loan will be due and payable on the earlier of (i.) February 12, 2023 and (ii.) the date of receipt of a minimum of $3.0 million from a subsequent financing.
Additionally, in May 2020 we received funding of $0.5 million pursuant to the federal Paycheck Protection Program under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act. The loan is unsecured, bears interest of 1% per annum and a deferment period of 6 months. The loan is to be used primarily for payroll related costs, lease, and utility payments. We have applied for forgiveness and received it as of May 23, 2021 for the whole loan and interest in accordance with applicable law.
In March 2020, we received a $2.0 million loan from an existing shareholder. The promissory note bears interest at a fixed rate of 1% per month and has a maturity date of the earlier of (i) March 31, 2022 and (ii) the date of receipt of a minimum of $5.0 million from a “Subsequent Financing.” The accrued interest shall be payable in cash commencing on June 30, 2021 for the previous quarter. Half of the interest accrued during the first three payment dates (3-month, 6-month and 9-month anniversaries of the issue date), was rolled into Term Loan and Security Agreement as mentioned above. The remaining half of the interest accrued will be paid upon the maturity date. The loan is repayable or convertible to common shares at the loan holder’s option on March 31, 2022 at a price per share equal to the price per share of our then most recent capital raise or debt conversion, or any other valuation as agreed in writing between the loan holder and us.
Cash Flows
Net cash used in operating activities was $4.6 million for the year ended March 31, 2021, and resulted primarily from $13.6 million in net loss offset by approximately $1.4 million in depreciation and amortization, interest expense and stock-based compensation expense as well as a $7.2 million in impairment of our goodwill and intangible assets for the period. Net changes in working capital items increased cash from operating activities by approximately $0.4 million, primarily related to decreases in accounts receivable associated with payments collected from our customers and a decrease in our inventory associated with product shipments during the period. These increases were offset by the decrease in accounts payable of $0.4 million associated with payments to vendors. There was no net cash used in or provided by investing activities for the 2021 period. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended March 31, 2021 was $3.0 million, related to proceeds received from the convertible loans, PPP loans and loans from our existing shareholders.
Net cash used in operating activities was $9.1 million for the year ended March 31, 2020, and resulted primarily from the $25.0 million of net loss offset by $2.3 million in depreciation and amortization, interest expense and stock-based compensation expense as well as a $13.9 million in impairment of our goodwill and intangible assets for the period. Net changes in working capital items decreased cash from operating activities by $0.6 million, primarily related to increases in inventory and prepaid expenses and decreases in our accounts payable and accrued liabilities, partially offset by decreases in our accounts receivable associated with cash collection efforts with our customers. Net cash used in investing activities was $0.2 million for the year ended March 31, 2020, which consisted of purchases of equipment. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended March 31, 2020 was $11.0 million, relating to proceeds received from convertible loans.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since inception, we have not engaged in any off balance sheet financing activities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations set forth above are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those described below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses, that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following critical accounting policies require significant judgment and estimates by us in the preparation of our financial statements.
Risks and Uncertainties
The Company has considered the impact of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) on its consolidated financial statements. Management believes that although the major negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic seems to be behind us, we still can not say for certain that we have future adverse effects. These impacts could include but may not be limited to risks and uncertainty related to ability of our sales and marketing personnel and distributors to access our customer base and reduced demand. Consequently, these may negatively impact our results of operations, cash flows and its overall financial condition. In addition, the impact of COVID-19 may subject us to future risk of material goodwill, intangible and long-lived assets impairments and increased reserves for uncollectible accounts.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when, or as, obligations under the terms of a contract are satisfied, which occurs when control of the promised products or services is transferred to customers. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring products or services to a customer.
Product revenue is generally recognized when the customer obtains control of our product, which occurs at a point in time, and may be upon shipment or upon delivery based on the contractual shipping terms of a contract.
Service revenue is generally recognized over time as the services are rendered to the customer based on the extent of progress towards completion of the performance obligation. We recognize service revenue over the term of the service contract. Services are expected to be transferred to the customer throughout the term of the contract and we believe recognizing revenue ratably over the term of the contract best depicts the transfer of value to the customer.
Revenue generated from our extended warranty sales are recognized ratably over the period that the warranty covers.
In the year ended March 31, 2021, we started selling our Pulse subscriptions with the purchase of our InMotion Connect devices. Customers are billed in advance of the start of their annual subscription and revenues are recognized ratably over each annual subscription period.
Revenue from the sale of products and services are evidenced by either a contract with the customer or a valid purchase order and an invoice which includes all relevant terms of sale and shipment of product or service provided has been incurred. We perform a review of each specific customer's credit worthiness and ability to pay prior to acceptance as a customer.
Allowance for doubtful accounts
We extend unsecured credit to our customers in the ordinary course of business but mitigate the associated credit risk by supplying products to customers with pre- approved capital expenditure budgets or rental credit, and by actively pursuing past due accounts. An allowance for doubtful accounts is estimated and recorded based on management’s assessment of the credit history with the customer and the current relationships with them. On this basis management has determined that an allowance for doubtful accounts of $0.2 million was appropriate as of March 31, 2020. There was no allowance for doubtful accounts needed at March 31, 2021.
Inventory
Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is recorded at actual cost, on the first-in first-out basis. We only have finished goods inventory recoded based on actual cost from outsourced manufacturing partner.
Warranty Reserve and Deferred Warranty Revenue
We provide a one-year warranty as part of its normal sales offering. When products are sold, we provide a warranty reserve, which, based on our historical experience are sufficient to cover warranty claims. Accrued warranty reserves are included in accrued liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets and amounted to $46,000 at March 31, 2021 and $0.2 million at March 31, 2020. We also sell extended warranties for additional periods beyond the standard warranty. Extended warranty revenue is deferred and recognized as revenue over the extended warranty period.
Foreign Currency Translation
The functional and presentation currency of the Company and its wholly owned subsidiaries is the U.S. dollar. Transactions denominated in a currency other than the functional currency are recorded on the initial recognition at the exchange rate at the date of the transaction. After initial recognition monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currency are translated at the end of each reporting period into the functional currency at the exchange rate at that date. Exchange differences are recognized in profit and loss. Non- monetary assets and liabilities measured at cost are translated at the exchange rate at the date of the transaction.
Intangible Assets
We capitalize and include in intangible assets the costs of patents, customer relationships and trademarks acquired in a business combination or asset acquisition. Intangible assets are recorded at fair value and stated net of accumulated amortization and impairments. We amortize our intangible assets that have finite lives using either the straight-line method, based on the useful life of the asset over which it is expected to be consumed utilizing expected undiscounted future cash flows. Amortization is recorded over the estimated useful lives ranging from one to 10 years. We evaluate the realizability of our definite lived intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances or business conditions indicate that the carrying value of these assets may not be recoverable based on expectations of future undiscounted cash flows for each asset group. If the carrying value of an asset or asset group exceeds its undiscounted cash flows, we estimate the fair value of the assets, generally utilizing a discounted cash flow analysis based on the present value of estimated future cash flows to be generated by the assets using a risk-adjusted discount rate. To estimate the fair value of the assets, we use market participant assumptions pursuant to ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements. If the estimate of an intangible asset’s remaining useful life is changed, we will amortize the remaining carrying value of the intangible asset prospectively over the revised useful life.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. We do not amortize our goodwill, but instead test for impairment at least annually and more frequently whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the fair value of the asset may be less than its carrying value of the asset. Our annual test for impairment occurs in our fourth quarter.
We have adopted ASU 2011-08 Intangibles-Goodwill and Other, an amendment to ASC 350, which updates how an entity evaluates its goodwill for impairment. The guidance provides entities an option to perform a “qualitative” assessment to determine whether further impairment testing is necessary. If further testing is required, the test for impairment continues with the two-step process. The first step compares the carrying amount of the reporting unit to its estimated fair value (Step 1). To the extent that the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value, a second step is performed, wherein the reporting unit’s carrying value is compared to the implied fair value (Step 2). To the extent that the carrying value exceeds the implied fair value, impairment exists and must be recognized.
We have concluded that Bionik. represents one reporting unit for goodwill impairment testing and we have performed a qualitative assessment on that reporting unit. As a result of our assessment, we determined that goodwill was impaired by $6.8 million and $11.3 million during the year ended March 31, 2021 and March 31, 2020.
Stock-Based Compensation
We follow the fair value recognition provisions of ASC 718, Stock Compensation Topic. This guidance requires share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options and restricted stock units, or RSUs, to be recognized in the statement of operations based on their fair values at the date of grant. The fair value of performance-based stock units is determined based on the fair market value of our common stock on the vest dates. ASC 718 requires companies to utilize an estimated forfeiture rate when calculating the expense for the period. Accordingly, we review our actual forfeiture rates periodically and align our stock compensation expense with the share-based payments that are vesting.
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock options. This option-pricing model requires the input of various subjective assumptions, including the option’s expected life and the price volatility of the underlying stock. Our estimated expected stock price volatility is based on our own historic volatility. We believe this is more reflective and a better indicator of the expected future volatility, than using an average of a comparable market index or of a comparable company in the same industry. We granted 76,902 and 659,494 options during the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our expected term of options granted represents the weighted average period of time that options granted are expected to be outstanding giving consideration to vesting schedules and our historical exercise patterns. The risk-free rate for the expected term of the option is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant. The dividend yield of zero is based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends and have no present intention to pay cash dividends.
We account for transactions in which services are received from non-employees in exchange for equity instruments based on the fair value of such services received or of the equity instruments issued, whichever is more reliably measured, in accordance with ASC 718 and the Equity Topic, ASC 505.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Accounting Standards Update 2020-06-Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity: simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”). Consequently, more convertible debt instruments will be reported as a single liability instrument and more convertible preferred stock as a single equity instrument with no separate accounting for embedded conversion features. The ASU removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, which will permit more equity contracts to qualify for it. The ASU also simplifies the diluted earnings per share (EPS) calculation in certain areas. The amendments in this Update are effective for public business entities that meet the definition of a Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) filer, excluding entities eligible to be smaller reporting companies as defined by the SEC, for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years. For all other entities, the amendments are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company is currently evaluating the impact the adoption of ASU 2020-06 will have on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12 - Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes, an authoritative guidance that simplifies the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions and making simplifications in other areas. It is effective from the first quarter of fiscal year 2022, with early adoption permitted in any interim period. If adopted early, the Company must adopt all the amendments in the same period. The amendments have differing adoption methods including retrospectively, prospectively and/or modified retrospective basis through a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the beginning of the fiscal year of adoption, depending on the specific change. The Company does not anticipate the new guidance will have a material impact on the consolidated balance sheet and consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss.