Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following MD&A is intended to help the reader understand the Company and its operations and is focused on our 2020 and 2019 financial results, including comparisons of year-to-year performance between these years. Discussion and analysis of our 2018 fiscal year, as well as the year-to-year comparison between 2019 and 2018, are included "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in Part II, Item 7 in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on March 2, 2020.
Forward-Looking Statements
This report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements can be identified by the fact that they do not relate strictly to historical or current facts and may include statements concerning, among other things, the anticipated economic and business environment in our service area and elsewhere, credit quality and other financial and business matters in future periods, our future results of operations and financial position, our business strategy and plans and our objectives and future operations. We also may make forward-looking statements in our other documents filed with or furnished to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”). In addition, our senior management may make forward-looking statements orally to analysts, investors, representatives of the media and others. Our forward-looking statements are based on numerous assumptions, any of which could prove to be inaccurate, and actual results may differ materially from those projected because of a variety of risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to: 1) general economic conditions either nationally, internationally, or locally may be different than expected, and particularly, any event that negatively impacts the tourism industry in Hawaii; 2) the compounding effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including reduced tourism in Hawaii, the duration and scope of government mandates or other limitations of or restrictions on travel, volatility in the international and national economy and credit markets, worker absenteeism, quarantines or other travel or health-related restrictions, the length and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, the pace of recovery following the COVID-19 pandemic, and the effect of government, business and individual actions intended to mitigate the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic; 3) changes in market interest rates that may affect credit markets and our ability to maintain our net interest margin; 4) changes in our credit quality or risk profile that may increase or decrease the required level of our reserve for credit losses; 5) the impact of legislative and regulatory initiatives, particularly the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (the “Dodd-Frank Act”) and Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act of 2018; 6) changes to the amount and timing of proposed common stock repurchases; 7) unanticipated changes in the securities markets, public debt markets, and other capital markets in the U.S. and internationally, including, without limitation, the anticipated elimination of the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) as a benchmark interest rate; 8) changes in fiscal and monetary policies of the markets in which we operate; 9) the increased cost of maintaining or the Company’s ability to maintain adequate liquidity and capital, based on the requirements adopted by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and U.S. regulators; 10) changes in accounting standards; 11) changes in tax laws or regulations, including Public Law 115-97, commonly known as the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, or the interpretation of such laws and regulations; 12) any failure in or breach of our operational systems, information systems or infrastructure, or those of our merchants, third party vendors and other service providers; 13) any interruption or breach of security of our information systems resulting in failures or disruptions in customer account management, general ledger processing, and loan or deposit systems; 14) natural disasters, public unrest or adverse weather, public health, disease outbreaks, and other conditions impacting us and our customers’ operations or negatively impacting the tourism industry in Hawaii; 15) competitive pressures in the markets for financial services and products; 16) actual or alleged conduct which could harm our reputation; and 17) the impact of litigation and regulatory investigations of the Company, including costs, expenses, settlements, and judgments. Given these risks and uncertainties, investors should not place undue reliance on any forward-looking statement as a prediction of our actual results. A detailed discussion of these and other risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results and events to differ materially from such forward-looking statements is included under the section entitled “Risk Factors” in Part I of this report. Words such as “believes,” “anticipates,” “expects,” “intends,” “targeted,” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements but are not the exclusive means of identifying such statements. We undertake no obligation to update forward-looking statements to reflect later events or circumstances, except as may be required by law.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our Consolidated Financial Statements were prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and follow general practices within the industries in which we operate. The most significant accounting policies we follow are presented in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Application of these principles requires us to make estimates, assumptions, and judgments that affect the amounts reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes. Most accounting policies are not considered by management to be critical accounting policies. Several factors are considered in determining whether or not a policy is critical in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements. These factors include among other things, whether the policy requires management to make difficult, subjective, and complex judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain and because it is likely that materially different amounts would be reported under different conditions or using different assumptions. The accounting policies which we believe to be most critical in preparing our Consolidated Financial Statements are those that are related to the determination of the reserve for credit losses, fair value estimates, leased asset residual values, and income taxes.
Reserve for Credit Losses
A consequence of lending activities is that we may incur credit losses. The amount of such losses will vary depending upon the risk characteristics of the loan and lease portfolio as affected by economic conditions such as rising interest rates and the financial performance of borrowers.
The reserve for credit losses consists of the allowance for credit losses (the “Allowance”) and the reserve for unfunded commitments (the “Unfunded Reserve”). As of December 31, 2020, the reserve for credit losses also included a reserve for accrued interest receivable related to loans in which interest payment forbearances were granted to borrowers impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result of our January 1, 2020, adoption of ASU No. 2016-13, “Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments,” and its related amendments, our methodology for estimating the reserve for credit losses changed significantly from December 31, 2019. The standard replaced the “incurred loss” approach with an “expected loss” approach known as current expected credit loss (“CECL”). The CECL approach requires an estimate of the credit losses expected over the life of an exposure (or pool of exposures). It removes the incurred loss approach’s threshold that delayed the recognition of a credit loss until it was “probable” a loss event was “incurred.”
The estimate of expected credit losses under the CECL approach is based on relevant information about past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts that affect the collectability of the reported amounts. Historical loss experience is generally the starting point for estimating expected credit losses. We then consider whether the historical loss experience should be adjusted for asset-specific risk characteristics or current conditions at the reporting date that did not exist over the period from which historical experience was used. Finally, we consider forecasts about future economic conditions that are reasonable and supportable. The Unfunded Reserve represents the expected credit losses on off-balance sheet commitments such as unfunded commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit. However, a liability is not recognized for commitments unconditionally cancellable by the Company. The Unfunded Reserve is determined by estimating future draws and applying the expected loss rates on those draws.
Management’s evaluation of the appropriateness of the reserve for credit losses is often the most critical of accounting estimates for a financial institution. Our determination of the amount of the reserve for credit losses is a critical accounting estimate as it requires significant reliance on the credit risk rating we assign to individual borrowers, the use of estimates and significant judgment as to the amount and timing of expected future cash flows on criticized loans, significant reliance on historical loss rates on homogenous portfolios, consideration of our quantitative and qualitative evaluation of economic factors, and the reliance on our reasonable and supportable forecasts. While our methodology in establishing the reserve for credit losses attributes portions of the Allowance and Unfunded Reserve to the commercial and consumer portfolio segments, the entire Allowance and Unfunded Reserve is available to absorb credit losses inherent in the total loan and lease portfolio and total amount of unfunded credit commitments, respectively.
The reserve for credit losses related to our commercial portfolio segment is generally most sensitive to the credit risk rating assigned to each borrower. Commercial loan risk ratings are evaluated based on each situation by experienced senior credit officers and are subject to periodic review by an independent internal team of credit specialists. The reserve for credit losses related to our consumer portfolio segment is generally most sensitive to economic assumptions and delinquency trends. The reserve for credit losses attributable to each portfolio segment also includes an amount for inherent risks not reflected in the historical analyses. Relevant factors include, but are not limited to, concentrations of credit risk (geographic, large borrower, and industry), economic trends and conditions, changes in underwriting standards, experience and depth of lending staff, trends in delinquencies, and the level of criticized loans.
Going forward, the impact of utilizing the CECL approach to calculate the reserve for credit losses will be significantly influenced by the composition, characteristics and quality of our loan portfolio, as well as the prevailing economic conditions and forecasts utilized. Material changes to these and other relevant factors may result in greater volatility to the reserve for credit losses, and therefore, greater volatility to our reported earnings. See Notes 1 and 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements and the “Corporate Risk Profile - Credit Risk” section in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) for more information on the Allowance and the Unfunded Reserve.
Fair Value Measurements
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in the principal or most advantageous market for an asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. The degree of management judgment involved in determining the fair value of a financial instrument is dependent upon the availability of quoted market prices or observable market inputs. For financial instruments that are traded actively and have quoted market prices or observable market inputs, there is minimal subjectivity involved in measuring fair value. However, when quoted market prices or observable market inputs are not fully available, significant management judgment may be necessary to estimate fair value. In developing our fair value measurements, we maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs.
The fair value hierarchy defines Level 1 valuations as those based on quoted prices, unadjusted, for identical instruments traded in active markets. Level 2 valuations are those based on quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets, quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active, or model-based valuation techniques for which all significant assumptions are observable in the market. Level 3 valuations are based on model-based techniques that use at least one significant assumption not observable in the market, or significant management judgment or estimation, some of which may be internally developed.
Financial assets that are recorded at fair value on a recurring basis include available-for-sale investment securities, loans held for sale, mortgage servicing rights, investments related to deferred compensation arrangements, and derivative financial instruments. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, $4.0 billion or 20% and $2.7 billion or 15%, respectively, of our total assets consisted of financial assets recorded at fair value on a recurring basis and most of these financial assets consisted of available-for-sale investment securities measured using information from a third-party pricing service. These investments in debt securities and mortgage-backed securities were all classified in either Levels 1 or 2 of the fair value hierarchy. Financial liabilities that are recorded at fair value on a recurring basis are comprised of derivative financial instruments. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, $17.4 million and $6.4 million, respectively, or less than 1% of our total liabilities consisted of financial liabilities recorded at fair value on a recurring basis. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, Level 3 financial assets recorded at fair value on a recurring basis were $96.4 million and $29.7 million, respectively, or less than 1% of our total assets, and were comprised of mortgage servicing rights and derivative financial instruments. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, Level 3 financial liabilities recorded at fair value on a recurring basis were $17.4 million and $6.1 million, respectively, or less than 1% of our total liabilities, and were comprised of derivative financial instruments.
Our third-party pricing service makes no representations or warranties that the pricing data provided to us is complete or free from errors, omissions, or defects. As a result, we have processes in place to monitor and periodically review the information provided to us by our third-party pricing service such as: 1) Our third-party pricing service provides us with documentation by asset class of inputs and methodologies used to value securities. We review this documentation to evaluate the inputs and valuation methodologies used to place securities into the appropriate level of the fair value hierarchy. This documentation is periodically updated by our third-party pricing service. Accordingly, transfers of securities within the fair value hierarchy are made if deemed necessary. 2) On a quarterly basis, management also selects a sample of securities priced by the Company’s third-party pricing service and reviews the significant assumptions and valuation methodologies used by the pricing service with respect to those securities. The information provided is comprised of market reference data, which may include reported trades; bids, offers, or broker-dealer dealer quotes; benchmark yields and spreads; as well as other reference data as appropriate. Periodically, based on these reviews, management determines whether the current placement of the security in the fair value hierarchy is appropriate or whether transfers may be warranted. 3) On a quarterly basis, management reviews the pricing information received from our third-party pricing service. This review process includes a comparison to a second source. 4) Our third-party pricing service has also established processes for us to submit inquiries regarding quoted prices. Periodically, we will challenge the quoted prices provided by our third-party pricing service. Our third-party pricing service will review the inputs to the evaluation in light of the new market data presented by us. Our third-party pricing service may then affirm the original quoted price or may update the evaluation on a going forward basis. Generally, we do not adjust the price from the third-party service provider. 5) On an annual basis, we obtain and review the third-party’s most recently issued Service Organization Controls report related to controls placed in operation and tests of operating effectiveness, to update our understanding of the third-party pricing service’s control environment.
See Note 21 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on our fair value measurements.
Income Taxes
We determine our liabilities for income taxes based on current tax regulations and interpretations in tax jurisdictions where our income is subject to taxation. Currently, we file tax returns for federal, six state and local domestic jurisdictions, and three foreign jurisdictions. In estimating income taxes payable or receivable, we assess the relative merits and risks of the appropriate tax treatment considering statutory, judicial, and regulatory guidance in the context of each tax position. Accordingly, previously estimated liabilities are regularly reevaluated and adjusted through the provision for income taxes. Changes in the estimate of income taxes payable or receivable occur periodically due to changes in tax rates, interpretations of tax law, the status of examinations being conducted by various taxing authorities, and newly enacted statutory, judicial and regulatory guidance that impact the relative merits and risks of each tax position. These changes, when they occur, may affect the provision for income taxes as well as current and deferred income taxes, and may be significant to our statements of income and condition.
Management's determination of the realization of net deferred tax assets is based upon management's judgment of various future events and uncertainties, including the timing and amount of future income, as well as the implementation of various tax planning strategies to maximize realization of the deferred tax assets. A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that some portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, we carried a valuation allowance of $3.6 million and $2.5 million, respectively, related to our deferred tax assets established in connection with our low-income housing investments.
We are also required to record a liability, referred to as an unrecognized tax benefit ("UTB"), for the entire amount of benefit taken in a prior or future income tax return when we determine that a tax position has a less than 50% likelihood of being accepted by the taxing authority. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, our liabilities for UTBs were $5.4 million and $6.1 million, respectively.
In 2020, the Company recognized federal and State of Hawaii investment tax credits from energy investments. The Company uses the deferral method of accounting for its investment tax credit with the benefit recognized in the provision for income taxes. These credits reduced the Company's provision for income taxes by $3.1 million, 4.1 million, and 5.0 million in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
Overview
We are a regional financial services company serving businesses, consumers, and governments in Hawaii, Guam, and other Pacific Islands. Our principal operating subsidiary, the Bank, was founded in 1897.
Our business strategy is to use our unique market knowledge, prudent management discipline and brand strength to deliver exceptional value to our stakeholders. Our business plan is balanced between growth and risk management while maintaining flexibility to adjust to economic changes. We will continue to focus on providing customers with best-in-class service and an innovative mix of products and services. We will also remain focused on continuing to deliver strong financial results while maintaining prudent risk and capital management strategies as well as our commitment to support our local communities.
Hawaii Economy
The year 2020 began with overall healthy economic conditions in Hawaii that were sharply impacted by a shut-down of tourism at the end of March in an attempt to isolate the State from additional travel-related transmission of COVID-19. The actions taken by the State of Hawaii beginning in March were imposed to mitigate the spread and lessen the public health impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in Hawaii. Although at-risk industries of leisure and hospitality represents 19% of jobs and 10% of Hawaii’s GDP, Hawaii benefits from a wide range of industries that help to provide stability in the case of economic shocks. Federal government jobs, primarily military, have historically been a stabilizing part of Hawaii’s economy and represent about 20% of GDP. Construction activity, including the Honolulu Rail Project, and other non-visitor-related activities have continued despite COVID-19. Hawaii’s large retiree population also contributes to a stable economic base. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Hawaii economy will likely continue to face significant challenges in the near future.
We have taken and continue to take significant steps to help our customers who have been impacted by COVID-19. For our consumer customers, we are providing payment relief for residential mortgage, home equity, auto loan, auto lease and direct personal loans for up to six months. We waived associated late fees, while not reporting these payment deferrals as late payments to the credit bureaus for all customers who were current prior to the event. For our commercial customers that continue to make interest payments, we provided six months of principal deferral, or alternatively, three months of interest or interest and principal deferral. As the COVID-19 pandemic persists in negatively impacting the economy, the Company continues to offer loan modifications an additional round of loan modifications to borrowers struggling as a result of COVID-19.
The Bank continues to responsibly lend to qualified consumer and commercial customers. We have been a participant in the SBA’s (“SBA’s”) Small Business PPP. As of February 24, 2021, the Bank had 4,237 PPP loans totaling $504.9 million.
The Bank has taken and continues to take additional steps to help minimize the financial impact of COVID-19 for its customers:
•
Suspended ATM surcharge fees for other banks ATM users through June 30, 2020.
•
Waived ATM fees for Bank debit cardholders who used their cards at non-Bank ATMs in the U.S. and U.S. Territories through July 21, 2020.
•
Suspended early withdrawal penalties for time deposit accounts through June 30, 2020.
•
Temporarily increased our mobile deposits limit from $5,000 to $10,000 per rolling five business days.
•
Reserved the first branch hour of the day to serve our elderly (65 years and older) and those at-risk, as well as their caregivers or family members.
•
Increased our call center capabilities by training and deputizing more than 100 branch, private banking and commercial staff members to provide additional support over the phone.
•
Offered Small Dollar Emergency Relief Loan Program to assist customers who were financially impacted by COVID-19 with loans up to $3,000.
Earnings Summary
Net income for 2020 was $153.8 million, a decrease of $72.1 million or 32% compared to 2019. Diluted earnings per share were $3.86 in 2020, a decrease of $1.70 or 31% compared to 2019. Our return on average assets was 0.79% in 2020, a decrease of 50 basis points from 2019, and our return on average shareholders’ equity was 11.38% in 2020, compared to 17.65% in 2019.
Our lower net income in 2020 was primarily due to the following:
•
We recorded a $117.8 million provision for credit losses in 2020 compared to a $16.0 million provision recorded in 2019. This increase was primarily due to management’s best estimate of losses over the life of loans in our portfolio in accordance with the CECL approach, given the economic outlook and forecasts for COVID-19 pandemic driven market changes, as well as the impact of unprecedented intervention of fiscal, monetary and regulatory programs.
•
Fees, exchange, and other service charges was $47.1 million in 2020, a decrease of $10.8 million or 19% compared to 2019. This decrease was primarily due to lower debit and credit card transaction volume and the Bank’s suspension of ATM surcharge fees from April 1, 2020, through June 30, 2020. In addition, merchant income decreased due to lower sales volume.
•
Net equipment expense was $35.4 million in 2020, an increase of $6.2 million or 21% compared to 2019. This increase was primarily due to a $2.5 million increase in software license fees and maintenance, coupled with a $2.2 million increase in depreciation expense.
•
Net occupancy expense was $39.5 million in 2020, an increase of $5.7 million or 17% compared to 2019. This increase was primarily due an impairment charge related to the permanent closure of 12 branches and the write down of cash-only ATMs in the fourth quarter of 2020.
•
Service charges on deposit accounts was $24.9 million in 2020, a decrease of $5.2 million or 17% compared to 2019. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in overdraft fees coupled with a decrease in account analysis fees.
•
Annuity and insurance income was $3.4 million in 2020, a decrease of $3.6 million or 52% compared to 2019. This decrease was primarily due to a one-time commission received in the first quarter of 2019 related to insurance products offered through a third-party administrator, coupled with a decrease in annuity and life insurance products.
•
Professional fees was $12.2 million in 2020, an increase of $2.1 million or 21% compared to 2019 due to an increase in corporate risk and legal fees.
These items were partially offset by the following:
•
The provision for income taxes was $35.3 million in 2020, a decrease of $24.6 million or 41% compared to 2019. The effective tax rate was 18.68% in 2020 compared to 20.96% in 2019. This decrease was primarily due to a lower pretax income and a tax benefit identified and recorded in 2020 for return to provision adjustments.
•
Net gains (losses) on sales of investment securities was $9.9 million in 2020, an increase of $13.9 million compared to 2019. This increase was primarily due to the sale of 80,214 Visa Class B Shares during the second quarter of 2020.
•
Other noninterest expense was $55.0 million in 2020, a decrease of $11.0 million or 17% compared to 2019. These decrease was primarily due to a $6.0 million legal reserves recorded in September 2019 for what was then a tentative settlement of a class action lawsuit regarding the Company’s overdraft practices.
•
Salaries and benefits expense was $207.3 million in 2020, a decrease of $8.8 million or 4% compared to 2019. This decrease was primarily due to a $13.3 million decrease in incentive compensation coupled with a $2.3 million decrease in medical, dental, and life insurance primarily due to lower expenses related to lower medical insurance costs. Shared-based compensation decreased by $1.8 million due to forfeiture of unvested restricted stock grants and a lower number of restricted stock units being amortized. These decreases were partially offset by a $4.8 million increase in separation expense coupled with a $1.9 million increase in base salaries due to merit increases.
•
Mortgage banking income was $17.9 million in 2020, an increase of $4.2 million or 31% compared to 2019. This increase was primarily due to increased sales and margins on sales of conforming saleable loans from current production. This increase was offset by a $3.9 million valuation impairment to our mortgage serving rights.
•
Other noninterest income was $30.4 million in 2020, an increase of $2.9 million or 17% compared to 2019. This increase was primarily due to an $8.2 million increase in fees related to our customer interest rate swap derivatives. This increases were partially offset by a $3.5 million decrease in net gain on sale of leased assets combined with a $1.0 million decrease in foreign currency transactions.
We maintained a strong balance sheet throughout 2020, with what we believe are adequate reserves for credit losses, and high levels of liquidity and capital.
•
Total loans and leases were $11.9 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $0.9 billion or 9% from December 31, 2019, primarily due to growth in our commercial portfolio.
•
The allowance for credit losses (the “Allowance”) was $216.3 million as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $106.2 million or 97% from December 31, 2019. The ratio of our Allowance to total loans and leases outstanding increased to 1.81% as of December 31, 2020, compared to 1.00% as of December 31, 2019. The level of our Allowance was commensurate with the Company’s credit risk profile, future economic outlook, and forecasts utilized.
•
The total carrying value of our investment securities portfolio was $7.1 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.4 billion or 25% from December 31, 2019. Mortgage-backed securities issued by Ginnie Mae, Fannie Mae, and Freddie Mac are the largest concentration in our portfolio.
•
Total deposits were $18.2 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $2.4 billion or 15% from December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase in consumer and commercial deposits.
•
Total shareholders’ equity was $1.4 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $87.7 million or 7% from December 31, 2019. While we continued to return capital to our shareholders in the form of dividends, in March 2020, we suspended share repurchases in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe the suspension is prudent given uncertainty regarding the length and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic. During 2020, we repurchased 203,865 shares of common stock at a total cost of $18.0 million under our share repurchase program and from employees and/or directors in connection with income tax withholdings related to the vesting of restricted stock, shares purchased for a deferred compensation plan, and stock swaps, less shares distributed from the deferred compensation plan. We also paid cash dividends of $107.4 million during 2020.
Analysis of Statements of Income
Average balances, related income and expenses, and resulting yields and rates are presented in Table 1. An analysis of the change in net interest income, on a taxable-equivalent basis, is presented in Table 2.
Non-performing loans and leases are included in the respective average loan and lease balances. Income, if any, on such loans and leases is recognized on a cash basis.
Comprised of other consumer revolving credit, installment, and consumer lease financing.
Interest income includes taxable-equivalent basis adjustments, based upon a federal statutory tax rate of 21% of $1.3 million and $2.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, respectively.
1 The change in interest income and expense are not solely due to changes in volume or rate has been allocated on a pro-rata basis to the volume and rate columns.
2 Comprised of other consumer revolving credit, installment, and consumer lease financing.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is affected by the size and mix of our balance sheet components as well as the spread between interest earned on assets and interest paid on liabilities. Net interest margin is defined as net interest income, on a taxable-equivalent basis, as a percentage of average earning assets. Net interest income was $496.3 million in 2020, relatively unchanged compared to 2019. On a taxable-equivalent basis, net interest income was $497.6 million in 2020, relatively unchanged compared to 2019. Net interest margin was 2.73% in 2020, a decrease of 30 basis points from 2019. We experienced lower yields in both our investment securities portfolio and loan portfolio, which were partially offset by lower rates paid on our interest-bearing deposits, a reflection of the lower rate environment.
Yields on our earning assets decreased by 57 basis points in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to the lower rate environment. Yields on our commercial and industrial loans decreased by 93 points due to lower yields on floating rate loans. Yields on our commercial mortgage decreased by 86 basis points due to lower yields on floating rate loans. Yields on our construction loans decreased by 115 basis points due to lower yields on floating-rate loans, and new loans with lower rates in comparison to loans that were paid off or transferred to commercial mortgage upon completion. Yields on our commercial lease financing decreased by 331 basis points primarily due to a $3.0 million impairment in the residual value of a leveraged lease. Yields on our funds sold decreased by 193 basis points primarily due to federal fund rate decreases. In addition, yields on our investment securities portfolio decreased by 53 basis points primarily due to purchases of lower yielding securities in the current lower rate environment.
Interest rates paid on our interest-bearing liabilities decreased 38 basis points in 2020 compared to 2019. Decreases to our funding costs were primarily due to lower rates paid on our interest-bearing deposits. Interest rates paid on our securities sold under agreements to repurchase decreased by 75 basis points from 2019. In July 2020, we terminated three of our repurchase agreements, with an aggregate total of $200.0 million, with one private institution. These repurchase agreements were scheduled to mature in June 2022 and had a weighted-average interest rate of 2.742%. These terminated repurchase agreements were replaced with one $200.0 million repurchase agreement with the same private institution. The new repurchase agreement matures in July 2025 and has an interest rate of 1.835%. Other debt, which is comprised of FHLB advances increased by 13 basis points primarily due to lower cost advances having matured in December 2019. During the second quarter of 2020, we restructured two existing FHLB advances totaling $50.0 million. The restructuring of advances extended the maturity from December 2020 to May 2024 and lowered the weighted-average interest rate from 3.04% to 1.21%.
Average balances of our earning assets increased by $1.7 billion or 10% in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to loan growth as the average balances of our loans and leases portfolio increased by $903.7 million. The average balance of investment securities increased by $561.2 million. The average balance of funds sold increased by $268.4 million. The average balance of our commercial and industrial portfolio increased by $426.6 million primarily due to the origination of new PPP loans. The average balance of our commercial mortgage portfolio increased by $265.5 million as a result of continued demand from new and existing customers. The average balance of our residential mortgage portfolio increased by $210.5 million primarily due to higher loan originations partially offset by an increase in payoff activity. The average balance of our automobile loans portfolio increased by $14.2 million primarily due to competitive loan programs and pricing. The average balance of our home equity portfolio decreased by $46.7 million as a result of elevated payoff rate driven heavily by increased mortgage refinancing activities as a result of the low interest rate environment and slightly lower utilization rates on existing lines.
Average balances of our interest-bearing liabilities increased by $1.1 billion or 9% in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to growth in our savings and demand deposits which increased by $668.7 million and $480.9 million, respectively. Average balances in other debt decreased by $49.7 million primarily due to the aforementioned maturing of FHLB advances.
Provision for Credit Losses
The provision for credit losses (the “Provision”) reflects our internal calculation and judgment of the appropriate amount of the Allowance. The adoption of ASU No. 2016-13, “Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments” or “CECL” has significantly changed the methodology of how we measure credit losses (see Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information). We maintain the Allowance at levels we believe are appropriate to cover our estimate of expected credit losses over the life of loans in the portfolio as of the end of the reporting period. The Allowance is determined through detailed quarterly analyses of the loan and lease portfolio. The Allowance is based on our loss experience, changes in the economic environment, reasonable and supportable forecasts, as well as an ongoing assessment of credit quality and environmental factors not reflective in historical loss rates. Additional factors that are considered in determining the amount of the Allowance are the level of net charge-offs, non-performing assets, risk-rating migration, as well as changes in our portfolio size and composition. We recorded a Provision of $117.8 million and $16.0 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. This increase was primarily due to management’s best estimate of losses over the life of loans in our portfolio in accordance with the CECL approach, given the economic outlook and forecasts for COVID-19 pandemic driven market changes, as well as the impact of unprecedented intervention of fiscal, monetary and regulatory programs. For further discussion on the Allowance, see the “Corporate Risk Profile - Credit Risk” section in MD&A.
Noninterest Income
Table 3 presents the major components of noninterest income for 2020 and 2019.
n.m.- not meaningful.
Trust and asset management income is comprised of fees earned from the management and administration of trusts and other customer assets. These fees are largely based upon the market value of the assets that we manage and the fee rate charged to customers. Total trust assets under administration were $10.5 billion and $10.3 billion as of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, respectively. Trust and asset management income decreased by $0.8 million or 2% in 2020 compared to 2019 due to decreases in number of accounts and tax service fees.
Mortgage banking income is highly influenced by mortgage interest rates, the housing market, the amount of our loan sales, and our valuation of mortgage servicing rights. Mortgage banking income increased by $4.2 million or 31% in 2020 compared to 2019. This increase was primarily due to increased sales of conforming saleable loans from current production. The increase was offset by a $3.9 million valuation impairment to our mortgage servicing rights.
Service charges on deposit accounts decreased by $5.2 million or 17% in 2020 compared to 2019. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in overdraft fees coupled with a decrease in account analysis fees.
Fees, exchange, and other service charges are primarily comprised of debit and credit card income, fees from ATMs, merchant service activity, and other loan fees and special charges. Fees, exchange, and other service charges decreased by $10.8 million or 19% in 2020 compared to 2019. This decrease was primarily due to lower debit and credit card transaction volume and the Bank’s suspension of ATM surcharge fees from April 1, 2020, through June 30, 2020. In addition, merchant income decreased due to lower sales volume.
Net gains (losses) on sales of investment securities totaled $9.9 million and ($4.0) million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The net gain in 2020 was primarily due to the sale of 80,214 Visa Class B Shares which was partially offset by fees paid to the counterparties of our prior Visa Class B share sale transactions. The net loss in 2019 was primarily due to fees paid to the counterparties of our prior Visa Class B share sale transactions. In addition, in September 2019, Visa announced a reduction of the conversion ratio of its Class B shares from 1.6298 to 1.6228 effective September 27, 2019. As a result, the Company recorded a $0.5 million liability in September 2019, which was paid to previous buyers of our Visa Class B shares in October 2019. We received these Class B shares in 2008 as part of Visa’s initial public offering. These shares are transferable only under limited circumstances until they can be converted into the publicly traded Class A shares. This conversion will not occur until the settlement of certain litigation which is indemnified by Visa members such as the Company. Visa funded an escrow account from its initial public offering to settle these litigation claims. Should this escrow account not be sufficient to cover these litigation claims, Visa is entitled to fund additional amounts to the escrow account by further reducing each member bank’s Class B conversion ratio to unrestricted Class A shares. Concurrent with certain sales of these Visa Class B shares, we entered into an agreement with the buyer that requires payment to the buyer in the event Visa further reduces the conversion ratio. We also contributed to the Bank of Hawaii Foundation 2,800 Visa Class B shares during 2019.
Annuity and insurance income decreased by $3.6 million or 52% in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to a decrease in annuity and life insurance products coupled with a one-time commission received in the first quarter of 2019 related to insurance products offered through a third-party administrator.
Bank-owned life insurance increased by $0.4 million or 5% in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to higher death benefits received in 2020.
Other noninterest income increased by $2.9 million or 11% in 2020 compared to 2019. This increase was primarily due to an $8.2 million increase in fees related to our customer interest rate swap derivatives. This increase was partially offset by a $3.5 million decrease in net gain on sale of leased assets combined with a $1.0 million decrease in foreign currency transactions. These decreases combined with decreases in other income ($0.4 million) and parking service income ($0.3 million).
Noninterest Expense
Table 4 presents the major components of noninterest expense for 2020 and 2019.
n.m.- not meaningful.
Total salaries and benefits decreased by $8.8 million or 4% in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due a $12.8 million decrease in incentive compensation coupled with a $2.3 million decrease in medical, dental, and life insurance primarily due to lower expenses related to lower medical insurance costs. Shared-based compensation decreased by $1.8 million due to forfeiture of unvested restricted stock grants and a lower number of restricted stock units being amortized. These decreases were partially offset by a $4.8 million increase in separation expense coupled with a $1.9 million increase in base salaries due to merit increases.
Net occupancy expense increased by $5.7 million or 17% in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to the decision to permanently close 12 branches in the fourth quarter of 2020 for a total exit cost of $5.6 million. This increase was combined with a $1.0 million increase in security guard services, $0.8 million increase in depreciation, and $0.6 million increase in janitorial supplies. These increases were partially offset by a $1.1 million decrease in utilities.
Net equipment expense increased by $6.2 million or 21% in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to a $2.5 million increase in software license fees and maintenance and coupled with a $2.2 million increase in depreciation expense. In addition, fixed asset disposal and rent expense increased by $0.7 million and $0.5 million, respectively.
Data processing expense decreased by $0.3 million or 1% in 2020 compared to 2019 due to ongoing information technology projects.
Professional fees expense increased by $2.1 million or 21% in 2020 compared to 2019 due to an increase in legal fees and corporate risk.
FDIC insurance increased by $0.6 million or 11% in 2020 compared to 2019 due to an increase in FDIC assessment rates.
Other noninterest expense decreased by $11.0 million or 17% in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to $6.0 million in legal reserves recorded in September 2019 for what was then a tentative settlement of a class action lawsuit regarding the Company’s overdraft practices. This decrease was combined with decreases in business development and travel ($1.9 million), merchant transactions and card processing fees ($1.5 million), insurance ($1.3 million), reserve for unfunded commitments ($1.1 million), delivery and postage ($1.0 million), station and supplies ($0.8 million), special events ($0.8 million), and sponsorships and fundraisers ($0.6 million). These decreases were partially offset by increases in advertising and broker’s charges.
Income Taxes
Table 5 presents our provision for income taxes and effective tax rates for 2020 and 2019:
The provision for income taxes was $35.3 million in 2020, a decrease of $24.6 million or 41% compared to 2019. The effective tax rate was 18.68% in 2020 compared to 20.96% in 2019. The lower effective tax rate in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to lower pretax income and the tax benefit identified and recorded in 2020 for return-to-provision adjustments. This was partially offset by the early buy-out of our equity interest in two leveraged leases, which resulted in $1.9 million and $1.8 million credits to the provision for income taxes in the first and fourth quarters of 2019.
Analysis of Business Segments
Our business segments are Consumer Banking, Commercial Banking, and Treasury and Other. Table 6 summarizes net income from our business segments for 2020 and 2019. Additional information about segment performance is presented in Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Consumer Banking
Net income decreased by $23.8 million or 20% in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to decreases in noninterest income and net interest income, as well as an increase in noninterest expense. This was partly offset by a decrease in the Provision. The decrease in noninterest income was primarily due to the temporary suspension of various ATM fees in the second quarter of 2020, as well as reductions in overdraft income and credit card income due to lower transaction volumes. Additionally, annuity and insurance income decreased primarily due to a one-time commission received in the first quarter of 2019 related to insurance products offered through a third-party administrator coupled with a decrease in annuity and life insurance products. This was partly offset by an increase in mortgage banking income primarily due to increased sales of conforming saleable loans from current production, less a valuation impairment to our mortgage servicing rights. The segment also received a one-time commission in the first quarter of 2019 related to insurance products offered through a third-party administrator. The decrease in net interest income was primarily due to lower average rates in the segment’s deposit portfolio, partially offset by higher average balances in the deposit portfolio. The increase in noninterest expense was primarily due to an increase in allocated expense and an increase in legal reserve in the third quarter of 2019 related to the tentative settlement of a class action lawsuit regarding the Company’s overdraft practices. The decrease in the Provision was due to lower net chargeoffs in the auto loan, installment loan, and home equity loan portfolios.
Commercial Banking
Net income increased by $16.5 million or 16% in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to an increase in interest income, noninterest income, and a decrease in noninterest expense. The increase in net interest income was due to growth in the segment’s loan and deposit portfolios, partially offset by lower rates. Loan growth was primarily driven by increases in commercial and industrial and commercial mortgage portfolio segments while deposit growth was primarily driven by increases in both noninterest bearing and interest bearing demand deposits, partially offset by a decrease in time deposits. The increase in noninterest income is primarily due to an increase in customer derivative program revenue, partially offset by lower deposit and merchant account fees and a decrease in gain on sale of leased assets due to a sale in 2019. The decrease in noninterest expense was primarily due to lower allocated expenses related to support units.
Treasury and Other
Net income decreased by $64.8 million in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to an increase in provision for income taxes and provision for credit losses, partially offset by an increase in noninterest income. The provision for income taxes in this business segment represents the residual amount to arrive at the total tax expense for the Company. The overall effective tax rate decreased to 18.68% in 2020 compared to 20.96% in 2019. The provision for credit losses in this business segment represents the residual provision for credit losses to arrive at the total Provision for the Company. The increase in noninterest income was primarily due to the sale of Visa Class B Shares during the second quarter of 2020.
Other organizational units (Technology, Operations, Marketing, Human Resources, Finance, Credit and Risk Management, and Corporate and Regulatory Administration) included in Treasury and Other provide a wide range of support to the Company's other income earning segments. Expenses incurred by these support units are charged to the business segments through an internal cost allocation process.
Analysis of Statements of Condition
Investment Securities
Table 7 presents the maturity distribution at amortized cost, weighted-average yield to maturity, and fair value of our investment securities.
Weighted-average yields on investment securities available-for-sale are based on amortized cost.
Weighted-average yields on obligations of states and political subdivisions are generally tax-exempt and are computed on a taxable-equivalent basis using a federal statutory tax rate of 21%.
Information for mortgage-backed securities and small business administration securities reflect weighted average life, including anticipated future prepayments.
The carrying value of our investment securities portfolio was $7.1 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.4 billion or 25% compared to December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, our investment securities portfolio was comprised of securities with an average base duration of approximately 3.30 years.
We continually evaluate our investment securities portfolio in response to established asset/liability management objectives, changing market conditions that could affect profitability, and the level of interest rate risk to which we are exposed. These evaluations may cause us to change the level of funds we deploy into investment securities, change the composition of our investment securities portfolio, and change the proportion of investments made into the available-for-sale and held-to-maturity investment categories.
Mortgage-backed securities issued by Ginnie Mae, Fannie Mae, and Freddie Mac continue to be the largest concentrations in our portfolio. As of December 31, 2020, our portfolio of Ginnie Mae mortgage-backed securities was primarily comprised of securities issued in 2008 or later. As of December 31, 2020, these mortgage-backed securities were all AAA-rated, with a low probability of a change in their credit ratings in the near future. As of December 31, 2020, our available-for-sale investment securities portfolio was comprised of securities with an average base duration of approximately 3.38 years.
Gross unrealized gains in our investment securities portfolio were $158.9 million as of December 31, 2020, and $51.1 million as of December 31, 2019. Gross unrealized losses on our temporarily impaired investment securities were $2.9 million as of December 31, 2020, and $19.2 million as of December 31, 2019. The gross unrealized loss positions were primarily related to mortgage-backed securities issued by Ginnie Mae, Fannie Mae, and Freddie Mac. The overall increase in net unrealized gains was primarily due to the decrease in interest rates during 2020. The gross unrealized losses were due in part to our corporate bond portfolio consisting of debt securities issued by large multinational banks. The unrealized losses primarily resulted from an increase in credit spreads due to the economic uncertainty related to COVID-19. However, such credit spreads have tightened significantly from their widest levels experienced in the first quarter of 2020. In addition, banks have built up substantial capital buffers since the financial crisis of 2008 which helps to mitigate the likelihood of credit losses. As of December 31, 2020, there have been no payment defaults nor do we currently expect any future payment defaults. Furthermore, we do not intend to sell these securities, and it is not more likely than not that we will be required to sell the investment securities before recovery of their amortized cost basis, which may be at maturity.
The remainder of our debt securities in unrealized loss positions as of December 31, 2020, consisted of debt securities issued by U.S. government agencies or U.S. government-sponsored enterprises. These securities carry the explicit and/or implicit guarantee of the U.S. government, are widely recognized as “risk free,” and have a long history of zero credit loss. Total gross unrealized losses were primarily attributable to changes in interest rates, relative to when the investment securities were purchased, and not due to the credit quality of the investment securities. We do not intend to sell the investment securities that were in an unrealized loss position and it is not more likely than not that we will be required to sell the investment securities before recovery of their amortized cost basis, which may be at maturity.
See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
The Company’s corporate bond holdings as of December 31, 2020, had a fair value of $236.9 million. Of this total, $32.9 million or 14% was fully guaranteed by the Export-Import Bank of the United States, an agency of the U.S. government. Of the remaining $204.0 million of corporate bonds, all of the remaining corporate bonds were credit-rated A- or better by at least one nationally recognized statistical rating organization.
Loans and Leases
Table 8 presents the composition of our loan and lease portfolio by major categories.
1 Comprised of other revolving credit, installment, and lease financing.
Total loans and leases were $11.9 billion as of December 31, 2020. This represents a $949.1 million or 9% increase from December 31, 2019, primarily due to growth in our commercial lending portfolios.
The commercial loan and lease portfolio is comprised of commercial and industrial loans, commercial mortgages, construction loans, and lease financing. Commercial and industrial loans are made primarily to corporations, middle market, and small businesses for the purpose of financing equipment acquisition, expansion, working capital, and other general business purposes. Commercial mortgages and construction loans are offered to real estate investors, developers, and builders primarily domiciled in Hawaii. Commercial mortgages are secured by first mortgages on commercial real estate at loan-to-value ratios generally not exceeding 75%. The commercial properties are predominantly developments such as retail centers, apartments, industrial properties, and to a lesser extent, specialized properties such as hotels. The primary source of repayment for investor property is cash flow from the property and for owner-occupied property is the operating cash flow from the business. Construction loans are for the purchase or construction of a property for which repayment will be generated by the property. We classify loans as construction until the completion of the construction phase. Following construction, if a loan is retained, the loan is reclassified to the commercial mortgage category. Lease financing consists of sales-type leases and leveraged leases and are used by commercial customers to finance capital purchases. Although our primary market is Hawaii, the commercial portfolio contains loans to some borrowers based on the U.S. Mainland, including some Shared National Credits.
Commercial loans and leases were $5.1 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $886.9 million or 21% from December 31, 2019. Commercial and industrial loans increased by $496.1 million or 36% from December 31, 2019, primarily due to origination of new loans under the Paycheck Protection Program. Commercial mortgage loans increased by $336.8 million or 13% from December 31, 2019, primarily due to continued demand from new and existing customers. Construction loans increased by $65.6 million or 34% from December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase in construction activity in our market. Lease financing decreased by $11.7 million or 10% from December 31, 2019, primarily due to a single lessee exercising its early buy-out option on a leveraged lease in the first quarter and a $3.0 million residual value impairment of a leveraged lease recorded in the fourth quarter of 2020.
The consumer loan and lease portfolio is comprised of residential mortgage loans, home equity lines and loans, indirect auto loans and leases, and other consumer loans including personal credit lines, direct installment loans, and rewards-based consumer credit cards. These products are generally offered in the geographic markets we serve. Although we offer a variety of products, our residential mortgage loan portfolio is primarily comprised of fixed-rate loans concentrated in Hawaii. We also offer a variety of home equity lines and loans, usually secured by second mortgages on residential property of the borrower. Automobile lending activities include loans and leases secured by new or used automobiles. We originate automobile loans and leases on an indirect basis through selected dealerships. Direct installment loans are generally unsecured and are often used for personal expenses or for debt consolidation.
Consumer loans and leases were $6.8 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $62.3 million or 1% from December 31, 2019. Residential mortgage loans increased by $239.4 million or 6% from December 31, 2019, primarily due to higher loan originations, partially offset by an increase in payoff activity. Other consumer loans decreased by $94.1 million or 19% from December 31, 2019, primarily due to pay downs in our installment loans. Home equity decreased by $71.5 million or less than 1% from December 31, 2019, as a result of elevated payoff rates driven heavily by increased mortgage refinancing activities as a result of the low interest rate environment, and slightly lower utilization rates on existing lines. Automobile loans decreased primarily as a result of multiple COVID-19 shelter-in-place and safer-at-home orders by the State of Hawaii and Guam resulting in dealership closures and limited automobile sales.
See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements and the “Corporate Risk Profile - Credit Risk” section of MD&A for more information on our loan and lease portfolio.
Table 9 presents the geographic distribution of our loan and lease portfolio.
For secured loans and leases, classification as U.S. Mainland is made based on where the collateral is located. For unsecured loans and leases, classification as U.S. Mainland is made based on the location where the majority of the borrower’s business operations are conducted.
Comprised of other revolving credit, installment, and lease financing.
Our commercial and consumer lending activities are concentrated primarily in Hawaii and the Pacific Islands. Our commercial loan and lease portfolio to borrowers based on the U.S. Mainland includes leveraged lease financing and participation in Shared National Credits. Our consumer loan and lease portfolio includes limited lending activities on the U.S. Mainland.
Our Hawaii loan and lease portfolio increased by $901.0 million or 9% from December 31, 2019.
Table 10 presents a maturity distribution for selected loan categories.
1 Based on contractual maturities.
2 As of December 31, 2020, loans maturing after one year consisted of $741.2 million in variable rate loans and $1.0 billion in fixed rate loans.
Goodwill
Goodwill was $31.5 million as of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, based on our qualitative assessment, there were no reporting units where we believed it was more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit was less than its carrying amount, including goodwill. As a result, we had no reporting units where there was a reasonable possibility of failing Step 1 of the goodwill impairment test. See Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on our goodwill impairment policy.
Other Assets
Other assets were $435.3 million as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $162.6 million or 60% from December 31, 2019. This increase was due to a $67.2 million increase in derivative financial instruments, which was primarily due to fair value increases of our interest rate swap agreement assets, which are impacted by prevailing interest rates. Low-income housing and other equity investments increased by $58.3 million due to additional funding of existing projects. Pledged collateral increased by $25.4 million on our uncleared interest rate swap agreements in liability positions due to the lower rate environment which is included in other assets. Deferred taxes increased by $16.7 million primarily due to temporary differences between financial reporting and income tax basis of the allowance for credit losses. Deferred compensation plan assets increased by $11.9 million primarily due to an increase in the executive deferred compensation plan. See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on the composition of our other assets.
Deposits
Table 11 presents the components of our deposits by major customer categories as of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019.
Total deposits were $18.2 billion as of December 31, 2020, a $2.4 billion or 15% increase from December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to an increase in consumer and commercial deposits. Consumer deposits increased by $1.2 billion due to an increase in core deposits. Commercial deposits increased by $978.6 million or 15% due to a $999.2 million increase in core deposits offset by a $20.6 million decrease in time deposits. In addition, public and other deposits increased by $219.3 million or 16% due to an increase in public demand deposits of $355.4 million offset by a $136.1 million decrease in time deposits.
Table 12 presents the components of our savings deposits as of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019.
Securities Sold Under Agreements to Repurchase
Table 13 presents the composition of our securities sold under agreements to repurchase.
Securities sold under agreements to repurchase as of December 31, 2020, decreased by $3.7 million or 1% from December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, the weighted-average maturity was 3.2 years for our repurchase agreements with government entities and 4.0 years for our repurchase agreements with private institutions. Some of our repurchase agreements with private institutions may be terminated at earlier specified dates by the private institution or in some cases by either the private institution or the Company. If all such agreements were to terminate at the earliest possible date, the weighted-average maturity for our repurchase agreements with private institutions would decrease to 3.5 years. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, the weighted-average interest rate for repurchase agreements with government entities were 1.49%, respectively, while the weighted-average interest rate for repurchase agreements with private institutions as of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, was 2.39% and 2.68%, respectively, with all rates being fixed. Each of our repurchase agreements is accounted for as collateralized financing arrangements (i.e., a secured borrowing) and not as a sale and subsequent repurchase of securities.
In July 2020, we terminated three of our repurchase agreements, with an aggregate total of $200.0 million, with one private institution. These repurchase agreements were scheduled to mature in June 2022 and had a weighted-average interest rate of 2.742%. These terminated repurchase agreements were replaced with one $200.0 million repurchase agreement with the same private institution. The new repurchase agreement matures in July 2025 and has an interest rate of 1.835%. See Note 9 and 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
Other Debt
Other debt was $60.5 million as of December 31, 2020, a decreases of $25.1 million or 29% from December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to a $25.0 million FHLB advance which matured during the first quarter of 2020. As of December 31, 2020, this balance was mainly comprised of $50.0 million in FHLB advances with a weighted-average interest rate of 1.19% and maturity dates during 2024. These advances were primarily for asset/liability management purposes. As of December 31, 2020, our available capacity under our line of credit with the FHLB was $2.8 billion.
Pension and Postretirement Plan Obligations
Retirement benefits payable were $51.2 million as of December 31, 2020, a $6.7 million or 15% increase from December 31, 2019. Our pension and postretirement benefit obligations and net periodic benefit cost are actuarially determined based on a number of key assumptions, including the discount rate, the expected return on plan assets, and the health-care cost trend rate. The accounting for pension and postretirement benefit plans reflect the long-term nature of the obligations and the investment horizon of the plan assets. The increase in retirement benefits payable was primarily due to change in discount rate.
The discount rate is used to determine the present value of future benefit obligations and the net periodic benefit cost. The discount rate used to value the present value of future benefit obligations as of each year-end is the rate used to estimate the net periodic benefit cost for the following year. Table 14 presents a sensitivity analysis of a 25 basis point change in discount rates to the pension and postretirement benefit plan’s net periodic benefit cost and benefit obligations:
See Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on our pension and postretirement benefit plans.
Foreign Activities
Cross-border outstandings are defined as loans (including accrued interest), acceptances, interest-bearing deposits with other banks, other interest-bearing investments, and any other monetary assets which are denominated in dollars or other non-local currency. As of December 31, 2020, December 31, 2019, and December 31, 2018, we did not have cross-border outstandings to any foreign country which exceeded 0.75% of our total assets.
Corporate Risk Profile
Managing risk is an essential part of successfully operating our business. Management believes that the most prominent risk exposures for the Company are credit risk, market risk, liquidity risk management, capital management, and operational risk.
Credit Risk
Credit risk is the risk that borrowers or counterparties will be unable or unwilling to repay their obligations in accordance with the underlying contractual terms. We manage and control credit risk in the loan and lease portfolio by adhering to well-defined underwriting criteria and account administration standards established by management. Written credit policies document underwriting standards, approval levels, exposure limits, and other limits or standards deemed necessary and prudent. Portfolio diversification at the obligor, industry, product, and/or geographic location levels is actively managed to mitigate concentration risk. In addition, credit risk management also includes an independent credit review process that assesses compliance with commercial and consumer credit policies, risk ratings, and other critical credit information. In addition to implementing risk management practices that are based upon established and sound lending practices, we adhere to sound credit principles. We understand and evaluate our customers’ borrowing needs and capacity to repay, in conjunction with their character and history.
Commercial and industrial loans are made primarily for the purpose of financing equipment acquisition, expansion, working capital, and other general business purposes. Lease financing consists of sales-type leases and leveraged leases that are used by commercial customers to finance capital purchases ranging from computer equipment to transportation equipment. The credit decisions for these transactions are based upon an assessment of the overall financial capacity of the applicant. A determination is made as to the applicant’s ability to repay in accordance with the proposed terms as well as an overall assessment of the risks involved. In addition to an evaluation of the applicant’s financial condition, a determination is made of the probable adequacy of the primary and secondary sources of repayment, such as additional collateral or personal guarantees, to be relied upon in the transaction. Credit agency reports of the applicant’s credit history supplement the analysis of the applicant’s creditworthiness.
Commercial mortgages and construction loans are offered to real estate investors, developers, builders, and owner-occupants primarily domiciled in Hawaii. These loans are secured by first mortgages on real estate at loan-to-value (“LTV”) ratios deemed appropriate based on the property type, location, overall quality, and sponsorship. Generally, these LTV ratios do not exceed 75%. The commercial properties are predominantly developments such as retail centers, apartments, industrial properties and, to a lesser extent, more specialized properties such as hotels. Substantially our entire commercial mortgage loans are secured by properties located in our primary market area.
In the underwriting of our commercial mortgage loans, we obtain appraisals for the underlying properties. Decisions to lend are based on the economic fundamentals of the property and the creditworthiness of the borrower. In evaluating a proposed commercial mortgage loan, we primarily emphasize the ratio of the property’s projected net cash flows to the loan’s debt service requirement. The debt service coverage ratio normally is not less than 125% and it is computed after deducting for a vacancy factor and property expenses as appropriate. In addition, a personal guarantee of the loan or a portion thereof is sometimes required from the principal(s) of the borrower. We typically require title insurance insuring the priority of our lien, fire, and extended coverage casualty insurance, and flood insurance, if appropriate, in order to protect our security interest in the underlying property. In addition, business interruption insurance or other insurance may be required. Owner-occupant commercial mortgage loans are underwritten based upon the cash flow of the business provided that the real estate asset is utilized in the operation of the business. Real estate is evaluated independently as a secondary source of repayment. As noted above, LTV ratios generally do not exceed 75%.
Construction loans are underwritten against projected cash flows derived from rental income, business income from an owner-occupant, or the sale of the property to an end-user. We may mitigate the risks associated with these types of loans by requiring fixed-price construction contracts, performance and payment bonding, controlled disbursements, and pre-sale contracts or pre-lease agreements.
We offer a variety of first mortgage and junior lien loans to consumers within our markets with residential home mortgages comprising our largest loan category. These loans are secured by a primary residence, secondary residence, or investor property and are underwritten using traditional underwriting systems to assess the credit risks and financial capacity and repayment ability of the consumer. Decisions are primarily based on LTV ratios, debt-to-income (“DTI”) ratios, liquidity, and credit scores. LTV ratios generally do not exceed 80%, although higher levels are permitted with mortgage insurance. We offer variable rate mortgage loans with interest rates that are subject to change every six months after the third, fifth, seventh, or tenth year, depending on the product and are based on the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”). Variable rate mortgage loans are underwritten at fully-indexed interest rates. We do not offer payment-option facilities, sub-prime or Alt-A loans, or any product with negative amortization. We selectively offer interest-only mortgage loans to Private Banking clients.
Home equity loans are secured by both first and second liens on residential property of the borrower. The underwriting terms for the home equity product generally permits borrowing availability, in the aggregate, up to 85% of the value of the collateral property at the time of origination. We offer fixed and variable rate home equity loans, with variable rate loans underwritten at fully-indexed interest rates. Our procedures for underwriting home equity loans include an assessment of an applicant’s overall financial capacity and repayment ability. Decisions are primarily based on LTV ratios, DTI ratios, and credit scores. Maximum amount and LTVs are determined by collateral value and channel.
Automobile lending activities include loans and leases secured by new or used automobiles. We originate automobile loans and leases on an indirect basis through selected dealerships in Hawaii, Guam and Saipan. Our procedures for underwriting automobile loans include an assessment of an applicant’s overall financial capacity and repayment ability, credit history, and the ability to meet existing obligations and payments on the proposed loan. Although an applicant’s creditworthiness is the primary consideration, the underwriting process also includes a comparison of the value of the collateral security to the proposed loan amount. We require borrowers to maintain full coverage automobile insurance on automobile loans and leases, with the Bank listed as either the loss payee or additional insured.
Economic conditions in Hawaii were sharply impacted by a shut-down of tourism at the end of March 2020 in an attempt to isolate the State from additional travel-related transmission of COVID-19. Our overall credit risk position reflects these stagnant economic trends and our loan portfolio growth and composition.
Non-Performing Assets and Accruing Loans and Leases Past Due 90 Days or More
Table 15 presents a five-year history of non-performing assets and accruing loans and leases past due 90 days or more.
Comprised of other revolving credit, installment, and lease financing.
Table 16 presents the activity in Non-Performing Assets (“NPAs”) for 2020:
NPAs consist of non-accrual loans and leases, and foreclosed real estate. Changes in the level of non-accrual loans and leases typically represent increases for loans and leases that reach a specified past due status, offset by reductions for loans and leases that are charged-off, paid down, sold, transferred to foreclosed real estate, or are no longer classified as non-accrual because they have returned to accrual status.
Total NPAs were $18.5 million as of December 31, 2020, a decrease of $1.6 million or 8% from December 31, 2019. The decrease was experienced primarily in the commercial lending portfolio. The ratio of our NPAs to total loans and leases, and foreclosed real estate was 0.15% as of December 31, 2020, and 0.18% as of December 31, 2019.
Commercial mortgage non-accrual loans decreased by $0.7 million or 8% from December 31, 2019. The largest component of our NPAs are commercial mortgage loans.
Residential mortgage non-accrual loans decreased by $0.9 million or 22% from December 31, 2019, primarily due to paydowns and payoffs. As of December 31, 2020, our residential mortgage non-accrual loans were comprised of five loans with a weighted average current LTV ratio of 74%.
Foreclosed real estate represents property acquired as the result of borrower defaults on loans. Foreclosed real estate is recorded at fair value, less estimated selling costs, at the time of foreclosure. On an ongoing basis, properties are appraised as required by market conditions and applicable regulations. Foreclosed real estate decreased by $0.4 million or 15% from December 31, 2019, primarily due to the sale of three residential properties during 2020.
Loans and Leases Past Due 90 Days or More and Still Accruing Interest
Loans and leases in this category are 90 days or more past due, as to principal or interest, and are still accruing interest because they are well-secured and in the process of collection. Loans and leases past due 90 days or more and still accruing interest were $10.5 million as of December 31, 2020, a $2.1 million or 25% increase from December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily in our residential mortgage portfolio.
If interest due on the balances of all non-accrual loans as of December 31, 2020, had been accrued under the original terms, approximately $0.9 million in total interest income would have been recorded in 2020.
Loans Modified in a Troubled Debt Restructuring
Table 17 presents information on loans whose terms have been modified in a TDR:
Comprised of other revolving credit and installment financing.
Loans modified in a TDR increased by $3.4 million or 5% from December 31, 2019. Commercial and industrial loans is our largest TDR loan class. As of December 31, 2020, $68.1 million or 94% of loans modified in a TDR were performing in accordance with their modified contractual terms and were on accrual status.
Generally, loans modified in a TDR are returned to accrual status after the borrower has demonstrated performance under the modified terms by making at least six consecutive payments.
The Company began offering short-term loan and lease modifications to assist borrowers during the COVID-19 pandemic. These modifications generally involve principal and/or interest payment deferrals for up to six months. As the COVID-19 pandemic persists in negatively impacting the economy, the Company continues to offer additional loan modifications to borrowers struggling as a result of COVID-19. Similar to the initial modifications granted, the additional round of loan modifications are granted specifically under Section 4013 of the CARES Act and generally involve principal and/or interest payment deferrals for up to an additional six months for commercial and consumer loans, and principal-only deferrals for up to an additional 12 months for selected commercial loans. The CARES Act, along with a joint agency statement issued by banking agencies, provide that modifications made in response to COVID-19 to borrowers who qualify are not required to be accounted for as a TDR. Accordingly, the Company does not account for such qualifying modifications as TDRs.
As of December 31, 2020, these COVID-19 related loan and lease modifications totaled $311.6 million (210 loans and leases) for the commercial segment and $178.1 million (1,920 loans and leases) for the consumer segment. See Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 4 Loans and Leases and the Allowance for Credit Losses for more information.
Reserve for Credit Losses
The reserve for credit losses consists of the Allowance and the Unfunded Reserve. As of December 31, 2020, the reserve for credit losses also included a reserve for accrued interest receivable related to loans in which interest payment forbearances were granted to borrowers impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Table 18 presents the activity in the Company’s reserve for credit losses for the years ended December 31:
Comprised of other revolving credit, installment, and lease financing.
Included in this analysis is activity related to the Company’s reserve for unfunded commitments, which is separately recorded in other liabilities in the consolidated statements of condition.
On December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a $2.7 million reserve on accrued interest receivable related to loans in which interest payment forbearances were granted to borrowers impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The reserve was recorded as a contra-asset against accrued interest receivable with the offset to provision for credit losses.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Table 19 presents the allocation of the Allowance by loan and lease category.
Comprised of other revolving credit, installment, and lease financing.
CECL Adoption
Upon adoption of CECL, the Company recorded a $1.7 million decrease to the Allowance on January 1, 2020. This “Day 1” adjustment decreased the Allowance as of January 1, 2020, to $108.3 million or 0.99% of total loans and leases outstanding, compared with an Allowance of $110.0 million or 1.00% of total loans and leases outstanding as of December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to an $18.8 million decrease to the Allowance of the commercial portfolio. This decrease was largely the result of the Company’s use of updated historical loss rates with refined segmentation based on portfolio class (commercial & industrial, commercial mortgage, construction and lease financing) in calculating the Allowance baseline, compared to the loss rate factors used in the incurred approach. The decrease to the Allowance of the commercial portfolio was largely offset by a $17.1 million increase to the Allowance of the consumer portfolio, which was primarily due to the impact of longer duration portfolio segments. Our one-year reasonable and supportable forecast reflected a generally stable asset quality and economic outlook. Upon adoption of CECL, the Company recorded a $3.3 million decrease to the Unfunded Reserve. This “Day 1” adjustment decreased the Unfunded Reserve as of January 1, 2020, to $3.5 million, compared to $6.8 million as of December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily reflected in the commercial portfolio, due largely to the same reasons explained for the decrease in the Allowance for the commercial portfolio.
Going forward, the impact of utilizing the CECL approach to calculate the reserve for credit losses will be significantly influenced by the composition, characteristics and credit risk in the loan portfolio, the prevailing economic conditions and forecasts utilized, and other external and internal factors. Material changes to these and other relevant factors may result in greater volatility to the reserve for credit losses, and therefore, greater volatility to our reported earnings.
Allowance for Credit Losses
As of December 31, 2020, the Allowance was $216.3 million or 1.81% of total loans and leases outstanding (1.89% excluding PPP loans), compared with an Allowance of $108.3 million or 0.99% of total loans and leases outstanding as of January 1, 2020, (after the CECL Day 1 adjustment). The increase in the Allowance and the ratio of Allowance to loans and leases outstanding was primarily due to management’s best estimate of losses over the life of loans in our portfolio in accordance with the CECL approach, given the economic outlook and forecasts for COVID-19 pandemic driven market changes, as well as the impact of unprecedented intervention of fiscal, monetary and regulatory programs. The CECL approach requires an estimate of the credit losses expected over the life of an exposure (or pool of exposures). It removes the incurred loss approach’s threshold that delayed the recognition of a credit loss until it was probable a loss event was incurred.
Net charge-offs of loans and leases were $7.1 million or 0.06% of total average loans and leases in 2020 compared to $12.7 million or 0.12% of total average loans and leases in 2019. Net charge-offs in our consumer portfolios were $7.8 million in 2020 compared to $11.4 million in 2019. This decrease was primarily reflected in our other and automobile portfolio. Net recoveries in our commercial portfolios were $0.6 million in 2020 compared to net charge-offs of $1.2 million in 2019. This increase in recoveries was primarily reflected in our commercial and industrial portfolio.
Although we determine the amount of each component of the Allowance separately, the Allowance as a whole was considered appropriate by management as of December 31, 2020, based on our ongoing analysis of estimated probable credit losses, credit risk profiles, economic conditions, coverage ratios, and other relevant factors.
The allocation of the Allowance to our commercial portfolio segment increased by $11.0 million or 15% from December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to a $13.8 million increase in the Allowance allocated to the commercial and industrial portfolio due to loan growth partially offset by a $6.6 million decrease in the Allowance allocated to the commercial mortgage portfolio.
The allocation of the Allowance to our consumer portfolio segment increased by $95.2 million from December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to current asset quality metrics and economic conditions.
See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on the Allowance and credit quality indicators.
Reserve for Unfunded Commitments
The Unfunded Reserve was $2.4 million as of December 31, 2020, a decrease of $1.1 million from January 1, 2020, (after the CECL Day 1 adjustment) due to the updated historical loss rates and segmentation.
Other Credit Risks
In the normal course of business, we serve the needs of state and political subdivisions in multiple capacities, including traditional banking products such as deposit services, and by investing in municipal debt securities. The carrying value of our municipal debt securities was $58.6 million as of December 31, 2020, and $109.9 million as of December 31, 2019. We also maintained investments in corporate bonds with a carrying value of $236.6 million as of December 31, 2020, and $351.3 million as of December 31, 2019. We are exposed to credit risk in these investments should the issuer of a security be unable to meet its financial obligations. This may result in the issuer failing to make scheduled interest payments and/or being unable to repay the principal upon maturity.
Our use of derivative financial instruments exposes the Company to counterparty credit risk. See Note 17 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
Market Risk
Market risk is the potential of loss arising from adverse changes in interest rates and prices. We are exposed to market risk as a consequence of the normal course of conducting our business activities. Our market risk management process involves measuring, monitoring, controlling, and mitigating risks that can significantly impact our statements of income and condition. In this management process, market risks are balanced with expected returns in an effort to enhance earnings performance while limiting volatility.
Our primary market risk exposure is interest rate risk.
Interest Rate Risk
The objective of our interest rate risk management process is to maximize net interest income while operating within acceptable limits established for interest rate risk and maintaining adequate levels of funding and liquidity. The potential cash flows, sales, or replacement value of many of our assets and liabilities, especially those that earn or pay interest, are sensitive to changes in the general level of interest rates. This interest rate risk arises primarily from our core business activities of extending loans and accepting deposits. Our investment securities portfolio is also subject to significant interest rate risk.
Many factors affect our exposure to changes in interest rates, such as general economic and financial conditions, customer preferences, historical pricing relationships, and repricing characteristics of financial instruments. Our earnings are affected not only by general economic conditions but also by the monetary and fiscal policies of the U.S. and its agencies, particularly the Federal Reserve Bank (the “FRB”). The monetary policies of the FRB can influence the overall growth of loans, investment securities, and deposits and the level of interest rates earned on assets and paid for liabilities.
In managing interest rate risk, we, through the Asset/Liability Management Committee (“ALCO”), measure short and long-term sensitivities to changes in interest rates. The ALCO, which is comprised of members of executive management, utilizes several techniques to manage interest rate risk, which include:
•
adjusting the statement of condition mix or altering the interest rate characteristics of assets and liabilities;
•
changing product pricing strategies;
•
modifying characteristics of the investment securities portfolio; and
•
using derivative financial instruments.
Our use of derivative financial instruments, as detailed in Note 17 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, has generally been limited. This is due to natural on-balance sheet hedges arising out of offsetting interest rate exposures from loans and investment securities with deposits and other interest-bearing liabilities. In particular, the investment securities portfolio is utilized to manage the interest rate exposure and sensitivity to within the guidelines and limits established by the ALCO. We utilize natural and offsetting economic hedges in an effort to reduce the need to employ off-balance sheet derivative financial instruments to hedge interest rate risk exposures. Expected movements in interest rates are also considered in managing interest rate risk. Thus, as interest rates change, we may use different techniques to manage interest rate risk.
A key element in our ongoing process to measure and monitor interest rate risk is the utilization of an asset/liability simulation model that attempts to capture the dynamic nature of the statement of condition. The model is used to estimate and measure the statement of condition sensitivity to changes in interest rates. These estimates are based on assumptions about the behavior of loan and deposit pricing, repayment rates on mortgage-based assets, and principal amortization and maturities on other financial instruments. The model’s analytics include the effects of standard prepayment options on mortgages and customer withdrawal options for deposits. While such assumptions are inherently uncertain, we believe that our assumptions are reasonable.
We utilize net interest income simulations to analyze short-term income sensitivities to changes in interest rates. Table 20 presents, for the twelve months subsequent to December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, an estimate of the change in net interest income that would result from a gradual and immediate change in interest rates, moving in a parallel fashion over the entire yield curve, relative to the measured base case scenario. The base case scenario assumes the statement of condition and interest rates are generally unchanged. Based on our net interest income simulation as of December 31, 2020, net interest income is expected to increase as interest rates rise. This is due in part to our strategy to maintain a relatively short investment portfolio duration. In addition, rising interest rates would drive higher rates on loans and investment securities, as well as induce a slower pace of premium amortization on certain securities within our investment portfolio. However, lower interest rates would likely cause a decline in net interest income as lower rates would lead to lower yields on loans and investment securities, as well as drive higher premium amortization on existing investment securities. Based on our net interest income simulation as of December 31, 2020, net interest income sensitivity to changes in interest rates for the twelve months subsequent to December 31, 2020, was slightly more sensitive in comparison to the sensitivity profile for the twelve months subsequent to December 31, 2019. Year-over-year asset sensitivity increased due to faster forecasted prepayments for mortgage-related assets due to the lower rate environment, higher liquidity, as well as higher balances in mortgage-backed securities and in floating rate commercial mortgage loans.
To analyze the impact of changes in interest rates in a more realistic manner, non-parallel interest rate scenarios are also simulated. These non-parallel interest rate scenarios indicate that net interest income may decrease from the base case scenario should the yield curve flatten or become inverted for a period of time. Conversely, if the yield curve were to steepen, net interest income may increase.
Other Market Risks
In addition to interest rate risk, we are exposed to other forms of market risk in our normal business transactions. Foreign currency and foreign exchange contracts expose us to a small degree of foreign currency risk. These transactions are primarily executed on behalf of customers. Our trust and asset management income is at risk to fluctuations in the market values of underlying assets, particularly debt and equity securities. Also, our share-based compensation expense is dependent on the fair value of our stock options, restricted stock units, and restricted stock at the date of grant. The fair value of stock options, restricted stock units, and restricted stock is impacted by the market price of the Parent’s common stock on the date of grant and is at risk to changes in equity markets, general economic conditions, and other factors.
Liquidity Risk Management
The objective of our liquidity risk management process is to manage cash flow and liquidity in an effort to provide continuous access to sufficient, reasonably priced funds. Funding requirements are impacted by loan originations and refinancings, deposit balance changes, liability issuances and settlements, and off-balance sheet funding commitments. We consider and comply with various regulatory guidelines regarding required liquidity levels and regularly monitor our liquidity position in light of the changing economic environment and customer activity. Based on ongoing liquidity assessments, we may alter our asset, liability, and off-balance sheet positions. The ALCO monitors sources and uses of funds and modifies asset and liability positions as liquidity requirements change. This process, combined with our ability to raise funds in money and capital markets and through private placements, provides flexibility in managing the exposure to liquidity risk.
In an effort to satisfy our liquidity needs, we actively manage our assets and liabilities. We have access to immediate liquid resources in the form of cash which is primarily on deposit with the FRB. Potential sources of liquidity also include investment securities in our available-for-sale securities portfolio, our ability to sell loans in the secondary market, and to secure borrowings from the FRB and FHLB. Our held-to-maturity securities, while not intended for sale, may also be utilized in repurchase agreements to obtain funding. Our core deposits have historically provided us with a long-term source of stable and relatively low cost source of funding. Additional funding is available through the issuance of long-term debt or equity.
Maturities and payments on outstanding loans and investment securities also provide a steady flow of funds. Liquidity is further enhanced by our ability to pledge loans to access secured borrowings from the FHLB and FRB. As of December 31, 2020, we could have borrowed an additional $2.8 billion from the FHLB and an additional $427.9 million from the FRB based on the amount of collateral pledged.
We continued our focus on maintaining a strong liquidity position throughout 2020. As of December 31, 2020, cash and cash equivalents were $614.1 million, the carrying value of our available-for-sale investment securities was $3.8 billion, and total deposits were $18.2 billion. As of December 31, 2020, our available-for-sale investment securities portfolio was comprised of securities with an average base duration of approximately 3.38 years.
Capital Management
We actively manage capital, commensurate with our risk profile, in our efforts to enhance shareholder value. We also seek to maintain capital levels for the Company and the Bank at amounts in excess of the regulatory “well-capitalized” thresholds. Periodically, we may respond to market conditions by implementing changes to our overall balance sheet positioning to manage our capital position.
The Company and the Bank are each subject to regulatory capital requirements administered by the federal banking agencies. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements could cause certain mandatory and discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, would likely have a material effect on our financial statements. Under capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action, the Company and the Bank must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative and qualitative measures. These measures were established by regulation intended to ensure capital adequacy. As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s capital levels remained characterized as “well-capitalized.” The Company’s regulatory capital ratios are presented in Table 21 below. Capital ratios are calculated using the regulatory capital rule that allows a five-year transition period related to the adoption of CECL. There have been no conditions or events since December 31, 2020, that management believes have changed either the Company’s or the Bank’s capital classifications.
As of December 31, 2020, shareholders’ equity was $1.4 billion, an increase of $87.7 million or 7% from December 31, 2019. Earnings for 2020 of $153.8 million, other comprehensive income of $38.9 million, common stock issuances of $9.2 million, share-based compensation of $7.6 million and cumulative change in accounting principle of $3.6 million were offset by cash dividends paid of $107.4 million and common stock repurchases of $18.0 million. In 2020, included in the amount of common stock repurchased were 156,358 shares repurchased under our share repurchase program. These shares were repurchased at an average cost per share of $89.32 and a total cost of $14.0 million. From the beginning of our share repurchase program in July 2001 through December 31, 2020, we repurchased a total of 57.1 million shares of common stock and returned a total of nearly $2.3 billion to our shareholders at an average cost of $40.51 per share.
Remaining buyback authority was $113.1 million as of December 31, 2020. In March 2020, we suspended share repurchases in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe the suspension, while conservative, is prudent given uncertainty regarding the length and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic. The actual amount and timing of future share repurchases, if any, will depend on market and economic conditions, regulatory rules, applicable SEC rules, and various other factors.
In January 2021, the Parent’s Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.67 per share on the Parent’s outstanding shares. The dividend will be payable on March 12, 2021, to shareholders of record at the close of business on February 26, 2021.
Table 21 presents a five-year history of activities and balances in our capital accounts, along with key capital ratios.
Includes unrealized gains and losses on available-for-sale investment securities, minimum pension liability adjustments, and common stock issuances under share-based compensation and related tax benefits.
Regulatory Initiatives Affecting the Banking Industry
Basel III
Under final FRB and FDIC approved rules implementing the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision’s capital guidelines for U.S. banks minimum requirements increased for both the quantity and quality of capital held by the Company. The Basel III capital standards substantially revised the risk-based capital requirements applicable to bank holding companies and their depository institution subsidiaries, including the definitions and the components of Tier 1 capital and Total Capital, the method of evaluating risk-weighted assets, institution of a capital conservation buffer, and other matters affecting regulatory capital ratios. Strict eligibility criteria for regulatory capital instruments were also implemented under the rules.
The phase-in period for the final rules became effective for the Company on January 1, 2015, with full compliance with all of the final rules’ requirements phased in over a multi-year schedule, which were fully implemented on January 1, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s capital levels remained characterized as “well-capitalized” under the new rules.
Management continues to monitor regulatory developments and their potential impact to the Company’s liquidity requirements.
Stress Testing
Enactment of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act in May 2018 significantly altered several provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act, including how stress tests are run. Bank holding companies with assets of less than $100 billion, such as the Company, are no longer subject to company-run stress testing requirements in section 165(i)(2) of the Dodd-Frank Act, including publishing a summary of results. At this time, the Company continues to run internal stress tests as a component of our comprehensive risk management and capital planning process.
CARES Act
On March 27, 2020, President Trump signed the CARES Act into law. The CARES Act established several new temporary U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”) loan programs to assist U.S. small businesses through the COVID-19 pandemic. One of the new loan programs is the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”), an expansion of the SBA’s 7(a) loan program and the Economic Injury Disaster Loan Program. Many of the provisions of the CARES Act, including the availability of PPP loans, were renewed or extended by the Coronavirus Response and Relief Supplemental Appropriations Act on December 21, 2020.
The PPP provides loans to small businesses who were affected by economic conditions as a result of COVID-19 to provide cash-flow assistance to employers who maintain their payroll (including healthcare and certain related expenses), mortgage interest, rent, leases, utilities and interest on existing debt during this emergency. Eligible borrowers need to make a good faith certification that the uncertainty of current economic conditions make requesting assistance necessary to support ongoing operations. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 1106 of the CARES Act, borrowers may apply to the Bank for loan forgiveness of all or a portion of the loan, subject to certain eligibility requirements and conditions.
The Bank is an SBA lender and began accepting applications under the CARES Act via its online application process on April 3, 2020. As of February 24, 2021, the Bank had 4,237 PPP loans totaling $504.9 million.
Operational Risk
Operational risk represents the risk of loss resulting from our operations, including, but not limited to, the risk of fraud by employees or persons outside the Company, errors relating to transaction processing and technology, failure to adhere to compliance requirements, and the risk of cyber attacks. We are also exposed to operational risk through our outsourcing arrangements, and the effect that changes in circumstances or capabilities of our outsourcing vendors can have on our ability to continue to perform operational functions necessary to our business. The risk of loss also includes the potential legal actions that could arise as a result of an operational deficiency or as a result of noncompliance with applicable regulatory standards, adverse business decisions or their implementation, and customer attrition due to potential negative publicity. Operational risk is inherent in all business activities, and management of this risk is important to the achievement of Company goals and objectives.
Our Operating Risk Committee (the “ORC”) provides oversight and assesses the most significant operational risks facing the Company. We have developed a framework that provides for a centralized operating risk management function through the ORC, supplemented by business unit responsibility for managing operational risks specific to their business units. Our internal audit department also validates the system of internal controls through ongoing risk-based audit procedures and reports on the effectiveness of internal controls to executive management and the Audit and Risk Committee of the Board of Directors.
We continuously strive to strengthen our system of internal controls to improve the oversight of operational risk. While our internal controls have been designed to minimize operational risks, there is no assurance that business disruption or operational losses will not occur. On an ongoing basis, management reassesses operational risks, implements appropriate process changes, and invests in enhancements to our systems of internal controls.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Guarantees
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We hold interests in several unconsolidated variable interest entities (“VIEs”). These unconsolidated VIEs are primarily low-income housing partnerships and solar energy tax credit partnership investments. Variable interests are defined as contractual ownership or other interests in an entity that change with fluctuations in an entity’s net asset value. The primary beneficiary consolidates the VIE. We have determined that the Company is not the primary beneficiary of these entities. As a result, we do not consolidate these VIEs. See discussion of our accounting policy related to VIEs in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Guarantees
We pool Federal Housing Administration (“FHA”) insured and U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (“VA”) guaranteed residential mortgage loans for sale to Ginnie Mae. We also sell residential mortgage loans in the secondary market to Fannie Mae. The agreements under which we sell residential mortgage loans to Ginnie Mae or Fannie Mae and the insurance or guaranty agreements with the FHA and VA contain provisions that include various representations and warranties regarding the origination and characteristics of the residential mortgage loans. Although these loans are primarily sold on a non-recourse basis, we may be obligated to repurchase residential mortgage loans or reimburse the respective investor if it is found that required documents were not delivered or were defective.
We also service substantially all of the loans we sell to investors in the secondary market. Each agreement under which we act as servicer generally specifies a standard of responsibility for our actions and provides protection against expenses and liabilities incurred by us when acting in compliance with the respective servicing agreements. However, if we commit a material breach of obligations as servicer, we may be subject to various penalties which may include the repurchase of an affected loan or a reimbursement to the respective investor.
See discussion of our risks related to representation and warranty provisions as well as our risks related to residential mortgage loan servicing activities in Note 20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020, were as follows:
Our liability for UTBs as of December 31, 2020, was $5.4 million. We were unable to reasonably estimate the period of cash settlement with the respective taxing authority. As a result, our liability for UTBs is not included in this disclosure.
Amounts only include obligations related to the unfunded non-qualified pension plan and postretirement benefit plan.
Commitments to extend credit, standby letters of credit, and commercial letters of credit do not necessarily represent future cash requirements in that these commitments often expire without being drawn upon; therefore, these items are not included in the above table (see Note 20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information). Our non-cancelable operating leases and finance lease obligations are primarily related to branch premises, equipment, and a portion of the Company’s headquarters’ building with lease terms extending through 2052. Purchase obligations arise from agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding. Other contracts included in purchase obligations primarily consist of service agreements for various systems and applications supporting bank operations. Pension and postretirement benefit contributions represent the minimum expected contribution to the unfunded non-qualified pension plan and postretirement benefit plan. Actual contributions may differ from these estimates.
See discussion of credit, lease, and other contractual commitments in Note 20 and Note 23 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Future Application of Accounting Pronouncements
Accounting Standards Pending Adoption
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, “Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes.” This ASU simplifies the accounting for income taxes by eliminating certain exceptions to the guidance in ASC 740 related to the approach for intraperiod tax allocation, the methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period and the recognition of deferred tax liabilities for outside basis differences. The new guidance also simplifies aspects of the accounting for franchise taxes and enacted changes in tax laws or rates and clarifies the accounting for transactions that result in a step-up in the tax basis of goodwill. Finally, it clarifies that single-member limited liability companies and similar disregarded entities that are not subject to income tax are not required to recognize an allocation of consolidated income tax expense in their separate financial statements, but they could elect to do so. ASU 2019-12 is effective for interim and annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2020. ASU 2019-12 did not have a material impact on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-04, “Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting.” This ASU provides temporary optional expedients and exceptions to GAAP guidance on contract modifications and hedge accounting to ease the financial reporting burdens of the expected market transition from LIBOR and other interbank offered rates to alternative reference rates, such as SOFR. For instance, entities can (1) elect not to apply certain modification accounting requirements to contracts affected by reference rate reform, if certain criteria are met. An entity that makes this election would not have to remeasure the contracts at the modification date or reassess a previous accounting determination. Entities can also (2) elect various optional expedients that would allow them to continue applying hedge accounting for hedging relationships affected by reference rate reform, if certain criteria are met. Finally, entities can (3) make a one-time election to sell and/or reclassify held-to-maturity (“HTM”) debt securities that reference an interest rate affected by reference rate reform. ASU 2020-04 is effective March 12, 2020, through December 31, 2022. The Company will elect (1) above for all contract modifications that meet the stated criteria. As the Company currently does not utilize hedge accounting, (2) above is currently not applicable. The Company currently does not have HTM debt securities that reference an interest rate, such as LIBOR, affected by reference rate reform, and therefore, (3) above is currently not applicable.
See Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the accounting standards adopted in 2020.
Selected Quarterly Consolidated Financial Data
Table 23 presents our selected quarterly financial data for 2020 and 2019.
The efficiency ratio is defined as noninterest expense divided by total revenue (net interest income and noninterest income).
The net interest margin is defined as net interest income, on a taxable-equivalent basis, as a percentage of average earning assets.
Fourth Quarter Results and Other Matters
Net Income
Net income for the fourth quarter of 2020 was $42.3 million, a decrease of $15.8 million or 27% compared to the fourth quarter of 2019. Diluted earnings per share were $1.06 for the fourth quarter of 2020, a decrease of $0.39 or 27% compared to the fourth quarter of 2019.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income, on a taxable-equivalent basis, for the fourth quarter of 2020 was $119.8 million, a decrease of $4.4 million or 4% compared to the fourth quarter of 2019. This decrease was primarily due to the lower rate environment. In addition the fourth quarter of 2020 included a $3.0 million impairment in the residual value of a leveraged lease. This decrease was partially offset by lower rates paid on our interest-bearing deposits. Net interest margin was 2.48% for the fourth quarter of 2020, a decrease of 47 basis points compared to the fourth quarter of 2019, primarily due to lower yields in our investment securities and loans portfolio.
Provision for Credit Losses
We recorded a Provision of $15.2 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to a Provision of $4.8 million recorded in the fourth quarter of 2019, while recording a net recovery of $0.3 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to a net charge-off of loans and leases of $3.7 million in the fourth quarter of 2019. The Provision recorded was based on our internal calculation and judgment that the allowance for credit losses should be $216.3 million as of December 31, 2020. In addition, on December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a $2.7 million reserve on accrued interest receivable related to loans in which interest payment forbearances were granted to borrowers impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The reserve was recorded as a contra-asset against accrued interest receivable with the offset to provision for credit losses.
Noninterest Income
Noninterest income, other than net gains on sales of investment securities, was $46.5 million in the fourth quarter of 2020, a decrease of $2.2 million or 4% compared to the fourth quarter of 2019. This decrease was primarily due to a $2.4 million decrease in fees, exchange, and other service charges due to lower debit card, credit card, and ATM transaction volume. In addition, merchant income decreased due to lower sales volume. Service charges on deposit accounts decreased by $1.5 million due to a decrease in overdraft fees due to lower transaction volume. Other income decreased by $1.9 million due to a $3.4 million decrease in net gain on sale of leased assets which was partially offset by a $2.0 million increase in fees related to our customer interest rate swap derivatives. These decreases were partially offset by a $3.7 million increase in mortgage banking income due to increased sales of conforming saleable loans from current production. The increase was offset by a $1.5 million valuation impairment to our mortgage servicing rights.
Noninterest Expense
Noninterest expense was $98.7 million in the fourth quarter of 2020, an increase of $5.6 million or 6% compared to the fourth quarter of 2019. This increase was primarily due to a $5.7 million increase in net occupancy primarily due to the determination to permanently close 12 branches in the fourth quarter of 2020 for a total exit cost of $5.6 million.
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes was $8.6 million in the fourth quarter of 2020, a decrease of $7.0 million or 45% compared to the fourth quarter of 2019. The effective tax rate for the fourth quarter of 2020 was 16.87% compared with an effective tax rate of 21.15% for the fourth quarter of 2019. The lower effective tax rate in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the same period of 2019 was primarily due to lower pretax income and tax benefit identified and recorded in 2020 for return to provision adjustments. This was partially offset by the early buy-out of our equity interest in a leveraged lease, which resulted in $1.8 million credit to the provision for income taxes in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Common Stock Repurchase Program
In the fourth quarter of 2020, the common stock repurchase program remains temporarily suspended. See Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information related to our common stock repurchase program.