ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our historical Consolidated Financial Statements and notes, as well as the selected historical consolidated financial data included elsewhere in this annual report. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations as well as our liquidity and capital resources for fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 can be found under Item 7 in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, which is available on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and our Investor Relations website at www.dmcglobal.com/investors.
Unless stated otherwise, all dollar figures in this report are presented in thousands (000s). N/M indicates that the change in dollars or percentage was not meaningful.
Overview
General
DMC Global Inc. (“DMC”, "we", "us", "our", or the "Company") is a diversified holding company. Our innovative businesses provide differentiated products and services to niche industrial and commercial markets around the world. DMC’s objective is to identify well-run businesses and strong management teams and support them with long-term capital and strategic, legal, technology and operating resources. Our approach helps our portfolio companies grow core businesses, launch new initiatives, upgrade technologies and systems to support their long-term strategy, and make acquisitions that improve their competitive positions and expand their markets. DMC’s culture is to foster local innovation versus centralized control and to stand behind our businesses in ways that truly add value. Today, DMC’s portfolio consists of DynaEnergetics and NobelClad, which collectively address the energy, industrial processing and transportation markets. Based in Broomfield, Colorado, DMC trades on Nasdaq under the symbol “BOOM.”
DynaEnergetics
DynaEnergetics designs, manufactures and distributes products utilized by the global oil and gas industry principally for the perforation of oil and gas wells. These products are sold to oilfield service companies in the U.S., Europe, Canada, Africa, the Middle East, Russia, and Asia. DynaEnergetics also sells directly to end-users. The market for perforating products, which are used during the well completion process, generally corresponds with oil and gas exploration and production activity. Well completion operations are increasingly complex, which in turn has increased the demand for intrinsically-safe, reliable and technically advanced perforating systems.
Cost of products sold for DynaEnergetics includes the cost of metals, explosives and other raw materials used to manufacture shaped charges, detonating products and perforating guns as well as employee compensation and benefits, depreciation of manufacturing facilities and equipment, manufacturing supplies and other manufacturing overhead expenses.
NobelClad
NobelClad produces explosion-welded clad metal plates for use in the construction of corrosion resistant industrial processing equipment and specialized transition joints. While a significant portion of the demand for our clad metal products is driven by maintenance and retrofit projects at existing chemical processing, petrochemical processing, oil refining, and aluminum smelting facilities, new plant construction and large plant expansion projects also account for a significant portion of total demand. These industries tend to be cyclical in nature and timing of new order inflow remains difficult to predict. We use backlog as a primary means to measure the immediate outlook for our NobelClad business. We define “backlog” at any given point in time as all firm, unfulfilled purchase orders and commitments at that time. Most firm purchase orders and commitments are realized, and we expect to fill most backlog orders within the following 12 months. NobelClad's backlog increased to $39,884 at December 31, 2020 from $31,660 at December 31, 2019.
Cost of products sold for NobelClad includes the cost of metals, explosive powders and other raw materials used to manufacture clad metal plates as well as employee compensation and benefits, depreciation of manufacturing facilities and equipment, manufacturing supplies and other manufacturing overhead expenses.
Factors Affecting Results
The following items impacted the comparability of the company's results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
•Consolidated sales of $229,161 decreased 42% versus 2019 as the COVID-19 pandemic drove a sharp decline in energy demand and average crude oil prices, which negatively impacted North American unconventional drilling and completion activity and sales at DynaEnergetics.
•DynaEnergetics' sales of $146,395 in 2020 decreased 53% compared with 2019 due to lower average crude oil prices and energy demand caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, which negatively impacted unconventional drilling and completion activity in North America. DynaEnergetics sales increased 3% sequentially in the fourth quarter of 2020 as an increase in well completion activity in North America offset lower international activity.
•NobelClad’s sales of $82,766 in 2020 decreased 5% compared with 2019 primarily due to the timing of shipment of projects out of backlog.
•Consolidated gross profit of 25% in 2020 decreased from 36% in 2019. The decline primarily related to lower average selling prices and the impact of lower sales volume on fixed manufacturing overhead and research and development expenses at DynaEnergetics and a less favorable project mix at NobelClad.
•Consolidated selling, general, and administrative expenses were $53,013 in 2020 compared with $65,451 in 2019. The decrease primarily was due to cost containment actions related to the COIVD-19 pandemic. We significantly reduced spending on outside service, incentive compensation expense, payroll and payroll-related costs, and curtailed travel expenses. These reductions partially were offset by an increase in the provision for expected credit losses of $3,039.
•Restructuring expenses of $3,387 in 2020 included asset impairments, severance costs related to downsizing our direct labor workforce in response to the COVID-19 impact on demand for DynaEnergetics’ products, and costs related to the sale of the Tyumen, Siberia manufacturing facility.
•Net cash of $42,659 (comprised of $53,923 in cash and marketable securities net of $11,264 of total debt) improved from net cash of $6,081 at December 31, 2019. Net cash, a non-GAAP measure, is calculated as total cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities less total debt.
Outlook
Employee safety is our top priority. During the fourth quarter of 2020, DynaEnergetics successfully passed one year without any lost time or recordable safety incidents across all its locations. As of December 31, 2020, NobelClad had no lost time safety incident at its locations in over 400 days.
With respect to COVID-19, we will continue to implement and enhance our efforts to ensure employee safety, which include regular deep cleaning of our facilities, providing personal protective equipment, restricting business travel and site visits and requiring adherence to health monitoring, hygiene and quarantine practices advised by health authorities. We continue to monitor and adjust our policies and practices to remain aligned with federal, state, local and international regulations and guidelines.
An initially slow recovery in North America’s unconventional oil and gas sector gained strength during the latter part of 2020, and that momentum has continued into the first quarter of 2021. The industry’s leading operators and their service providers are increasingly focused on maximizing the safety, performance and profitability of their well completion programs, which is driving demand for DynaEnergetics’ DS perforating systems. The recovery of pricing for energy products has lagged the rebound in market activity. As demand continues to improve, DynaEnergetics is focused on returning its prices to levels that reflect the inherent value of its technologies and products.
DynaEnergetics continues to invest in research and development to expand our portfolio of perforating systems, as well as product and market development initiatives to maintain our competitive advantages and future growth. In parallel, we are maintaining our efforts and commitment to intellectual property development and protection, including where necessary, patent enforcement. Protecting and enforcing our intellectual property and patents is vital to reinforcing the value of our investments in research and development, and we expect to incur increased legal expenses in 2021.
NobelClad principally serves long-cycle industries that can be slow to react to changing economic conditions, and this will likely lead to a relatively slow start to 2021. We nevertheless remain encouraged by NobelClad’s prospects for medium to long-range growth. It entered 2021 with a $40 million order backlog, which is approximately 25% higher than its backlog at the end of 2020.
While we remain in cost-containment mode and continue to closely monitor capital expenditures and operating costs, our staffing levels are increasing primarily in activity-based positions at DynaEnergetics.
We also may continue from time to time to use our at-the-market equity program (“ATM”), which was commenced in October 2020, to raise additional capital efficiently and responsibly. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we sold 608,360 shares of common stock at a weighted average price per share of $42.95 through our ATM equity program and received net proceeds of $25,740
Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP (generally accepted accounting principles) measure that we believe provides an important indicator of our ongoing operating performance and that we use in operational and financial decision-making. We define EBITDA as net income or loss plus or minus net interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA excludes from EBITDA stock-based compensation, restructuring and impairment charges and, when appropriate, other items that management does not utilize in assessing DMC’s operating performance (as further described in the tables below). As a result, internal management reports used during monthly operating reviews feature Adjusted EBITDA and certain management incentive awards are based, in part, on the amount of Adjusted EBITDA achieved during the year.
Adjusted operating income is defined as operating income plus restructuring and impairment charges and, when appropriate, other items that management does not utilize in assessing DMC’s operating performance.
Adjusted net income is defined as net income plus restructuring and impairment charges and, when appropriate, other items that management does not utilize in assessing DMC’s operating performance. Adjusted diluted earnings per share is defined as diluted earnings per share plus restructuring and impairment charges and, when appropriate, other items that management does not utilize in assessing DMC’s operating performance.
Adjusted operating income, adjusted net income, and adjusted diluted earnings per share are presented because management believes these measures are useful to understand the effects of restructuring and impairment charges on DMC’s operating income, net income and diluted earnings per share, respectively.
Net cash is a non-GAAP measure we use to supplement information in our Consolidated Financial Statements. We define net cash as total cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities less total debt. In addition to conventional measures prepared in accordance with GAAP, the Company uses this information to evaluate its performance, and we believe that certain investors may do the same.
The presence of non-GAAP financial measures in this report is not intended to suggest that such measures be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or as superior to, DMC’s GAAP information, and investors are cautioned that the non-GAAP financial measures are limited in their usefulness. Because not all companies use identical calculations, DMC’s presentation of non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.
Forward-Looking Statements
This annual report and the documents incorporated by reference into it contain certain forward-looking statements within the meaning of the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigations Reform Act of 1995. Words such as “anticipates,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “believes,” “seeks,” “estimates,” “may,” “will,” “continue,” “project,” “forecast,” and similar expressions, as well as statements in the future tense, identify forward-looking statements. Such statements include statements regarding our future expected financial position and operating results, our growth and business strategy, planned developments with respect to human capital matters, our expectations regarding the oil and gas industry, expected product developments in DynaEnergetics, expected impacts to demand and pricing for DynaEnergetics’ products, growth of our NobelClad segment, our financing plans, our future liquidity position and factors impacting such position.
These forward-looking statements are not guarantees of our future performance and are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results contemplated by the forward-looking statements. These risks and uncertainties include those relating to:
•Continuing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and related governmental actions;
•Changes in global economic conditions;
•The ability to obtain new contracts at attractive prices;
•The size and timing of customer orders and shipments;
•Product pricing and margins;
•Our ability to realize sales from our backlog and our ability to adjust our manufacturing and supply chain;
•Fluctuations in customer demand;
•Our ability to manage periods of growth and contraction effectively;
•General economic conditions, both domestic and foreign, impacting our business and the business of the end-market users we serve;
•Competitive factors;
•The timely completion of contracts;
•The timing and size of expenditures;
•The timely receipt of government approvals and permits;
•The price and availability of metal and other raw materials;
•The adequacy of local labor supplies at our facilities;
•Current or future limits on manufacturing capacity at our various operations;
•The impact of catastrophic weather events on our business and that of our customers;
•Our ability to successfully integrate acquired businesses;
•The ability to remain an innovative leader in our fields of business;
•The costs and impacts of pending or future litigation or regulatory matters;
•Changes to legislation, regulation or public sentiment related to our business and the industries in which our customers operate;
•The impacts of trade and economic sanctions or other restrictions imposed by the European Union, the United States or other countries;
•Costs and risks associated with compliance with laws and regulations, including the United States Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (“FCPA”) and similar legislation;
•The availability and cost of funds; and
•Fluctuations in foreign currencies.
The effects of these factors are difficult to predict. New factors emerge from time to time and we cannot assess the potential impact of any such factor on our business or the extent to which any factor, or combination of factors, may cause results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statement. All forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this annual report, and we do not undertake any obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect events or circumstances after the date of such statement or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events. In addition, see “Risk Factors” for a discussion of these and other factors that could materially affect our results of operations and financial condition.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Net sales decreased $168,389 compared with 2019. This primarily was due to the COVID-19 pandemic-related collapse in crude oil and gas demand, which resulted in a significant reduction in unconventional well completions in North America and demand for DynaEnergetics’ perforating systems.
Gross profit percentage decreased to 24.8% primarily due lower average selling prices and the impact of lower sales volume on fixed manufacturing overhead expenses at DynaEnergetics as well as a less favorable project mix at NobelClad.
General and administrative expenses decreased $8,826 compared with 2019 principally due to significant cost containment actions made in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We reduced spending on outside services by $5,018, variable bonus expenses by $2,274, employee benefits expenses and payroll taxes by $1,878, and travel expenses by $1,134. These decreases were partially offset by increases in depreciation expense of $506 and stock-based compensation expense of $356.
Selling and distribution expenses decreased $3,612 compared with 2019 primarily due to reductions in freight expenses by $1,191, wages, employee benefits expenses and payroll taxes by $1,068, outside service costs by $948, travel expenses by $906, and variable bonus by $851. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in the provision for expected credit losses by $3,039 during 2020.
Restructuring expenses of $3,387 in 2020 primarily related to asset impairments, severance costs related to downsizing our direct labor workforce in response to the COVID-19 pandemic related decline in crude oil prices and corresponding demand for unconventional well perforating systems at DynaEnergetics, and costs related to the sale of the Tyumen, Siberia manufacturing facility.
Operating loss of $996 compared with operating income of $58,425 in 2019 was primarily due to lower sales volume and average selling prices at DynaEnergetics in 2020.
Other expense, net of $233 in 2020 and $169 in 2019 primarily related to the non-service cost components of our defined benefit pension plans at certain foreign subsidiaries. In 2019, other expense, net also included a net foreign currency exchange gain. Foreign currency exchange gains and losses can arise when subsidiaries enter into inter-company and third-party transactions that are denominated in currencies other than their functional currency, including foreign currency forward contracts used to offset foreign exchange rate fluctuations on certain foreign currency denominated asset and liability positions.
Interest expense, net of $731 decreased compared with 2019 primarily due to a lower average outstanding debt balance and lower applicable interest rates in 2020.
Income tax benefit of $548 for 2020 compared with an income tax provision of $22,661 for 2019. Our most significant operations are in the United States, which has a 21% statutory tax rate and Germany, which has a 33% statutory tax rate. The mix of pretax income between these jurisdictions is one of the main drivers of the difference between our 21% statutory tax rate and our effective tax rate. Additionally, the current-year effective tax rate was impacted unfavorably by nondeductible losses related to the closure of DynaEnergetics’ operations in Tyumen, Siberia, partially offset by benefits from the vesting of equity-based compensation. The 2019 effective tax rate was unfavorably impacted by nondeductible losses related to the closure of DynaEnergetics’ operations in Tyumen, Siberia. Additionally, the 2019 effective tax rate reflects an unfavorable increase due to the establishment of a valuation allowance against certain deferred tax assets in Germany that we do not expect to be realizable due to a change in our German legal entity structure that was effective on January 1, 2020.
Net loss in 2020 was $1,412, or $0.10 per diluted share, compared with net income of $34,041, or $2.28 per diluted share in 2019.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased compared with 2019 due to the factors discussed above. See "Overview" above for the explanation of the use of non-GAAP measures. The following is a reconciliation of the most directly comparable GAAP measure to Adjusted EBITDA.
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Diluted Earnings per Share decreased compared with 2019 due to the factors discussed above. See "Overview" above for the explanation of the use of non-GAAP measures. The following is a reconciliation of the most directly comparable GAAP measures to Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Diluted Earnings Per Share.
Business Segment Financial Information
We primarily evaluate performance and allocate resources based on segment revenues, operating income and Adjusted EBITDA as well as projected future performance. Segment operating income is defined as revenues less expenses identifiable to the segment. DMC operating income and Adjusted EBITDA include unallocated corporate expenses and stock-based compensation expense, which are not allocated to our business segments. Segment operating income will reconcile to consolidated income before income taxes by deducting unallocated corporate expenses, including stock-based compensation, other expense, net, and interest expense, net,
Net sales, segment operating income, and Adjusted EBITDA for each segment were as follows for years ended December 31:
DynaEnergetics
Net sales were $164,029 lower than in 2019 due to sharply lower demand for well perforating systems as the COVID-19 pandemic-related collapse in oil and gas demand led to a downturn in unconventional well completions in North America.
Gross profit percentage decreased to 26.0% compared to 2019 primarily due to lower average selling prices and the impact of lower sales volumes on fixed manufacturing overhead expenses, including excess capacity charges in the second quarter and an increase in reserves for excess inventories.
General and administrative expenses decreased by $3,760 compared with 2019 primarily due to reductions in outside service costs by $3,018 and salaries and wages, variable bonus, and other payroll-related costs by $1,384. These decreases were partially offset by a $440 increase in depreciation expense.
Selling and distribution expenses decreased by $2,435 compared with 2019 primarily due to reductions in salaries and wages, variable bonus, and other payroll-related costs by $1,337, freight expenses by $1,187 on lower shipping activity, outside service costs by $791, and travel expenses by $376. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in the provision for expected credit losses of $2,861 associated with specifically identified at-risk customer balances combined with an increase to our current expected credit loss reserve.
Amortization of purchased intangibles decreased by $103 compared with 2019 primarily due to fully amortizing certain customer relationship intangibles during 2019.
Restructuring expense of $2,922 in 2020 primarily related to asset impairments, severance costs related to downsizing our direct labor workforce as the COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted crude oil prices and corresponding demand for well perforating systems, as well as costs related to the sale of the Tyumen, Siberia manufacturing facility.
Operating income decreased by $62,631 compared with 2019 primarily due to a sharp decline in unit sales volume, lower average selling prices, the unfavorable impact of lower sales volume on fixed overhead expenses, and increases in reserves for excess inventories and expected credit losses, partially offset by lower general and administrative and selling and distribution expenses.
Adjusted operating income and Adjusted EBITDA decreased compared with 2019 primarily due to the factors discussed above. See "Overview" above for the explanation of the use of non-GAAP measures. The following is a reconciliation of the most directly comparable GAAP measure to Adjusted operating income and Adjusted EBITDA.
NobelClad
Net sales decreased by $4,360 compared with 2019 due to the timing of shipment of projects out of backlog.
Gross profit percentage decreased to 23.5% primarily due to unfavorable project mix in 2020 versus 2019.
General and administrative expenses decreased by $1,315 compared with 2019 primarily due to reductions in payroll-related costs and taxes by $492, travel expenses by $141, and variable bonus by $79.
Selling and distribution expenses decreased by $1,260 compared with 2019 primarily due to reductions in travel expenses by $529, salaries and wages, variable bonus and other payroll-related costs by $523, and outside service costs by $157. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in the provision for expected credit losses of $178 associated with a customer that declared bankruptcy during the first quarter of 2020.
Restructuring expense, net and asset impairments of $346 in 2020 primarily related to asset impairments for manufacturing and software assets that were no longer in use and severance costs related to downsizing our direct labor workforce in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating income decreased by $307 compared to 2019 as lower general and administrative, selling and distribution, and restructuring expenses offset lower net sales and less favorable project mix.
Adjusted operating income and Adjusted EBITDA decreased due to the factors discussed above. See "Overview" above for the explanation of the use of non-GAAP measures. The following is a reconciliation of the most directly comparable GAAP measure to Adjusted operating income and Adjusted EBITDA.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have historically financed our operations from a combination of internally generated cash flow, revolving credit borrowings, and various long-term debt arrangements. The COVID-19 pandemic drove a sharp decline in DynaEnergetics' core oil and gas end markets and corresponding well-completion activity and demand for its perforating systems late in the first quarter of 2020. In April 2020, DMC announced several cost-containment actions to reduce our activity-based cost structure, limit spending and protect our balance sheet. These actions included reducing our workforce by 32%, implementing reduced work weeks at DynaEnergetics, significantly cutting selling, general and administrative expenses, reducing our capital expenditures budget by 50% and suspending the quarterly dividend. The decline in crude oil prices and oil and gas demand accelerated early in the second quarter of 2020 and sales volume only partially recovered during the third and fourth quarters. Though NobelClad customers in the downstream energy industry have delayed various repair and maintenance projects and one customer has delayed the award of a large prospective petrochemical order, NobelClad’s order backlog increased to $39,884 at December 31, 2020 from $31,660 at December 31, 2019. To further preserve liquidity, we entered into an amendment to our credit facility on June 25, 2020 to, among other provisions, maintain our $50,000 revolving credit facility and to waive the debt service coverage ratio for the quarters ending September 30, 2020, December 31, 2020, and March 31, 2021. These measures enabled us to improve our net cash position from $6,081 at December 31, 2019 to $16,923 at December 31, 2020, maintain our fully undrawn and available $50,000 revolving credit facility, and provide covenant relief for three quarters.
We also took action to allow future flexibility in accessing the capital markets. We filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which became effective on May 28, 2020, pursuant to which we registered for sale up to $150 million of certain of our securities from time to time and on terms that we may determine in the future. On October 22, 2020, we commenced an at-the-market equity program under the shelf registration statement, which allows us to sell and issue up to $75 million in shares of our common stock from time to time, and during the fourth quarter of 2020 we sold 608,360 shares of common stock for net proceeds of $25,740. In connection with the commencement of the at-the-market equity program, we also amended our credit facility to waive the requirement to repay outstanding amounts under the credit facility with proceeds from the program. This allows us full flexibility as to the use of proceeds from the program, as they are available over time. Our ability to access this capital may be limited by market conditions at the time of any future
potential sale. While we were able to sell shares during the fourth quarter of 2020, there can be no assurance that any future capital will be available on acceptable terms or at all.
With due consideration of the COVID-19 global pandemic and the resulting severe disruption of our end markets, we believe that cash flow from operations, funds available under our current credit facilities and any future replacement thereof, and potential proceeds from our at-the-market offering, will be sufficient to fund the working capital, debt service, and other capital expenditure requirements of our current business operations for the foreseeable future. Nevertheless, our ability to generate sufficient cash flows from operations will depend upon our success in executing our strategies. If we are unable to (i) realize sales from our backlog; (ii) secure new customer orders; (iii) continue selling products at profitable margins; and (iv) continue to implement cost-effective internal processes, our ability to meet cash requirements through operating activities could be impacted. Furthermore, any restriction on the availability of borrowings under our credit facilities could negatively affect our ability to meet future cash requirements. We will continue to monitor the continuing unprecedented financial and market conditions, including the impacts COVID-19 will have on credit availability and capital markets.
We declared a quarterly dividend of $0.125 per share in the first quarter of 2020 and $0.29 per share in 2019. On April 23, 2020, DMC announced that its Board of Directors suspended the quarterly dividend indefinitely due to the uncertain economic outlook caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Future dividends may be affected by, among other items, our views on potential future capital requirements, future business prospects, debt covenant compliance considerations, changes in income tax laws, and any other factors that our Board of Directors deems relevant. Any determination to pay cash dividends will be at the discretion of the Board of Directors.
Debt facilities
On March 8, 2018, we entered into a five-year $75,000 syndicated credit agreement (“credit facility”) which allows for revolving loans of up to $50,000 with a $20,000 US dollar equivalent sublimit for alternative currency loans. In addition, the agreement provides for a $25,000 Capital Expenditure Facility (“Capex Facility") which was used to assist in financing our DynaEnergetics manufacturing expansion project in Blum, Texas. The Capex Facility allowed for advances to fund capital expenditures of the Blum expansion project during year one of the credit facility. In March 2019, the Capex Facility converted from a revolving loan to a term loan amortizable at 12.5% of principal per year with a balloon payment for the outstanding balance upon the credit facility maturity date in 2023. In 2019, we prepaid an additional $7,000 above the required amortization amount. The credit facility has an accordion feature to increase the commitments by $100,000 under the revolving loan class and/or by adding a term loan subject to approval by applicable lenders. We entered into the credit facility with a syndicate of three banks, with KeyBank, N.A. acting as administrative agent. The syndicated credit facility is secured by the assets of DMC including accounts receivable, inventory, and fixed assets, as well as guarantees and share pledges by DMC and its subsidiaries.
Borrowings under the $50,000 revolving loan limit can be in the form of one, two, three, or six-month London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) loans. Additionally, US dollar borrowings on the revolving loan can be in the form of Base Rate loans (Base Rate borrowings are based on the greater of the administrative agent’s Prime rate, an adjusted Federal Funds rate or an adjusted LIBOR rate). LIBOR loans bear interest at the applicable LIBOR rate plus an applicable margin (varying from 1.50% to 3.00%). Base Rate loans bear interest at the defined Base rate plus an applicable margin (varying from 0.50% to 2.00%).
Borrowings under a $20,000 alternate currency sublimit can be in euros, Canadian dollars, pounds sterling, or in any other currency acceptable to the administrative agent. Alternative currency borrowings denominated in euros, pounds sterling, and any other currency that is dealt with on the London Interbank Deposit Market shall be comprised of LIBOR loans and bear interest at the LIBOR rate plus an applicable margin (varying from 1.50% to 3.00%).
On June 25, 2020, we entered into an amendment ("Amendment") to the credit facility related to the debt-to-EBITDA leverage ratio covenant and a debt service coverage ratio covenant, among other things. The Amendment waives the debt service coverage ratio covenant for the quarters ending September 30, 2020, December 31, 2020, and March 31, 2021. The debt service coverage ratio minimum of 1.35 to 1 was applicable for the quarter ending June 30, 2020 and will resume beginning with the quarter ending June 30, 2021 and thereafter.
Additionally, the Amendment adds a minimum liquidity covenant requiring the total of cash and cash equivalents held by U.S. subsidiaries and available borrowing capacity under the credit facility to exceed $10,000 for the quarters ending September 30, 2020, December 31, 2020, and March 31, 2021. The minimum liquidity covenant is not required after the quarter ending March 31, 2021.
During the period from the Amendment through August 31, 2020, borrowings outstanding under the credit facility bore interest at LIBOR plus a margin of 1.75% or at a Base Rate (as defined in the credit facility) plus a margin of 0.75%. For the
period from September 1, 2020 through the date of receipt of the covenant compliance certificate for the quarter ending March 31, 2021, borrowings outstanding under the credit facility will bear interest at a LIBOR plus a margin of 1.75% to 3.00% or at a Base Rate plus a margin of 0.75% to 2.00%. In each case, the margin is based on the Company's Leverage Ratio of Consolidated Funded Indebtedness (as defined in the credit facility) on the last day of such period to Consolidated Pro Forma EBITDA for such period. Additionally, the Amendment sets the minimum LIBOR at 0.75%.
LIBOR, the interest rate benchmark used as a reference rate on our credit facility borrowings, is expected to be phased out after calendar year 2021, when private-sector banks are no longer required to report the information used to set the rate. Our credit facility amendments address the replacement of LIBOR with an alternative benchmark rate. At this time, no consensus exists as to what rate or rates will become accepted alternatives to LIBOR, although the U.S. Federal Reserve, in connection with the Alternative Reference Rates Committee, a steering committee comprised of large U.S. financial institutions, is considering replacing U.S. dollar LIBOR with the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR). The consequence of a new benchmark rate is unknown at this time but could result in an increase in the cost of our variable rate debt.
The leverage ratio is defined in the credit facility for any trailing four quarter period as the ratio of Consolidated Funded Indebtedness (as defined in the agreement) on the last day of such period to Consolidated Pro Forma EBITDA for such period. For the December 31, 2020 reporting period, the maximum leverage ratio permitted was 3.00 to 1.0. The actual leverage ratio as of December 31, 2020, calculated in accordance with the credit facility, as amended, was 0.6 to 1.0.
The minimum liquidity covenant requires the total of cash and cash equivalents held by U.S. subsidiaries and available borrowing capacity under the credit facility to exceed $10,000. The liquidity as of December 31, 2020, calculated in accordance with the credit facility, as amended, was $64,793.
Our credit facility, as amended, also includes various other covenants and restrictions, certain of which relate to the payment of dividends or other distributions to stockholders, redemption of capital stock, incurrence of additional indebtedness, mortgaging, and pledging or disposition of major assets. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all financial covenants and other provisions of our debt agreements.
As of December 31, 2020, U.S. dollar revolving loans of zero and borrowings of $11,750 on the Capital Expenditure facility were outstanding under our credit facility and our available borrowing capacity was $50,000.
We also maintain a line of credit with a German bank for certain European operations. This line of credit provides a borrowing capacity of €7,000.
Other contractual obligations and commitments
The table below presents principal cash flows by expected maturity dates for our debt obligations and other contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Represents outstanding borrowings under our credit facility but excludes interest expense on outstanding credit facility borrowings. For more information about our debt obligations, see Note 3 "Debt" to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
(2) The operating lease obligations presented reflect future minimum lease payments due under non-cancelable portions of our leases as of December 31, 2020. Our operating lease obligations are described in Note 2 "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(3) Amounts represent commitments to purchase goods or services to be utilized in the normal course of business. These amounts are not reflected in the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Cash flows from operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $30,362 in 2020 compared with $64,594 in 2019. The decrease primarily was due to a decline in net income, partially offset by a significant reduction in net working capital and nonrecurring anti-dumping duties and penalties in 2019. The net working capital change in 2020 included lower accounts receivable from a decline in sales and lower accounts payable resulting from reduced purchasing activity.
Cash flows used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities in 2020 totaled $39,557 and primarily consisted of investment in marketable securities of $25,740 and acquisition of property, plant and equipment of $11,741 for DynaEnergetics and $1,975 for NobelClad.
Net cash used in investing activities in 2019 totaled $25,947 and primarily consisted of acquisition of property, plant and equipment of $19,785 for DynaEnergetics and $5,560 for NobelClad. The decrease in capital expenditures in 2020 versus 2019 principally related to cost containment actions taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Cash flows from financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for 2020 totaled $17,317, which included proceeds from our ATM equity program of $25,740 partially offset by payment of quarterly dividends of $3,749, repayments on the Capex Facility of $3,125, and treasury stock purchases of $1,890.
Net cash used in financing activities for 2019 totaled $30,562, which included net repayments on revolving loans of $17,129, repayments on the Capex Facility of $10,125, payment of quarterly dividends of $2,762, and treasury stock purchases of $1,103.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our historical Consolidated Financial Statements and notes to our historical Consolidated Financial Statements contain information that is pertinent to our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations. Preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires that our management make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. However, the accounting principles used by us generally do not change our reported cash flows or liquidity. Existing rules must be interpreted and judgments made on how the specifics of a given rule apply to us.
In management’s opinion, the more significant reporting areas impacted by management’s judgments and estimates are revenue recognition, asset impairments, intangible assets, and income taxes. Management’s judgments and estimates in these areas are based on information available from both internal and external sources, and actual results could differ from the estimates as additional information becomes known. We believe the following to be our most critical accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
On January 1, 2018, the Company adopted a new accounting standard, as amended, regarding revenue from contracts with customers using the modified retrospective approach, which was applied to all contracts with customers. Under the new standard, an entity is required to recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods.
There was no cumulative financial statement effect of initially applying the new revenue standard because an analysis of our contracts supported the recognition of revenue consistent with our historical approach. In accordance with the modified retrospective approach, the comparative information has not been restated and continues to be reported under the accounting standards in effect for those periods. The Company does not expect the adoption of the new revenue standard to have a material impact on the Company’s revenues or net income on an ongoing basis.
The Company’s revenues are primarily derived from consideration paid by customers for tangible goods. The Company analyzes its different goods by segment to determine the appropriate basis for revenue recognition, as described below. Revenue is not generated from sources other than contracts with customers and revenue is recognized net of any taxes collected from customers, which are subsequently remitted to governmental authorities. There are no material upfront costs for operations that are incurred from contracts with customers. On occasion, NobelClad and DynaEnergetics may require customers to make advance payments prior to the shipment of goods. We record such payments as contract liabilities in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Our rights to payments for goods transferred to customers are conditional only on the passage of time and not on any other criteria. Payment terms and conditions vary by contract, although terms generally include a requirement of payment within 30 to 60 days. In instances when we require customers to make advance payments prior to the shipment of their orders, we record a contract liability. We have determined that our contract liabilities do not include a significant financing component given the short duration between order initiation and order fulfillment within each of our segments.
NobelClad
Customers agree to terms and conditions at the time of initiating an order. The significant majority of transactions contain a single performance obligation - the delivery of a clad metal product. In instances where multiple products are included within an order, each product represents a separate performance obligation given that: (1) the customer can benefit from each product on a standalone basis and (2) each product is distinct within the context of the contract.
The transaction price is readily determinable and fixed at the time the transaction is entered into with the customer. NobelClad is entitled to each product’s transaction price upon the customer obtaining control of the item. Such control occurs as of a point in time, which is generally based upon relevant International Commercial Terms (“Incoterms”) as it relates to product ownership and legal title being transferred. Upon fulfillment of applicable Incoterms, NobelClad has performed its contractual requirements such that it has a present right to payment, and the customer from that point forward bears all risks and rewards of ownership. In addition, at this date, the customer has the ability to direct the use of, or restrict access to, the asset. No payment discounts, rebates, refunds, or any other forms of variable consideration are included within its contracts. NobelClad also does not provide service-type warranties either via written agreement or customary business practice, nor does it allow customer returns.
For contracts that contain only one performance obligation, the total transaction price is allocated to the sole performance obligation. For contracts which contain multiple distinct performance obligations, judgment is required to determine the standalone selling price (“SSP”) for each performance obligation. NobelClad uses the expected cost plus margin approach in order to estimate SSP, whereby an entity forecasts its expected costs of satisfying a performance obligation and then adds an appropriate margin for that good. The required judgment described herein largely is mitigated given the short duration between order initiation and complete order fulfillment.
DynaEnergetics
Customers agree to terms and conditions at the time of initiating an order. Transactions contain standard products, which may include perforating system components, such as detonating cord, or systems and associated hardware, including Factory-Assembled, Performance-AssuredTM DynaStage® perforating systems. In instances where multiple products are included within an order, each product represents a separate performance obligation given that: (1) the customer can benefit from each product on a standalone basis and (2) each product is distinct within the context of the contract.
The transaction price is readily determinable and fixed at the time the transaction is entered into with the customer. DynaEnergetics is entitled to each product’s transaction price upon the customer obtaining control of the item. Such control occurs as of a point in time, which is generally based upon relevant Incoterms as it relates to product ownership and legal title being transferred. Upon fulfillment of applicable Incoterms, DynaEnergetics has performed its contractual requirements such that it has a present right to payment, and the customer from that point forward bears all risks and rewards of ownership. In addition, at this date, the customer has the ability to direct the use of, or restrict access to, the asset. No payment discounts, rebates, refunds, or any other forms of variable consideration are included within contracts. DynaEnergetics also does not provide service-type warranties either via written agreement or customary business practice, nor does it allow customer returns without its prior approval.
For orders that contain only one performance obligation, the total transaction price is allocated to the sole performance obligation. For orders that contain multiple products being purchased by the customer, judgment is required to determine SSP for each distinct performance obligation. However, such judgment largely is mitigated given that products purchased are
generally shipped at the same time. In instances where products purchased are not shipped at the same time, DynaEnergetics uses the contractually stated price to determine SSP as this price approximates the price of each good as sold separately.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower-of-cost (first-in, first-out) or net realizable value. Significant cost elements included in inventory are material, labor, freight, subcontract costs, and manufacturing overhead. As necessary, we adjust inventory to its net realizable value by recording provisions for excess, slow moving and obsolete inventory. To determine provision amounts, we regularly review inventory quantities on hand and values, and compare them to estimates of future product demand, market conditions, production requirements and technological developments.
Shipping and handling costs incurred by us upon shipment from our manufacturing facilities directly to customers are included in "Cost of products sold" while shipping and handling costs incurred by us upon shipment from our distribution centers to customers are included in "Selling and distribution expenses" in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Asset impairments
Finite-lived assets are tested for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying value may not be recoverable. We compare the expected undiscounted future operating cash flows associated with these finite-lived assets to their respective carrying values to determine if they are fully recoverable when indicators of impairment are present. If the expected future operating cash flows of an asset are not sufficient to recover the carrying value, we estimate the fair value of the asset. Impairment is recognized when the carrying amount of the asset is not recoverable and when carrying value exceeds fair value. Long-lived assets to be disposed of, if any, are reported at the lower of carrying amount or fair value less cost to sell.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic-related collapse in oil and gas demand led to a downturn in well completions and the corresponding demand for DynaEnergetics’ products. As a result, DynaEnergetics recorded asset impairment charges during 2020 on certain manufacturing assets that will no longer be utilized in production at its Blum, Texas and Troisdorf, Germany facilities. There were no other indicators of impairment of finite-lived assets for 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized an impairment charge related to production assets in DynaEnergetics' operations in Tyumen, Siberia, which were closed in 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2018, no impairments were recorded. Refer to Note 10 “Restructuring and Asset Impairments” for additional discussion.
Income taxes
We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future income tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities. Any effects of changes in income tax rates or tax laws are included in the provision for income taxes in the period of enactment. The deferred income tax impact of tax credits are recognized as an immediate adjustment to income tax expense. We recognize deferred tax assets for the expected future effects of all deductible temporary differences to the extent we believe these assets will more likely than not be realized. We record a valuation allowance when, based on current circumstances, it is more likely than not that all or a portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. In making such determination, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies, recent financial operations and their associated valuation allowances, if any.
We recognize the tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only when it is more likely than not, based on the technical merits of the position, the tax position will be sustained upon examination, including the resolution of any related appeals or litigation. The tax benefits recognized in the Consolidated Financial Statements from such a position are measured as the largest benefit that is more likely than not to be realized upon ultimate resolution. We recognize interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions in operating expense.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined by SEC rules, that have or are reasonably likely to have a material current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to Note 2 "Significant Accounting Policies" to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this annual report for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements and their anticipated effect on our business.