Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” and in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Box is the Content Cloud: one secure, cloud-native platform for managing the entire content journey. Content - from blueprints to wireframes, videos to documents, proprietary formats to PDFs - is the source of an organization’s unique value. Our cloud content management platform enables our customers, including 67% of the Fortune 500, to securely manage the entire content lifecycle, from the moment a file is created or ingested to when it’s shared, edited, published, approved, signed, classified, and retained. Box keeps content secure and compliant, while also allowing easy access and sharing of this content from anywhere, on any device - both within the organization and with external partners.
With our Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) platform, users can collaborate on content both internally and with external parties, automate content-driven business processes, develop custom applications, and implement data protection, security and compliance features to comply with legal and regulatory requirements, internal policies and industry standards and regulations. The Box Content Cloud accelerates business processes, improves employee productivity, enables secure remote work, and protects an organization’s most valuable data. Our platform enables a broad set of high-value business use cases across enterprises, hundreds of file formats and media types, and user experiences. Our platform integrates with leading enterprise business applications, and is compatible with multiple application environments, operating systems and devices, ensuring that workers can securely access their critical business content whenever and wherever they need it.
In addition, we continue to innovate by expanding our core services and our offerings with a focus on frictionless security and compliance, seamless internal and external collaboration and workflow, and integration with best-of-breed applications. For example, we provide Box Shield, our advanced security offering that helps customers reduce the risk of accidental data leakage and protect their business from insider threats and account compromise; Box KeySafe, a solution that builds on top of Box’s strong encryption and security capabilities to give customers greater control over the encryption keys used to secure the file contents that are stored with Box; Box Governance, which gives customers a better way to comply with regulatory policies, satisfy e-discovery requests and effectively manage sensitive business information; Box Relay, which allows our end users to easily build, manage and track their own workflows; Box Platform, which further enables customers and partners to build enterprise apps using our open APIs and developer tools; and Box Zones, which gives global customers the ability to store their data locally in certain regions. With Box Consulting, we also provide in-house professional services such as implementation support, content migration, and change management. The increasing success of our add-on products allows our customers to realize the full set of capabilities of our Content Cloud.
We offer our solution to our customers as a subscription-based service, with subscription fees based on the requirements of our customers, including the number of users and functionality deployed. The majority of our customers subscribe to our service through one-year contracts, although we also offer our services for terms ranging from one month to three years or more. We typically invoice our customers at the beginning of the term, in multiyear, annual, quarterly or monthly installments. We recognize revenue as we satisfy a performance obligation. Accordingly, due to our subscription model, we recognize revenue for our subscription and premier services ratably over the term of the contract.
Our objective is to build an enduring business that creates sustainable revenue and earnings growth over the long term. To best achieve this objective, we focus on growing the number of users and paying organizations through direct field sales, direct inside sales, indirect channel sales and through word-of-mouth by individual users, some of whom use our services at no cost. Individual users and organizations can also simply sign up to use our solution on our website. We believe this approach not only helps us build a critical mass of users but also has a viral effect within organizations as more of their employees use our service and encourage their IT professionals to deploy our services to a broader user base.
Our user base included 77.7 million registered users as of January 31, 2021. We define a registered user as a Box account that has been provisioned a unique user identification number. As of January 31, 2021, 20% of our registered users were paying users who registered as part of a larger enterprise or business account or by using a paid personal account. As of January 31, 2021, we had over 105,000 paying organizations, and our solution was offered in 25 languages. We define paying organizations as separate and distinct buying entities, such as a company, an educational or government institution, or a distinct business unit of a large corporation, that have entered into a subscription agreement with us to utilize our services.
Organizations typically purchase our solution in the following ways: (i) employees in one or more small groups within the organization may individually purchase our service; (ii) organizations may purchase IT-sponsored, enterprise-level agreements with deployments for specific, targeted use cases ranging from tens to thousands of user seats; (iii) organizations may purchase IT- sponsored, enterprise-level agreements where the number of user seats sold is intended to accommodate and enable nearly all information workers within the organization in whatever use cases they desire to adopt over the term of the subscription; and (iv) organizations may purchase our Box Platform service to create custom business applications for their internal use and extended ecosystem of customers, suppliers and partners. Customers can choose between an a la carte approach (i.e., by purchasing specific add-on products to complement their Box subscription) or one of our bundled Enterprise Suites, which include multiple add-on products to help accelerate customer time to value.
We intend to continue scaling our organization to meet the increasingly complex needs of our customers. Our sales and customer success teams are organized to efficiently serve organizations ranging from small businesses to the world’s largest global organizations. We have invested in our sales and marketing teams to sell our services around the world, as well as in our development efforts to deliver additional features and capabilities of our cloud services to address our customers’ evolving needs. We also expect to continue to make investments in both our infrastructure to meet the needs of our growing global user base and our professional services organization (Box Consulting) to address the strategic needs of our customers in more complex deployments and to drive broader adoption across a wide array of use cases.
Current Period Highlights
For the year ended January 31, 2021, our revenue was $770.8 million, representing year-over-year growth of 11%, and 28% of this revenue came from non-U.S. customers. As of January 31, 2021, our remaining performance obligations were $896.9 million, an increase of 17% from January 31, 2020. For the year ended January 31, 2021, our operating loss was $37.6 million, and our operating margin was negative 5%, representing a 15 percentage point improvement year-over-year. For the year ended January 31, 2021, our free cash flow was positive $120.3 million, an increase of $127.5 million from the year ended January 31, 2020.
Continuous Innovation
Despite the pandemic’s impact, we were able to continue delivering product innovation throughout our fiscal year 2021. During the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, we launched several new products including, but not limited to:
•
Machine learning-based automated classification of sensitive data and proactive malware detection in Box Shield;
•
New capabilities for end users, including an all-new Box user interface, Collections to help users organize and categorize content, and Annotations, which allows users to add text-based comments or free-form markups to any document format without altering the underlying content;
•
New workflow capabilities with Box Relay, including pre-built and custom workflow templates that allow customers to more easily build and implement process automations;
•
Significant improvements to our integrations with Microsoft Teams, Slack, and Zoom to power better remote work experiences for our customers, as well as a new Box for Google Workspace Essentials integration;
•
Improvements to our Box Platform offering including a new metadata query toolkit and improved developer onboarding experience; and
•
Various infrastructure improvements, including in-region uploads and downloads in our Australia Zone, as well as a new point-of-presence in Chicago, IL.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted global economic activity, worldwide financial markets and social practices. We continue to monitor, analyze and respond to evolving developments regarding the COVID-19 pandemic. As part of these efforts, we have taken steps to protect the health and welfare of our employees by temporarily closing most of our offices and suspending almost all business-related travel, while continuing our commitment and efforts to serve customers that rely on us. In addition, we have shifted our customer and marketing events to virtual-only experiences.
Although the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material adverse impact on our financial results for our fiscal year 2021, COVID-19 has negatively impacted many of our customers and prospects. As a result, we have experienced, and may continue to experience, increased customer churn and delayed sales cycles, including customers and prospective customers delaying contract signing or contract renewals, or reducing budgets related to services that we offer. Despite these adverse impacts, the COVID-19 pandemic has also created additional opportunities for Box by enabling our customers’ and prospects’ employees to engage in secure remote work through our platform.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic ultimately impacts our business, results of operations, and financial position will depend on future developments, which are uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time, and include the severity and duration of the pandemic, the availability and effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines, actions that may be taken by government authorities to contain the virus and minimize its economic impact, passing of or not passing further stimulus packages by governments, the impact of COVID-19 on our customers, business partners and employees, and other factors identified in Part I, Item 1A "Risk Factors" of this Form 10-K. As a result, the extent and magnitude of the impact COVID-19 will have on our business and operating results cannot be predicted at this time.
Our Business Model
Our business model focuses on maximizing the lifetime value of a customer relationship. We make significant investments in acquiring new customers and believe that we will be able to achieve a positive return on these investments by retaining customers, cross-selling our add-on products and expanding the size of our deployments within our customer base over time. In connection with the acquisition of new customers, we incur and recognize significant upfront costs. These costs include sales and marketing costs associated with acquiring new customers, such as sales commission expenses, a portion of which are deferred and then amortized over a period of benefit, and marketing costs, which are expensed as incurred. We recognize revenue as we satisfy a performance obligation. Accordingly, due to our subscription model, we recognize revenue for our subscription and premier services ratably over the term of the contract. Although our objective is for each customer to be profitable for us over the duration of our relationship, the costs we incur with respect to any customer relationship, whether a new customer or an expansion within an existing customer, may exceed revenue in earlier periods because we recognize those costs faster than we recognize the associated revenue.
Because of these dynamics, we experience a range of profitability with our customers depending in large part upon their current stage. We generally incur higher sales and marketing expenses for new customers and existing customers who are still in an expanding stage. For new customers, our associated sales and marketing expenses typically exceed the first year revenue we recognize from those customers. For customers who are expanding their use of Box, we incur various associated marketing expenses as well as sales commission expenses, though we typically recognize higher revenue than sales and marketing expenses. For typical customers who are renewing their Box subscriptions, our associated sales and marketing expenses are significantly less than the revenue we recognize from those customers. These differences are primarily driven by the higher compensation we provide to our sales force for new customers and customer subscription expansions compared to the compensation we provide to our sales force for routine subscription renewals by customers. In addition, our sales and marketing expenses, even after considering deferred incremental compensation we provide to our sales force, are generally higher for acquiring new customers versus expansions or renewals of existing customer subscriptions. We have experienced, and expect to continue to experience, lower sales and marketing expenses as a percentage of revenue as our existing customer base grows over time and a relatively higher percentage of our revenue is attributable to renewals versus new or expanding Box deployments.
Key Business Metrics
We use the key metrics below for financial and operational decision-making and as a means to evaluate period-to-period comparisons. We believe that these key metrics provide meaningful supplemental information regarding our performance. We believe that both management and investors benefit from referring to these key metrics in assessing our performance and when planning, forecasting, and analyzing future periods. These key metrics also facilitate management's internal comparisons to our historical performance as well as comparisons to certain competitors' operating results. We believe these key metrics are useful to investors both because (1) they allow for greater transparency with respect to key metrics used by management in its financial and operational decision-making and (2) they are used by institutional investors and the analyst community to help analyze the health of our business. The below data is presented in millions, except for percentage rate data.
*
Box began disclosing remaining performance obligations upon the adoption of ASC Topic 606 on February 1, 2018. Year-over-year comparisons against prior periods before February 1, 2018 are not applicable.
Remaining Performance Obligations
Remaining performance obligations (RPO) represent, at a point in time, contracted revenue that has not yet been recognized. RPO consists of deferred revenue and backlog, offset by contract assets. Backlog is defined as non-cancellable contracts deemed certain to be invoiced and recognized as revenue in future periods. Future invoicing is determined to be certain when we have an executed non-cancellable contract or a significant penalty is due upon cancellation, and invoicing is not dependent on a future event such as the delivery of a specific new product or feature, or the achievement of contractual contingencies. While Box believes RPO is a leading indicator of revenue as it represents sales activity not yet recognized in revenue, it is not necessarily indicative of future revenue growth as it is influenced by several factors, including seasonality, contract renewal timing, average contract terms and foreign currency exchange rates. Box monitors RPO to manage the business and evaluate performance. We do not consider RPO to be a non-GAAP financial measure given that it is calculated in accordance with GAAP.
RPO increased 17% in the year ended January 31, 2021 over the year ended January 31, 2020. The increase in RPO was primarily driven by expansion within existing customers as they broadened their deployment of our product offerings, longer customer contract durations, the addition of new customers, and the timing of customer-driven renewals.
Billings
Billings represent our revenue plus the changes in deferred revenue and contract assets in the period. Billings we record in any particular period primarily reflect subscription renewals and expansion within existing customers plus sales to new customers, and represent amounts invoiced for all of our products and professional services. We typically invoice our customers at the beginning of the term, in multiyear, annual, quarterly or monthly installments. If the customer negotiates to pay the full subscription amount at the beginning of the period, the total subscription amount for the entire term will be reflected in billings. If the customer negotiates to be invoiced annually or more frequently, only the amount billed for such period will be included in billings.
Billings help investors better understand our sales activity for a particular period, which is not necessarily reflected in our revenue given that we recognize subscription revenue ratably over the contract term. We consider billings a significant performance measure. We monitor billings to manage our business, make planning decisions, evaluate our performance and allocate resources. We believe that billings offer valuable supplemental information regarding the performance of our business and will help investors better understand the sales volumes and performance of our business. We do not consider billings to be a non-GAAP financial measure given that it is calculated using exclusively revenue, deferred revenue, and contract assets, all of which are financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Billings increased 9% in the year ended January 31, 2021 over the year ended January 31, 2020. The increase in billings was primarily driven by expansion within existing customers as they broadened their deployment of our product offerings, longer customer contract durations, the addition of new customers, and the timing of customer-driven renewals.
Our use of billings has certain limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for revenue or an analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Billings are recognized when invoiced, while the related subscription and premier services revenue is recognized ratably over the contract term as we satisfy a performance obligation. Also, other companies, including companies in our industry, may not use billings, may calculate billings differently, may have different billing frequencies, or may use other financial measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of billings as a comparative measure.
Over time, we expect to continue to normalize payment durations. In addition, as we have gained and expect to continue to gain more traction with large enterprise customers, we also anticipate our quarterly billings to increasingly concentrate in the back half of our fiscal year, especially in the fourth quarter.
A calculation of billings starting with revenue, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, is presented below (in thousands):
*
Balance as of February 1, 2018 upon the adoption of ASC Topic 606
Free Cash Flow
We define free cash flow as cash flows from operating activities less purchases of property and equipment, principal payments of finance lease liabilities, capitalized internal-use software costs, and other items that did not or are not expected to require cash settlement and that management considers to be outside of our core business. We specifically identify adjusting items in our reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP financial measures. We consider free cash flow to be a profitability and liquidity measure that provides useful information to management and investors about the amount of cash generated by the business that can possibly be used for investing in our business and strengthening the balance sheet, but it is not intended to represent the residual cash flow available for discretionary expenditures. A reconciliation of free cash flow to net cash provided by operating activities, its nearest GAAP equivalent, is presented in the non-GAAP Financial Measures section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The presentation of free cash flow is also not meant to be considered in isolation or as an alternative to cash flows from operating activities as a measure of liquidity.
Free cash flow increased $127.6 million in the year ended January 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended January 31, 2020. The increase in free cash flow was primarily driven by an increase in cash provided by operating activities of $152.1 million and a decrease in capitalized internal-use software costs of $0.5 million, partially offset by an increase in principal payments of finance lease liabilities of $21.5 million and an increase in capital expenditures of $3.6 million. The primary factors affecting the increase in cash flows provided by operating activities included a decrease of our net loss of $100.9 million, an increase in non-cash charges of $35.7 million primarily driven by an increase in depreciation and amortization of $26.2 million, and favorable changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $15.5 million.
Net Retention Rate
Net retention rate is defined as the net percentage of Total Account Value (TAV) retained from existing customers, including expansion. We calculate our net retention rate as of a period end by starting with the TAV from customers as of 12 months prior to such period end (Prior Period TAV) and a subscription customer of Box for at least 12 months. We then calculate TAV from these same customers as of the current period end (Current Period TAV). Finally, we divide the Current Period TAV by the Prior Period TAV and report the average of this calculation over the prior 12 months to arrive at our net retention rate. Prior to fiscal year 2021, we included only TAV from customers with a contract value of $5,000 or more in our net retention rate calculation. As a result of our focus on driving an efficient land and expand go-to-market strategy, large enterprise customers may begin their deployments with contract values below $5,000 and expand significantly over time. Given this strategy, we now include TAV from customers with a contract value of less than $5,000 in our net retention rate calculation. This new methodology, adopted retrospectively in fiscal year 2021, provides a more comprehensive view of how existing customers contribute to our overall revenue growth. We believe our net retention rate is an important metric that provides insight into the long-term value of our subscription agreements and our ability to retain and grow revenue from our customer base. Net retention rate is an operational metric and there is no comparable GAAP financial measure to which we can reconcile this particular key metric.
Our net retention rates were 102%, 104% and 108% as of January 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our net retention rates were primarily attributable to seat growth in existing customers and strong attach rates of add-on products. As our customers purchase add-on products, we tend to realize significantly higher average contract values and stronger net retention rates as compared to customers who only purchase our core product. We believe our go-to-market efforts to deliver a solution selling strategy and our investments in product, customer success, and Box Consulting have been a significant factor in our customer retention results. As we penetrate customer accounts, we expect our net retention rate to remain above 100% for the foreseeable future.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We derive our revenue primarily from three sources: (1) subscription revenue, which is comprised of subscription fees from customers who have access to our cloud content management platform, and other subscription-based services, which all include routine customer support; (2) revenue from customers purchasing our premier services package; and (3) revenue from professional services such as implementing best practice use cases, project management and implementation consulting services.
To date, practically all of our revenue has been derived from subscription and premier services. Subscription and premier services revenue are driven primarily by the number of customers, the number of seats sold to each customer and the price of our services.
We recognize revenue as we satisfy a performance obligation. Accordingly, due to our subscription model, we recognize revenue for our subscription and premier services ratably over the contract term. We typically invoice our customers at the beginning of the term, in multiyear, annual, quarterly or monthly installments. Our subscription and premier services contracts are typically non-cancellable and do not contain refund-type provisions. The majority of our customers subscribe to our service through one-year contracts, although we also offer our services for terms ranging between one month to three years or more.
Professional services are generally billed on a fixed price basis, for which revenue is recognized over time based on the proportion performed. Professional services revenue was not material as a percentage of total revenue for all periods presented.
Revenue is presented net of sales and other taxes we collect on behalf of governmental authorities.
Cost of Revenue
Our cost of revenue consists primarily of costs related to providing our subscription services to our paying customers, including employee compensation and related expenses for data center operations, customer support and professional services personnel, payments to outside technology service providers, depreciation of servers and equipment, security services and other tools, as well as amortization expense associated with acquired technology and capitalized internally developed software. We allocate overhead such as rent, information technology costs and employee benefit costs to all departments based on headcount. As such, general overhead expenses are reflected in cost of revenue and each of the operating expense categories set forth below.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses. Personnel costs are the most significant component of each category of operating expenses. Operating expenses also include allocated overhead costs for facilities, information technology costs and employee benefit costs.
Research and Development. Research and development expense consists primarily of employee compensation and related expenses, as well as allocated overhead. Our research and development efforts are focused on scaling our platform, building an ecosystem of best-of-breed applications and platforms, infrastructure, adding enterprise grade features, functionality and enhancements such as workflow automation, intelligent content management capabilities, and advanced security to enhance the ease of use of our cloud content management services. We capitalize certain qualifying costs to develop software for internal use incurred during the application development stage.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expense consists primarily of employee compensation and related expenses, sales commissions, marketing programs, travel-related expenses, as well as allocated overhead. Marketing programs include but are not limited to advertising, events, corporate communications, brand building, and product marketing. Sales and marketing expense also consists of data center and customer support costs related to providing our cloud-based services to our free users. We market and sell our cloud content management services worldwide through our direct sales organization and through indirect distribution channels such as strategic resellers.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expense consists primarily of employee compensation and related expenses for administrative functions including finance, legal, human resources, recruiting, information systems, security, compliance, fees for external professional services and cloud based enterprise systems, as well as allocated overhead. External professional services fees are primarily comprised of outside legal, accounting, audit and outsourcing services.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net consists of interest expense and interest income. Interest expense consists primarily of interest charges for our line of credit and interest rate swap agreement, interest expense related to finance leases, unused commitment fees on our line of credit, the amortization of capitalized debt issuance costs, fees on our letters of credit, and the amortization of debt discount and issuance costs of our convertible senior notes. Interest income consists primarily of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents. We have historically invested our cash and cash equivalents in overnight deposits, certificates of deposit, money market funds, and short term, investment-grade corporate debt, marketable securities and asset backed securities.
Other Income (Loss), Net
Other income (loss), net consists primarily of gains and losses from foreign currency transactions and other income and expense.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes consists primarily of income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business and state income taxes in the United States and, as applicable, changes in our deferred taxes and related valuation allowance positions and uncertain tax positions.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented in thousands, except per share amounts:
(1)
Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented as a percentage of our revenue:
(1)
Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended January 31, 2021 compared to the year ended January 31, 2020 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended January 31, 2020 compared to the year ended January 31, 2019 can be found under Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 19, 2020, which is available on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov.
Comparison of the Years Ended January 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
The increase in revenue was primarily driven by expansion within our existing customers as they broadened their deployment of our product offerings with strong attach rates of add-on products at higher price per seat. Additionally, the increase in subscription services is also driven by the addition of new customers, as the number of paying organizations increased by 8% from January 31, 2020 to January 31, 2021. In the year ended January 31, 2021, we experienced strong growth in the Japan market, driving an increase in revenue from non-U.S. customers to 28%, compared to 25% in the year ended January 31, 2020. This increase is partially offset by customers partially churning their deployment with Box.
Cost of Revenue
The increase in absolute dollars was primarily due to an increase of $9.3 million in depreciation primarily related to additional data center equipment, an increase of $8.6 million in software and maintenance expense primarily driven by increases in amortization of internally developed software and on-premises contracts, an increase of $3.3 million in rent for our data centers, and an increase of $2.2 million in stock-based compensation expense primarily driven by equity grants to existing and new employees. The increase in cost of revenue expenses was partially offset by a decrease of $14.8 million in hosted data service costs. Cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue decreased 2 percentage points year-over-year. We expect our cost of revenue to increase in dollars but decrease slightly as a percentage of revenue over time as we continue to optimize infrastructure efficiency.
Research and Development
The increase in absolute dollars was primarily due to a decrease of $4.9 million in capitalized internally developed software costs and an increase of $3.0 million in employee and related costs. The increase in research and development expenses was partially offset by a decrease of $3.3 million in stock-based compensation expense, a decrease of $1.8 million in allocated overhead costs, a decrease of $0.7 million in outside agency and consulting services, and a decrease of $0.6 million in travel-related costs. Research and development expenses as a percentage of revenue decreased 3 percentage points year-over-year. We continue to invest in enhancements of our products and services, developing new products, and further differentiating our offerings. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in dollars but remain relatively stable as a percentage of revenue over time, as we continue to make significant improvements to our cloud content management product offerings and services, including expanding our advanced security, compliance, collaboration, workflow automation, and integration capabilities.
Sales and Marketing
The decrease in absolute dollars was primarily due to decreases of $19.9 million and $7.4 million in employee and related costs and allocated overhead costs, respectively, primarily driven by a decrease in headcount from 880 as of January 31, 2020 to 773 as of January 31, 2021. In addition, there were decreases of $13.0 million and $2.4 million in travel-related costs and company events, respectively, primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, a decrease of $6.2 million in marketing expenses, driven by a $5.0 million decrease in expenses related to BoxWorks, which transitioned into a virtual experience in the third quarter of fiscal year 2021, a decrease of $2.7 million in data center and customer support costs to support our free users, and a decrease of $2.2 million in outside agency and consulting services. The decrease in sales and marketing expenses was partially offset by an $11.1 million increase in commission expenses primarily driven by increased sales and increased amortization of deferred commissions and a $4.0 million increase in stock-based compensation expense driven by equity grants to existing and new employees. Sales and marketing expenses as a percentage of revenue decreased 9 percentage points year-over-year due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and our focus on driving greater efficiency from our solution selling strategy and simplifying our product offerings, as well our focus on higher performing geographies and segments producing a greater return on investment.
Our sales and marketing expenses are generally higher for acquiring new, or expanding existing, customers than for renewals of existing customer subscriptions. We expect to continue to invest in capturing our large market opportunity globally and capitalize on our competitive position with continued focus on our long-term margin objectives. We expect our sales and marketing expenses will continue to decrease as a percentage of revenue over time, as our existing customer base grows and a relatively higher percentage of our revenue is attributable to renewals versus new or expanding Box deployments and as we continue to focus on improving sales productivity and simplifying our product offerings. While we expect certain expenses that were reduced due to COVID-19 to partially return over time, we do not expect to return to pre-COVID-19 levels, even after we return to an office-based environment.
General and Administrative
The increase in absolute dollars was primarily due to an increase of $3.8 million in stock-based compensation expense driven by equity grants to existing and new employees and an increase of $0.9 million in employee and related costs. The increase in general and administrative expenses was partially offset by a decrease of $1.0 million in outside agency costs and consulting services. General and administrative expense as a percentage of revenue decreased 1 percentage point year-over-year. We expect our general and administrative expense to slowly increase in dollars but to decrease as a percentage of revenue over time as we benefit from greater operational efficiency.
Interest Expense, Net and Other Income (Loss), Net
*
Percentage change not meaningful
The increase in interest expense, net is primarily due to a decrease of $3.0 million in interest income from our certificates of deposit and money market funds due to a lower interest rate environment, an increase of $1.3 million in interest expense related to finance leases provisioned for our data center facilities, and an increase of $0.6 million in interest expense related to the amortization of the debt discount and issuance costs of our convertible senior notes.
The increase in other income (loss), net is primarily due to higher foreign currency gains.
Provision for Income Taxes
The decrease in provision expense was primarily due to lower foreign tax expense in the period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
*
As reported and disclosed under ASC Topic 840
As of January 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash of $595.5 million. Our cash and cash equivalents are comprised primarily of overnight cash deposits and money market funds. We generated positive cash flows from operations as reflected in our consolidated statements of cash flows for the twelve-month period ended January 31, 2021. While we may continue to incur operating losses, we expect to continuously improve overall cash flows from operations through improvements to our working capital management processes to provide capital resources for strategic initiatives to grow our business.
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily through equity, cash generated from sales and debt financing. We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, together with our finance leases and credit facilities, will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our growth rate, subscription renewal activity, billing frequency, data center expansions, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing and international operation activities, the introduction of new and enhanced service offerings, and the continuing market acceptance of our services. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services and technologies, including intellectual property rights. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, operating results and financial condition would be adversely affected.
In January 2021, we issued $345.0 million aggregate principal amount of 0.00% convertible senior notes due January 15, 2026. The Notes are senior unsecured obligations and do not bear regular interest. Each $1,000 principal amount of the Notes will initially be convertible into 38.7665 shares of our Class A common stock, which is equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $25.80 per share, subject to adjustment upon the occurrence of specified events.
The Notes are convertible at the option of the holders of the Notes at any time prior to the close of business on the business day immediately preceding October 15, 2025, only under the following circumstances: (1) during any fiscal quarter commencing after the fiscal quarter ending on April 30, 2021 (and only during such fiscal quarter), if the last reported sale price of our Class A common stock for at least 20 trading days (whether or not
consecutive) during a period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on and including, the last trading day of the immediately preceding fiscal quarter is greater than or equal to 130% of the conversion price on each applicable trading day; (2) during the five-business day period after any five consecutive trading day period (the “measurement period”) in which the trading price per $1,000 principal amount of Notes for each trading day of the measurement period was less than 98% of the product of the last reported sale price of our Class A common stock and the conversion rate for the Notes on each such trading day; (3) if we call the Notes for redemption, at any time prior to the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding the redemption date; or (4) upon the occurrence of specified corporate events.
On or after October 15, 2025, holders of the Notes may convert all or any portion of their Notes at any time prior to the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding the maturity date regardless of the foregoing conditions. Effective February 5, 2021, we have made an irrevocable election to settle the principal portion of the Notes only in cash. Accordingly, upon conversion, we will pay the principal portion in cash and we will pay or deliver, as the case may be, the conversion premium in cash, shares of common stock or a combination of cash and shares of common stock, at the Company’s election.
We may not redeem the Notes prior to January 20, 2024. We may redeem for cash all or any portion of the Notes, at our option, on or after January 20, 2024, if the last reported sale price of our common stock has been at least 130% of the conversion price then in effect for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during any 30 consecutive trading day period (including the last trading day of such period) ending on and including, the trading day immediately preceding the date on which we provide notice of redemption at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Notes to be redeemed, plus any accrued and unpaid special interest to, but excluding the redemption date. No sinking fund is provided for the Notes, which means we are not required to redeem or retire the Notes periodically.
Upon the occurrence of a fundamental change (as defined in the indenture governing the Notes) prior to the maturity date, subject to certain conditions, holders of the Notes may require us to repurchase all or a portion of the Notes for cash at a repurchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Notes to be repurchased, plus any accrued and unpaid special interest to, but excluding, the fundamental change repurchase date.
As of January 31, 2021, the conditions allowing holders of the Notes to convert were not met.
On November 27, 2017, we entered into a secured credit agreement (as amended or otherwise modified from time to time, the “November 2017 Facility”) and on July 12, 2019, we entered into Amendment No. 1 to the November 2017 Facility. Pursuant to the terms of the amendment, among other changes, (i) the maturity date of borrowings under the November 2017 Facility was extended from November 27, 2020 to July 12, 2022; (ii) the revolving commitments were increased from $85.0 million to $100.0 million; (iii) the sublimit for the issuance of letters of credit was increased from $30.0 million to $45.0 million; (iv) the covenant in the November 2017 Facility that limits the amount of finance leases and debt that we can incur to finance the acquisition, construction or improvement of any equipment or capital assets was increased from $100.0 million to $200.0 million; and (v) a clause for the issuance of debt constituting convertible debt securities was added, limiting the debt to an aggregate principal amount not to exceed the greater of (a) $350.0 million and (b) immediately after giving pro forma effect to the incurrence of such debt, an amount that would not cause the total leverage ratio to exceed 6.00 to 1.00. The total leverage ratio is defined in Amendment No. 1 as the ratio of (a) all outstanding funded debt to (b) earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA), as of the end of the twelve-month period most recently ended for which financial statements are available. The proceeds of the revolving loans may be used for general corporate purposes. The revolving loans accrue interest at a prime rate plus a margin of 0.25% or, at our option, a LIBOR rate (based on one, three or six-month interest periods) plus a margin of 1.00%. Interest on the revolving loans is payable quarterly in arrears with respect to loans based on the prime rate and at the end of an interest period in the case of loans based on the LIBOR rate (or at each three-month interval if the interest period is longer than three months). Borrowings under the November 2017 Facility are collateralized by substantially all of our assets. The November 2017 Facility requires us to comply with a maximum leverage ratio and a minimum liquidity requirement. Additionally, the November 2017 Facility contains customary affirmative and negative covenants, including covenants limiting our, and our subsidiaries’, ability to, among other things, grant liens, incur debt, pay dividends or distributions on the capital stock, effect certain mergers, make investments, dispose of assets and enter into transactions with affiliates, in each case subject to customary exceptions for a credit facility of the size and type of the November 2017 Facility.
As of January 31, 2021, debt outstanding under the November 2017 Facility was $30.0 million.
Operating Activities
For the year ended January 31, 2021, cash provided by operating activities was $196.8 million. The primary factors affecting our operating cash flows during this period were our net loss of $43.4 million, offset by non-cash charges of $154.3 million for stock-based compensation, $75.5 million for depreciation and amortization of our property and equipment and capitalized software, $36.1 million for amortization of deferred commissions, and net cash outflows of $26.6 million provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities. The primary drivers for the changes in operating assets and liabilities include a $48.0 million increase in deferred commissions primarily due to new and expanded deployments with paying customers during the period, a $45.7 million decrease in operating lease liabilities, an $18.9 million increase in accounts receivable that was primarily due to higher sales and relative timing of our cash collections, and a $12.3 million decrease in accounts payable, partially offset by a $41.8 million increase in deferred revenue that was primarily due to seasonality in our sales cycle which is concentrated in the back half of our fiscal year, predominantly in the last quarter, a $40.7 million decrease in operating right-of-use assets, a $9.4 million increase in accrued expenses and other liabilities, and a $6.3 million decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets.
For the year ended January 31, 2020, cash provided by operating activities was $44.7 million. The primary factors affecting our operating cash flows during this period were our net loss of $144.3 million, offset by non-cash charges of $146.0 million for stock-based compensation, $59.4 million for depreciation and amortization of our property and equipment and capitalized software, $25.9 million for amortization of deferred commissions, and net cash outflows of $42.1 million provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities. The primary drivers for the changes in operating assets and liabilities include a $44.0 million increase in deferred commissions primarily due to new and expanded deployments with paying customers during the period, a $35.1 million decrease in operating lease liabilities, a $34.3 million increase in accounts receivable that was primarily due to higher sales and relative timing of our cash collections, a $7.1 million increase in prepaid expenses and other assets, and a $5.9 million decrease in accrued expenses and other liabilities, partially offset by a $48.8 million increase in deferred revenue that was primarily due to seasonality in our sales cycle which is concentrated in the back half of our fiscal year, predominantly in the last quarter, and a $35.4 million decrease in operating right-of-use assets.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities of $16.4 million for the year ended January 31, 2021 was primarily due to $9.1 million of fixed asset purchases to support our offices and employees and $7.4 million of capitalized internally developed software costs associated with the development of additional significant features and functionality to our products.
Cash used in investing activities of $13.3 million for the year ended January 31, 2020 was primarily due to $8.0 million of capitalized internally developed software costs associated with the development of additional significant features and functionality to our products. In addition, included in cash used in investing activities was $5.5 million of fixed asset purchases to support our increased headcount.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities of $218.7 million for the year ended January 31, 2021 was primarily due to $308.6 million of net proceeds from the issuance of the Notes, $30.0 million of additional borrowings on our November 2017 Facility, $18.6 million from issuances of common stock under the 2015 ESPP, and $10.3 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by $60.0 million of principal payments of finance lease liabilities, $48.8 million of employee payroll taxes paid related to net share settlement of restricted stock, and $40.0 million of payment towards our November 2017 Facility.
Cash used in financing activities of $53.4 million for the year ended January 31, 2020 was primarily due to $43.3 million of employee payroll taxes paid related to net share settlement of restricted stock, $38.5 million of principal payments of finance lease liabilities, and $0.9 million of contingent consideration payments in connection with business combinations in fiscal year 2019, partially offset by $23.4 million of proceeds from issuances of common stock under the 2015 ESPP and $6.0 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments as of January 31, 2021 (in thousands):
(1)
Includes principal, interest, and unused commitment fees on our line of credit under the November 2017 Facility.
(2)
Consists of principal on our 0.00% convertible senior notes due January 15, 2026.
(3)
Includes operating lease liabilities for certain of our offices and data centers. As of January 31, 2021, we expected to receive sublease income of $22.5 million over the next four years from tenants in certain of our leased facilities. The amounts set forth in the table above do not include any sublease income amounts nor does the table include payments for short-term leases or variable lease payments.
(4)
Includes obligations related to our servers and related equipment for our data center operations.
(5)
Includes purchase obligations which were not recognized on the consolidated balance sheet as of January 31, 2021, related primarily to infrastructure services and IT software and support services costs. Our contracts for infrastructure services and IT software, which have terms ranging from 2 to 8 years, support our long-term goals of improving gross margin. In addition to the purchase obligations included in the table above, as of January 31, 2021, we had recognized a total of $14.9 million related to non-cancellable contractual purchases, which were included in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities, and other long-term liabilities on the balance sheet. $9.2 million, $3.8 million, and $1.9 million is due to be paid in the years ending January 31, 2022, 2023, and 2024, respectively.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Through January 31, 2021, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material effect on our financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that of our significant accounting policies, which are described in Note 2 of the Notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the following accounting policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of our operations.
Revenue Recognition
We derive our revenue from three sources: (1) subscription revenue, which is comprised of subscription fees from customers who have access to our cloud content management platform, and other subscription-based services, which all include routine customer support; (2) revenue from customers purchasing our premier services package; and (3) revenue from professional services such as implementing best practice use cases, project management and implementation consulting services.
Revenue is recognized when control of these services is transferred to a customer. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services.
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
•
Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer
•
Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
•
Determination of the transaction price
•
Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
•
Recognition of revenue as we satisfy a performance obligation
Subscription and Premier Services Revenues
We recognize revenue as we satisfy a performance obligation. Accordingly, due to our subscription model, we recognize revenue for our subscription and premier services ratably over the contract term.
We typically invoice our customers at the beginning of the term, in multiyear, annual, quarterly or monthly installments. Our subscription and premier services contracts generally range from one to three years in length, are typically non-cancellable and do not contain refund-type provisions. Revenue is presented net of sales and other taxes we collect on behalf of governmental authorities.
Professional Services
Professional services are generally billed on a fixed price basis, for which revenue is recognized over time based on the proportion performed.
Contracts with Multiple Performance Obligations
Our contracts can include multiple performance obligations which may consist of some or all of subscription services, premier services, and professional services. For these contracts, we account for individual performance obligations separately if they are distinct. The transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price basis. We determine the standalone selling prices based on our overall pricing objectives, taking into consideration discounting practices, the size and volume of our transactions, the customer demographic, the geographic area where services are sold, price lists, our go-to-market strategy, historical standalone sales and contract prices.
Deferred Revenue
Deferred revenue consists of billings in advance of revenue recognition generated by our subscription services, premier services, and professional services described above.
Deferred Commissions
Sales commissions earned by our sales force are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. Sales commissions for new contracts are deferred and then amortized on a straight-line basis over a period of benefit that we have estimated to be five years. We determined the period of benefit by taking into consideration our customer contracts, our technology and other factors. Sales commissions for renewal contracts are deferred and then amortized on a straight-line basis over the related contractual renewal period. Amortization expense is included in sales and marketing expenses on the consolidated statements of operations.
Internal-Use Software Costs
We capitalize costs to develop software for internal use incurred during the application development stage. Costs related to preliminary project activities and post implementation activities are expensed as incurred. Once an application has reached the development stage, qualifying internal and external costs are capitalized until the application is substantially complete and ready for its intended use. Capitalized qualifying costs are amortized on a straight-line basis when the software is ready for its intended use over an estimated useful life, which is generally three years. Internal-use software costs also include on-premises software, which is amortized over the lesser of five years or the license term. We evaluate the useful lives of these assets on an annual basis and test for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances occur that could impact the recoverability of these assets.
Leases
We determine whether an arrangement contains a lease at inception. A contract is or contains a lease if the contract conveys the right to control the use of an identified asset for a period of time in exchange for consideration. To determine whether a contract is or contains a lease, we consider all relevant facts and circumstances to assess whether the customer has both of the following:
•
the right to obtain substantially all of the economic benefits from use of the identified asset
•
the right to direct the use of the identified asset
We recognize lease liabilities and right-of-use assets at lease commencement. We measure lease liabilities based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term discounted using the rate implicit in the lease when that rate is readily determinable or our incremental borrowing rate. We estimate our incremental borrowing rate based on an analysis of publicly traded debt securities of companies with credit and financial profiles similar to our own and adjust our incremental borrowing rate to reflect the corresponding lease term. We do not include in the lease term options to extend or terminate the lease unless it is reasonably certain that we will exercise any such options. We account for the lease and non-lease components as a single lease component for all our leases.
We measure right-of-use assets based on the corresponding lease liabilities adjusted for (i) prepayments made to the lessor at or before the commencement date, (ii) initial direct costs we incur, and (iii) tenant incentives under the lease. We evaluate the recoverability of our right-of-use assets for possible impairment in accordance with our long-lived assets policy. We do not recognize right-of-use assets or lease liabilities for short-term leases, which have a lease term of twelve months or less, and recognize the associated lease payments in the consolidated statements of operations on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Operating leases are reflected in operating lease right-of-use assets, operating lease liabilities, and operating lease liabilities, non-current on our consolidated balance sheets. Finance leases are included in property and equipment, net, finance lease liabilities, and finance lease liabilities, non-current on our consolidated balance sheets.
We begin recognizing rent expense when the lessor makes the underlying asset available to us. We recognize rent expense under our operating leases on a straight-line basis. For finance leases, we record interest expense on the lease liability in addition to amortizing the right-of-use asset (generally straight-line) over the shorter of the lease term or the useful life of the right-of-use asset. Variable lease payments are expensed as incurred and are not included within the lease liabilities and right-of-use assets calculation. We generally recognize sublease income on a straight-line basis over the sublease term.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure and recognize compensation expense for all stock-based awards granted to our employees and other service providers, including stock options, restricted stock units, restricted stock and purchase rights granted under our 2015 Equity Incentive Plan (2015 Plan) and 2015 Employee Stock Purchase Plan (2015 ESPP), based on the estimated fair value of the award on the grant date. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock option awards and purchase rights granted under our 2015 Plan and 2015 ESPP. We use the market closing price of our Class A common stock as reported on the New York Stock Exchange for the fair value of restricted stock units and restricted stock granted after our initial public offering. We recognize the fair value of stock options, restricted stock units and restricted stock as an expense, net of estimated forfeitures, on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. We recognize the fair value of purchase rights granted under our 2015 ESPP as an expense on a straight-line basis over the offering period.
Our Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the input of certain assumptions, including the fair value of the underlying common stock, the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of the price of our common stock, risk-free interest rates, and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. The assumptions used in our option pricing model represent management’s best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
These assumptions are estimated as follows:
•
Fair Value of Common Stock. We use the market closing price for our Class A common stock as reported on the New York Stock Exchange to determine the fair value of our common stock at each grant date.
•
Expected Term. The expected term represents the period that our share-based awards are expected to be outstanding. The expected term assumptions were determined based on the vesting terms, exercise terms and contractual lives of the options and 2015 ESPP purchase rights.
•
Expected Volatility. Beginning in fiscal year 2019, we have estimated the expected volatility of the stock option grants and 2015 ESPP purchase rights based on the historical volatility of our Class A common stock over a period equivalent to the expected term of the stock option grants and 2015 ESPP purchase rights, respectively. In previous years, we derived the expected volatility from the historical stock volatilities of several unrelated public companies within the same industry that we considered to be comparable to our business over a period equivalent to the expected term of the stock option grants and 2015 ESPP purchase rights as we did not have sufficient trading history of our Class A common stock.
•
Risk-free Interest Rate. The risk-free rate that we use is based on the implied yield available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with remaining terms similar to the expected term on the options and 2015 ESPP purchase rights.
•
Dividend Yield. We have never declared or paid any cash dividends and do not plan to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future, and, therefore, use an expected dividend yield of zero.
Refer to Note 10 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a summary of the assumptions used to estimate the fair value of stock option and ESPP purchase rights.
For performance-based restricted stock units that vest based upon continued service and achievement of certain performance conditions established by the board of directors for a predetermined period, the fair value is determined based upon the market closing price of our Class A common stock on the date of the grant; compensation expense is recognized over the requisite service period if it is probable that the performance condition will be satisfied based on the accelerated attribution method.
In addition, we have issued performance-based stock options that vest based upon continued service through the vesting term and achievement of certain market conditions established by the board of directors for a predetermined period. We measure stock-based compensation expense for performance-based stock options containing market conditions based on the estimated grant date fair value determined using the Monte Carlo valuation model; we recognize compensation expense for such awards over the requisite service period using the accelerated attribution method.
We estimate the expected forfeiture rate and only recognize expense for those shares that are expected to vest. We estimate the expected forfeiture rate at the date of grant based on historical experience and our expectations regarding future pre-vesting termination behavior of employees and other service providers and revise the estimates, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. To the extent our actual forfeiture rate is different from our estimate, stock-based compensation expense is adjusted accordingly.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions related to our stock-based compensation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may have refinements to our estimates, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
Long-Lived Assets, Including Goodwill and Other Acquired Intangible Assets
We evaluate the recoverability of property and equipment and operating lease right-of-use assets for possible impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. Recoverability of these assets is measured by a comparison of the carrying amounts to the future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate. If such review indicates that the carrying amount of property and equipment is not recoverable, the carrying amount of such assets is reduced to fair value. We have not recorded any significant impairment charges during the years presented.
We review goodwill for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. We have elected to first assess the qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of our single reporting unit is less than its carrying amount as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test. If we determine that it is more likely than not that its fair value is less than its carrying amount, then the quantitative goodwill impairment test will be performed. The quantitative goodwill impairment test identifies goodwill impairment and measures the amount of goodwill impairment loss to be recognized by comparing the fair value of our single reporting unit with its carrying amount. If the fair value exceeds its carrying amount, no further analysis is required; otherwise, any excess of the goodwill carrying amount over the implied fair value is recognized as an impairment loss, and the carrying value of goodwill is written down to fair value. No impairment of goodwill has been identified during the years presented.
Acquired finite-lived intangible assets are typically amortized over the estimated useful lives of the assets, which is generally two to seven years. We evaluate the recoverability of our intangible assets for possible impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. Recoverability of these assets is measured by a comparison of the carrying amounts to the future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate. If such review indicates that the carrying amount of intangible assets is not recoverable, the carrying amount of such assets is reduced to fair value. We have not recorded any such impairment charges during the years presented.
Recently Adopted and Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K regarding the effect of recently adopted and issued accounting pronouncements on our financial statements.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Regulation S-K Item 10(e), “Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures in Commission Filings,” defines and prescribes the conditions for use of non-GAAP financial information. Our measures of non-GAAP operating income (loss), non-GAAP operating margin, non-GAAP net income (loss), non-GAAP net income (loss) per share, and free cash flow (collectively, the non-GAAP financial measures) each meet the definition of a non-GAAP financial measure.
We use these non-GAAP financial measures and our key metrics for financial and operational decision-making and as a means to evaluate period-to-period comparisons. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures and key metrics provide meaningful supplemental information regarding our performance by excluding certain expenses that may not be indicative of our recurring core business operating results. We believe that both management and investors benefit from referring to these non-GAAP financial measures and key metrics in assessing our performance and when planning, forecasting, and analyzing future periods. These non-GAAP financial measures and key metrics also facilitate management’s internal comparisons to our historical performance as well as comparisons to our competitors’ operating results. We believe these non-GAAP financial measures and key metrics are useful to investors both because (1) they allow for greater transparency with respect to key metrics used by management in its financial and operational decision-making and (2) they are used by our institutional investors and the analyst community to help them analyze the health of our business.
Non-GAAP operating income (loss) and non-GAAP operating margin
We define non-GAAP operating income (loss) as operating income (loss) excluding expenses related to stock-based compensation (SBC), acquired intangible assets amortization, and as applicable, other special items. Non-GAAP operating margin is defined as non-GAAP operating income (loss) divided by revenue. Although SBC is an important aspect of the compensation of our employees and executives, determining the fair value of certain of the stock-based instruments we utilize involves a high degree of judgment and estimation and the expense recorded may bear little resemblance to the actual value realized upon the vesting or future exercise of the related stock-based awards. Furthermore, unlike cash compensation, the value of stock options, which is an element of our ongoing stock-based compensation expense, is determined using a complex formula that incorporates factors, such as market volatility, that are beyond our control. For restricted stock unit awards, the amount of stock-based compensation expenses is not reflective of the value ultimately received by the grant recipients. Management believes it is useful to exclude SBC in order to better understand the long-term performance of our core business and to facilitate comparison of our results to those of peer companies. Management also views amortization of acquisition-related intangible assets, such as the amortization of the cost associated with an acquired company’s developed technology and trade names, as items arising from pre-acquisition activities determined at the time of an acquisition. While these intangible assets are continually evaluated for impairment, amortization of the cost of purchased intangibles is a static expense, one that is not typically affected by operations during any particular period. Furthermore, Box excludes the following expenses as they are considered by management to be special items outside of Box’s core operating results: (1) fees related to shareholder activism, which include directly applicable third-party advisory and professional service fees, (2) expenses related to certain litigation, (3) expenses associated with restructuring activities, consisting primarily of severance and other personnel-related costs, and (4) expenses related to announced acquisitions, including transaction and discrete tax costs. There are no expenses related to litigation excluded from non-GAAP operating income (loss) in any of the periods presented.
Non-GAAP net income (loss) and net income (loss) per share
We define non-GAAP net income (loss) as net loss excluding expenses related to stock-based compensation, acquired intangible assets amortization and as applicable, other special items. We specifically identify other adjusting items in our reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP net income (loss). These items include expenses related to certain litigation and the amortization of the debt discount and issuance costs associated with our Notes, which are amortized as interest expense, because they are considered by management to be special items outside our core operating results. We define non-GAAP net income (loss) per share as non-GAAP net income (loss) divided by the weighted-average outstanding shares. Similarly, the same adjusting items specified in our reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP net income (loss) are also excluded from the calculation of non-GAAP net income (loss) per share.
Free Cash Flow
We define free cash flow as cash flows from operating activities less purchases of property and equipment, principal payments of finance lease liabilities, capitalized internally developed software costs, and other items that did not or are not expected to require cash settlement and that management considers to be outside of our core business. We specifically identify other adjusting items in our reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP financial measures. We consider free cash flow to be a profitability and liquidity measure that provides useful information to management and investors about the amount of cash generated by the business that can possibly be used for investing in our business and strengthening the balance sheet; but it is not intended to represent the residual cash flow available for discretionary expenditures. A reconciliation of free cash flow to net cash provided by operating activities, its nearest GAAP equivalent, is presented below. The presentation of free cash flow is also not meant to be considered in isolation or as an alternative to cash flows from operating activities as a measure of liquidity.
Limitations on the use of non-GAAP financial measures
A limitation of our non-GAAP financial measures is that they do not have uniform definitions. Our definitions will likely differ from the definitions used by other companies, including peer companies, and therefore comparability may be limited. Thus, our non-GAAP financial measures should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, or in isolation from, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. Additionally, in the case of stock-based compensation expense, if we did not pay a portion of compensation in the form of stock-based compensation expense, the cash salary expense included in costs of revenue and operating expenses would be higher which would affect our cash position.
We compensate for these limitations by reconciling non-GAAP financial measures to the most comparable GAAP financial measures. We encourage investors and others to review our financial information in its entirety, not to rely on any single financial measure and to view our non-GAAP financial measures in conjunction with the most comparable GAAP financial measures.
The following table sets forth our reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measures for years ended January 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands, except per share data and percentages). We adopted ASC Topic 842, effective February 1, 2019, utilizing the modified retrospective method. The reported results for fiscal year 2020 onwards reflect the application of ASC 842, while the reported results for fiscal years presented prior to adoption are not adjusted and continue to be reported under ASC Topic 840.