Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the ‘‘Risk Factors’’ section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results or timing of certain events could differ materially from the results or timing described in, or implied by, these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a global precision therapy company that is inventing transformative medicines for people with cancer and hematologic disorders. Applying an approach that is both precise and agile, we create therapies that selectively target genetic drivers, with the goal of staying one step ahead across stages of disease. Since 2011, we have leveraged our research platform, including expertise in molecular targeting and world-class drug design capabilities, to rapidly and reproducibly translate science into a broad pipeline of precision therapies. We are delivering our approved medicines, AYVAKIT™/AYVAKYT® (avapritinib) and GAVRETO™ (pralsetinib), to patients in the U.S. and Europe, and we are globally advancing multiple programs for genomically defined cancers, systemic mastocytosis, and cancer immunotherapy.
Our drug discovery approach combines our deep understanding of kinase biology with our proprietary compound library and chemistry expertise to design highly selective and potent precision therapies, with the goal of delivering significant and durable clinical benefit to patients based on the genetic driver of their disease. This uniquely targeted, scalable approach is designed to empower the rapid design and development of new treatments and increase the likelihood of success. In addition, our business model integrates our research engine with robust clinical development and commercial capabilities in oncology and hematology to create a cycle of innovation.
Systemic Mastocytosis and other Mast Cell Disorders - Avapritinib and BLU-263
Avapritinib
We are developing avapritinib for the treatment of systemic mastocytosis, or SM, a rare hematologic disorder that causes an overproduction of mast cells and the accumulation of mast cells in the bone marrow and other organs, which can lead to a wide range of debilitating symptoms and organ dysfunction and failure. Nearly all cases of SM are driven by the KIT D816V mutation, which aberrantly activates mast cells.
In December 2020, we submitted a supplemental new drug application, or NDA, to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, for avapritinib for the treatment of adult patients with advanced SM. In February 2021, the FDA accepted our application and set a Prescription Drug User Fee Act, or PDUFA, action date of June 16, 2021. We also submitted a Type II variation marketing authorization application, or MAA, to the European Medicines Agency, or EMA, for avapritinib for advanced SM in February 2021.
We are currently evaluating avapritinib in an ongoing registration-enabling Phase 1 clinical trial in advanced SM, which we refer to as our EXPLORER trial, and an ongoing registration-enabling Phase 2 clinical trial in advanced SM, which we refer to as our PATHFINDER trial. In September 2020, we reported positive top-line data from the EXPLORER and PATHFINDER trials. We plan to present registrational data from the PATHFINDER trial in the first half of 2021. In addition, we are evaluating avapritinib in an ongoing registration-enabling Phase 2 clinical trial in non-advanced SM, which we refer to as our PIONEER trial. In 2020, we reported data from the dose-finding portion (Part 1) of the PIONEER trial and initiated the registration-enabling Part 2 of the PIONEER trial. We expect to complete enrollment of Part 2 of the PIONEER trial in mid-2021.
The FDA has granted breakthrough therapy designation to avapritinib for (i) the treatment of advanced SM, including the subtypes of aggressive SM, SM with an associated hematologic neoplasm and mast cell leukemia, and (ii) the treatment of moderate to severe indolent SM. In addition, the FDA has granted orphan drug designation to avapritinib for the treatment of mastocytosis, and the European Commission has granted orphan medicinal product designation to avapritinib for the treatment of mastocytosis.
BLU-263
BLU-263 is an investigational, orally available, potent and highly selective KIT inhibitor that we are developing for the treatment of non-advanced SM and other mast cell disorders. BLU-263 is designed to have equivalent potency as avapritinib, with low off-target activity and lower penetration of the central nervous system, or CNS, relative to avapritinib based on preclinical data, which we believe will enable development of BLU-263 in a broad population of patients with non-advanced SM, including patients with lower disease burden requiring potentially life-long chronic therapy, and potentially patients with other mast cell disorders. In January 2021, we announced positive top-line results from a Phase 1 trial of BLU-263 in healthy volunteers. Based on these data, in mid-2021, we plan to initiate a Phase 2 trial of BLU-263 in patients with non-advanced SM, which we refer to as our HARBOR trial.
RET-altered Cancers - GAVRETO™ (pralsetinib)
We are developing and commercializing pralsetinib for the treatment of RET fusion-positive non-small cell lung cancer, or NSCLC, and for the treatment of RET-altered thyroid carcinoma, including medullary thyroid carcinoma, or MTC. We are also developing pralsetinib for the treatment of other RET-altered solid tumors. We have granted exclusive licenses to Roche and CStone Pharmaceuticals, or CStone, to develop and commercialize pralsetinib in their respective territories. See “-Collaborations and Licenses Summary” below.
Pralsetinib is approved in the U.S. with accelerated approval under the brand name GAVRETO for the treatment of (i) adult patients with metastatic RET fusion-positive NSCLC as detected by an FDA approved test, (ii) adult and pediatric patients 12 years of age and older with advanced or metastatic RET-mutant MTC who require systemic therapy, and (iii) adult and pediatric patients 12 years of age and older with advanced or metastatic RET fusion-positive thyroid cancer who require systemic therapy and who are radioactive iodine-refractory (if radioactive iodine is appropriate).
The EMA is currently reviewing our MAA for pralsetinib for RET fusion-positive NSCLC. If approved by the European Commission, Roche plans to launch pralsetinib in RET fusion-positive NSCLC in Europe in the first half of 2021. Roche also plans to submit a Type II variation MAA to the EMA for pralsetinib for RET-altered thyroid cancers in the second half of 2021, and to submit marketing applications for pralsetinib for RET-altered NSCLC and thyroid cancers across multiple additional global geographies in 2021. In addition, China’s National Medical Products Administration, or NMPA, accepted an NDA submitted by CStone in the third quarter of 2020 for pralsetinib for the treatment of RET fusion-positive NSCLC patients previously treated with platinum-based chemotherapy.
We are currently evaluating pralsetinib in an ongoing registration-enabling Phase 1/2 clinical trial in patients with RET-altered NSCLC, MTC and other advanced solid tumors, which we refer to as our ARROW trial. Pursuant to our collaboration with Roche, we plan to co-develop pralsetinib globally in RET-altered solid tumors, including NSCLC, MTC and other thyroid cancers, as well as other solid tumors.
The FDA has granted breakthrough therapy designation to pralsetinib for (i) the treatment of patients with RET fusion-positive NSCLC that has progressed following platinum-based chemotherapy and (b) the treatment of patients with RET mutation-positive MTC that requires systemic treatment and for which there are no acceptable alternative treatments. In addition, the FDA has granted orphan drug designation to pralsetinib for the treatment of RET-rearranged NSCLC, JAK1/2-positive NSCLC or TRKC-positive NSCLC.
PDGFRA-Driven Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors - AYVAKIT™ / AYVAKYT® (avapritinib)
We are commercializing avapritinib for the treatment of patients with PDGFRA exon 18 mutant gastrointestinal stromal tumors, or GIST, a rare disease that is a sarcoma, or tumor of bone or connective tissue, of the gastrointestinal
tract. Avapritinib is approved in the U.S. under the brand name AYVAKIT for the treatment of adults with unresectable or metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumors harboring a PDGFRA exon 18 mutation, including PDGFRA D842V mutations, and is approved in the European Union with conditional marketing authorization under the brand name AYVAKYT as a monotherapy for the treatment of adult patients with unresectable or metastatic GIST harboring a PDGFRA D842V mutation.
The European Commission has granted orphan medicinal product designation to avapritinib for the treatment of GIST. In addition, the NMPA accepted an NDA submitted by CStone in the first quarter of 2020 for avapritinib for the treatment of adults with unresectable or metastatic PDGFRA exon 18 mutant GIST. CStone also submitted an NDA to the Taiwan Food and Drug Administration, or the TFDA, for avapritinib for the indication of adult patients with unresectable or metastatic GIST harboring a PDGFRA exon 18 mutation, including PDGFRA D842V mutations, and received priority review designation from the TFDA.
Treatment-Resistant EGFR-Mutated NSCLC
We are developing two investigational EGFR inhibitors, BLU-701 and BLU-945, with the goal of addressing the most common on-target resistance mutations to currently available EGFR-targeted therapies. While the introduction of EGFR-targeted therapies, including osimertinib, has transformed the care of patients with EGFR-driven NSCLC, treatment resistance is a significant emerging unmet medical need.
In addition to targeting EGFR resistance mutations, BLU-701 and BLU-945 were specifically designed for selectivity over wild-type EGFR and other kinases to enable potential improved tolerability and also combination strategies. In addition, in preclinical tumor models, both drug candidates have shown CNS activity, highlighting the potential to address CNS metastases which are more common in treatment-experienced NSCLC patients.
We plan to initially develop BLU-701 and BLU-945 as monotherapies and in combination with each other and other therapies to overcome treatment resistance in specific patient populations with EGFR-driven NSCLC.
EGFR-Positive Double Mutant NSCLC - BLU-701
BLU-701 is a selective and potent investigational inhibitor of double-mutant EGFR harboring either the activating L858R or exon 19 deletion mutations combined with the acquired C797S mutation, the most common on-target resistance mutation to osimertinib. We plan to initially develop BLU-701 as a monotherapy and in combination with other therapies. We plan to present foundational preclinical data for BLU-701 in the first half of 2021, and we plan to initiate a Phase 1 trial of BLU-701 in the second half of 2021.
EGFR-Positive Triple Mutant NSCLC - BLU-945
BLU-945 is a selective and potent investigational inhibitor of triple-mutant EGFR harboring either the activating L858R or exon 19 deletion mutations combined with the acquired T790M and C797S mutations, the most common on-target resistance to first-generation EGFR inhibitors and osimertinib, respectively.
In preclinical data presented in September 2020, BLU-945 inhibited triple mutant EGFR with sub-nanomolar potency and demonstrated greater than 900-fold selectivity over wild-type EGFR along with excellent overall kinome selectivity. In a triple mutant EGFR cell-line, BLU-945 potently inhibited the EGFR pathway, while osimertinib demonstrated limited activity. BLU-945 monotherapy resulted in robust anti-tumor activity in multiple cell line-derived and patient-derived xenograft models of triple mutant EGFR NSCLC. In addition, BLU-945 treatment in combination with osimertinib or gefitinib resulted in tumor regression in a triple mutant EGFR NSCLC patient-derived xenograft model, which was derived from a patient with progressive disease following five lines of prior therapy. BLU-945 was also highly active in an intracranial disease model.
Based on these preclinical proof-of-concept data, we plan to initially develop BLU-945 as a monotherapy and in combination with other agents. We plan to initiate a Phase 1 trial of BLU-945 in patients with EGFR-driven NSCLC, in the first half of 2021.
Fisogatinib - Hepatocellular Carcinoma
We are developing fisogatinib for the treatment of advanced hepatocellular carcinoma, or HCC. Fisogatinib is an investigational, orally available, potent and highly selective inhibitor that targets FGFR4, a kinase that is aberrantly activated in a defined subset of patients with HCC, the most common type of liver cancer. As part of our collaboration with CStone, we are evaluating fisogatinib as a monotherapy and in combination with sugemalimab, a clinical-stage anti-PDL1 immunotherapy being developed by CStone, for the treatment of locally advanced or metastatic HCC in an ongoing Phase 1b/2 trial conducted in multiple clinical sites in China. The FDA has granted orphan drug designation to fisogatinib for the treatment of HCC.
Discovery Platform
We plan to continue to leverage our discovery platform to systematically and reproducibly identify kinases that are drivers of diseases in genomically defined patient populations and craft drug candidates that potently and selectively target these kinases.
In addition to our discovery programs for treatment-resistant EGFR-mutated NSCLC, we currently have the following wholly-owned discovery programs:
● CDK2 Discovery Program. In February 2021, we announced a discovery program targeting CDK2. CDK2, a cyclin-dependent kinase involved in cell cycle biology, is activated by its regulatory partner Cyclin E, and can drive cancer cell proliferation when Cyclin E is aberrantly expressed. Dysregulated Cyclin E is associated with multiple malignancies and has been shown to be a mechanism of resistance to targeted therapies, including CDK4/6 inhibitors.
● Other Discovery Programs. In addition to the discovery programs described above, we have two wholly-owned pre-development candidate programs for undisclosed kinase targets.
Under our immunotherapy collaboration with Roche, we are conducting activities for up to two discovery programs, including a development candidate for the kinase target MAP4K1. See “-Collaborations and Licenses Summary” below. We plan to present initial preclinical data for our MAP4K1 development candidate in the first half of 2021.
Collaborations and Licenses
Roche-Immunotherapy Collaboration. In March 2016, we entered into a collaboration with Roche to discover, develop and commercialize up to two small molecule therapeutics targeting kinases believed to be important in cancer immunotherapy (including the kinase target MAP4K1, which is believed to play a role in T cell regulation), as single products or possibly in combination with other therapeutics.
Roche-Pralsetinib Collaboration. In July 2020, we entered into a collaboration with Roche to develop and commercialize pralsetinib for the treatment of RET-altered cancers. Under the collaboration, we and Genentech are co-commercializing GAVRETO in the U.S., and Roche has exclusive commercialization rights for pralsetinib outside of the U.S., excluding the CStone territory. We and Roche also plan to co-develop pralsetinib globally in RET-altered solid tumors, including NSCLC, MTC and other thyroid cancers, and expand development of pralsetinib in multiple treatment settings. Further, we and Roche plan to explore development of a next-generation RET inhibitor as part of the collaboration.
CStone. In June 2018, we entered into a collaboration with CStone to develop and commercialize avapritinib, pralsetinib and fisogatinib, including back-up forms and certain other forms, in the CStone territory either as a monotherapy or as part of a combination therapy.
Clementia. In October 2019, we entered into a license agreement with Clementia Pharmaceuticals, Inc., or Clementia, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Ipsen S.A., and granted Clementia an exclusive, worldwide, royalty-bearing license to develop and commercialize BLU-782, as well as specified other compounds related to the BLU-782 program. BLU-782 is an investigational, orally available, potent and highly selective inhibitor that targets mutant activin-like kinase 2, or ALK2, in development for the treatment of fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva, or FOP. The FDA has granted a rare pediatric disease designation, orphan drug designation and fast track designation to BLU-782, each for the treatment of FOP.
We will continue to evaluate additional collaborations, partnerships and licenses that could maximize the value for our programs and allow us to leverage the expertise of strategic collaborators, partners and licensors, including in additional geographies where we may not have current operations or expertise. We are also focused on engaging in
collaborations, partnerships and license agreements to capitalize on our discovery platform outside of our primary strategic focus area of cancer and rare diseases.
Note on the COVID-19 Pandemic
Due to the continued evolution and uncertain global impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, we cannot precisely determine or quantify the impact this pandemic will have on our business, operations and financial performance. In 2020, we initially established a work-from-home policy for all employees, other than those performing or supporting business-critical activities, such as certain members of our laboratory and facilities staff. While the majority of employees continue to work from home, we have continued to evaluate and update this policy for each of our locations and field-based employees based on guidance from federal, state and local government authorities and the severity of the pandemic. For our ongoing and planned clinical trials, while we anticipate and have experienced some delays or disruptions due to the COVID-19 pandemic, in particular with respect to activation of additional clinical trial sites and patient enrollment rates, we have continued to work with any impacted clinical trial sites to ensure study continuity, enable medical monitoring, facilitate study procedures and maintain clinical data and records, including the use of local laboratories for testing and tumor imaging, home delivery of study drug and remote data and records monitoring. In addition, we currently have sufficient supply or plans for supply to meet our anticipated global commercial and clinical development needs for our approved drugs and clinical-stage drug candidates through 2022. However, depending on the duration and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on local and global supply chains, our suppliers could be adversely impacted, which may result in delays or disruptions in our current or future supply chain. For our commercial activities for AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT and GAVRETO, we are committed to continuing to serve the needs of healthcare providers, patients and other stakeholders during this critical time, including by conducting commercial and medical affairs field activities across our portfolio in virtual formats where possible. We will continue to assess the duration, scope and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic and the existing and potential impacts on our business, operations and financial performance, and we will continue to work closely with our third-party vendors, collaborators and other parties in order to seek to advance our pipeline of targeted therapies as quickly as possible, while making the health and safety of our employees and their families, healthcare providers, patients and communities a top priority. Please refer to our Risk Factors in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Financial Operations Overview
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through public offerings of our common stock, private placements of our convertible preferred and common stock, collaborations and a license agreement. Through December 31, 2020, we have received an aggregate of $2.9 billion from such transactions, including $1.9 billion in aggregate gross proceeds from the sale of common stock in our initial public offering, or IPO, follow-on public offerings, through our “at the market” stock offering program and the equity investment by Roche, $115.1 million in gross proceeds from the issuance of convertible preferred stock, $910.8 million in upfront and milestone payments under our collaborations with Roche and CStone, our license agreement with Clementia and our former collaboration with Alexion Pharma Holding, or Alexion. In addition, since January 2020, we have generated limited product revenue.
Since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses, with the exception of the year ended December 31, 2020. Our net income was $313.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the collaboration revenue recorded under our collaboration with Roche for pralsetinib. Our net losses were $347.7 million and $236.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $631.4 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses over the next few years. We anticipate that our expenses will continue to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we:
● maintain and expand our sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure to continue to commercialize AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT, GAVRETO and any current or future drug candidates for which we may obtain marketing approval;
● seek marketing approval for our drug candidates, including for avapritinib and pralsetinib in additional indications or in additional geographies;
● continue to advance clinical development activities for avapritinib and pralsetinib and initiate or advance clinical development activities for other current or future drug candidates;
● continue to discover, validate and develop additional drug candidates or development candidates, including our discovery programs for treatment-resistant EGFR-mutated NSCLC and our CDK2 discovery program;
● continue to manufacture increasing quantities of drug substance and drug product material for use in pre-clinical studies, clinical trials and commercialization;
● conduct development and commercialization activities for companion diagnostic tests for our drugs and drug candidates;
● conduct research and development activities under our collaborations with Roche and CStone;
● maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
● acquire or in-license additional businesses, technologies, drugs or drug candidates, form strategic alliances or create joint ventures with third parties; and
● hire additional research, clinical, quality, manufacturing, regulatory, commercial and general and administrative personnel.
Revenue
In January 2020, the FDA granted approval of avapritinib under the brand name AYVAKIT for the treatment of adults with unresectable or metastatic GIST harboring a PDGFRA exon 18 mutation, including PDGFRA D842V mutations. In September 2020, the FDA granted accelerated approval to pralsetinib under the brand name GAVRETO for the treatment of adult patients with metastatic RET fusion-positive NSCLC as detected by an FDA approved test, and the European Commission granted conditional marketing authorization to avapritinib under the brand name AYVAKYT as a monotherapy for the treatment of adult patients with unresectable or metastatic GIST harboring the PDGFRA D842V mutation.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our revenue primarily consisted of sales of AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT, GAVRETO and collaboration revenue under our collaborations with Roche and CStone. Collaboration revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily includes amounts that were recognized related to upfront payments, milestone payments, the equity premium from Roche, and amounts due to us for supply of inventory (under our collaboration agreements) and research and development services.
In the future, we expect to generate revenue from a combination of sales of AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT, GAVRETO and any current or future drug candidates for which we receive marketing approval, royalties on product sales, upfront, milestone, profit sharing and other payments, if any, under any current or future collaborations and licenses, including revenues related to the supply of our drug candidates or approved drugs to our various collaboration partners. We expect that any revenue we generate will fluctuate from quarter to quarter as a result of the timing and amount of product sales, license fees, research and development services, payments for manufacturing services, and option fees, milestone payments or other payments under our collaboration or license agreements, if any.
Cost of sales
Our cost of sales includes the cost of producing and distributing inventories that are related to product revenue during the respective period, including salary related and stock-based compensation expense for employees involved with production and distribution, freight, and indirect overhead costs. In addition, shipping and handling costs for product shipments are recorded in cost of sales as incurred.
Prior to receiving FDA approval for AYVAKIT and GAVRETO in January 2020 and September 2020, respectively, we manufactured inventory to be sold upon commercialization and recorded approximately $36.3 million related to this inventory as research and development expense. As a result, the manufacturing costs related to the inventory build-up incurred before FDA approval were expensed in a prior period and are therefore excluded from the cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2020. We estimate our cost of goods sold as a percentage of net product revenue will continue to be positively impacted as we sell through certain inventory that was previously expensed prior to FDA approval. We expect to utilize zero cost inventory for an extended period of time.
Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research and development activities, including our drug discovery efforts, and the development of our drug candidates, which include:
● employee-related expenses including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation expense;
● expenses incurred under agreements with third parties that conduct research and development, pre-clinical activities, clinical activities and manufacturing on our behalf;
● expenses incurred under agreements with third parties for the development and commercialization of companion diagnostic tests;
● the cost of consultants in connection with our research and development activities;
● the cost associated with regulatory quality assurance and quality control operations;
● the cost of lab supplies and acquiring, developing and manufacturing pre-clinical study materials, clinical trial materials and commercial supply materials; and
● facilities, depreciation, and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance, and other operating costs in support of research and development activities.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Costs for certain activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are capitalized. The capitalized amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
The successful development of our drug candidates is highly uncertain. As such, at this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and estimated costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the remainder of the development of these drug candidates. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, material net cash inflows will commence from the sale of our current or future drug candidates for which we received marketing approval. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing drugs, including the uncertainty of:
● establishing an appropriate safety profile with IND-enabling toxicology studies;
● successful initiation, enrollment in, and completion of clinical trials;
● receipt of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
● establishing commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers;
● obtaining and maintaining patent and trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity for AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT, GAVRETO and our drug candidates;
● commercializing AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT, GAVRETO and our drug candidates, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others;
● market acceptance of AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT, GAVRETO and any future drug we may commercialize; and
● continued acceptable safety profile of the drugs following approval.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our drug candidates would significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that drug candidate.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Drug candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect research and development costs to increase significantly for the foreseeable future as our drug candidate development programs progress and as we conduct and continue our clinical trials to evaluate our approved drugs for additional indications. However, we do not believe that it is possible at this time to accurately project total program-specific expenses through commercialization. There are numerous factors associated with the successful commercialization of any of our approved drugs or drug candidates for which we may receive marketing approval, including future trial design and various regulatory requirements, many of which cannot be determined with accuracy at this time based on our stage of development. In addition, future commercial and regulatory factors beyond our control will impact our clinical development programs and plans.
A significant portion of our research and development expenses have been external expenses, which we track on a program-by-program basis following nomination as a development candidate. Our internal research and development expenses are primarily personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation expense. Except for internal research and development expenses related to collaboration agreements, we do not track our internal research and development expenses on a program-by-program basis as they are deployed across multiple projects under development.
The following table summarizes our external research and development expenses by program for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. Other development and pre-development candidate expenses, unallocated expenses and internal research and development expenses have been classified separately.
*
Pralsetinib external expenses includes reimbursable expenses under our collaboration for pralsetinib with Roche, and other development and pre-development candidate expenses includes reimbursable expenses under our other collaboration agreements.
We expect that our research and development expenses will increase in future periods as we expand our operations and incur additional costs in connection with our clinical trials and preparing regulatory filings. These
increases will likely include the costs related to the implementation and expansion of clinical trial sites and related patient enrollment, monitoring, program management and manufacturing expenses for API, drug product and drug substance for current and future clinical trials and commercial inventory. In addition, we expect that our research and development expenses will increase in future periods as we incur additional costs in connection with research and development activities under our immunotherapy collaboration with Roche, development activities under our collaboration with CStone, development activities under our collaboration for pralsetinib with Roche and development activities for companion diagnostic tests for current and future drug candidates.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation and benefits, including stock-based compensation, for commercial operations and for personnel in executive, finance, accounting, commercial, business development, information technology, legal and human resources functions. Other significant costs include facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, commercial development activities, legal fees related to intellectual property and corporate matters and fees for accounting and consulting services.
We expect that our selling, general and administrative expenses will continue to increase in the future to support additional research and development activities and commercialization activities, including expanding our sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any drugs for which we may obtain marketing approval for additional indications or in additional geographies and expanding our operations globally. These increases will likely include increased costs related to the hiring of additional personnel, legal, auditing and filing fees and general compliance and consulting expenses, among other expenses. We have incurred and will continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company and expanding the scope of our operations.
Interest Income (Expense), net
Interest income (expense), net consists primarily of income earned on cash equivalents and investments. We expect our interest income, net, will increase in future periods due to our increase in average investment balances following receipt of the upfront payments related to our collaboration with Roche for pralsetinib.
Other Income (Expense), net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of foreign currency transaction gains or losses.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense consists primarily of income taxes related to the taxable income generated from our collaboration with Roche for pralsetinib and our product sales in the state jurisdictions where we conduct business.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our judgments and estimates in light of changes in circumstances, facts and experience. The effects of material revisions in estimates, if any, will be reflected in the consolidated financial statements prospectively from the date of change in estimates.
Our critical accounting policies are those policies that require the most significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our financial statements. Management has determined that our most critical accounting policies are those relating to revenue recognition, accounts receivable, inventory, accrued research and development expenses, available-for-sale investments, stock-based compensation and leases.
Revenue Recognition
We account for contracts with customers in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, ASC 606. We recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
Product Revenue
We generated product revenue from sales of AYVAKIT and GAVRETO in the U.S. and sales of AYVAKYT in the European Union to a limited number of specialty distributors and specialty pharmacy providers. These customers subsequently resell the products or dispense the products directly to patients. In addition, we entered into arrangements with payors that provide for government mandated rebates, discounts and allowances with respect to the utilization of our products.
Product revenue is recognized when the customer takes control of the product, typically upon delivery to the customer. Product revenue is recorded at the net sales price, or transaction price, which includes estimated reserves for variable consideration resulting from chargebacks, government rebates, trade discounts and allowances, product returns and other incentives that are offered within the contract with customers, healthcare providers, payors and other indirect customers relating to the sales of our product. Reserves are established based on the amounts earned or to be claimed on the related sales. Where appropriate, we utilize the expected value method to determine the appropriate amount for estimates of variable consideration based on factors such as our current contractual and statutory requirements, specific known market events and trends, industry data and forecasted customer buying and payment patterns. The amount of variable consideration that is included in the transaction price may be constrained and is included in net product revenues only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. If actual results vary from our estimates, we adjust these estimates, which would affect net product revenue and earnings in the period such variances become known.
Chargebacks: Chargebacks for fees and discounts represent the estimated obligations resulting from contractual commitments to sell product to qualified healthcare providers and government agencies at prices lower than the list prices charged to the customers who directly purchase the product from us. The customers charge us for the difference between what they pay for the product and the ultimate contractually committed or government required lower selling price to the qualified healthcare providers. These reserves are estimated using the expected value method based upon a range of possible outcomes and are established in the same period that the related revenue is recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenue.
Government rebates: Government rebates consist of Medicare, Tricare and Medicaid rebates, which were estimated using the expected value method, based upon a range of possible outcomes for the estimated payor mix. These reserves are recorded in the same period the related revenue is recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenue. For Medicare, we also estimate the number of patients in the prescription drug coverage gap for whom we will owe a rebate under the Medicare Part D program.
Trade discounts and allowances: We provide the customers with discounts that are explicitly stated in the contracts and recorded as a reduction of revenue in the period the related product revenue is recognized. In addition, we also receive sales order management, inventory management and data services from the customers in exchange for certain fees.
Product returns: We estimate the amount of product sales that may be returned by our customers and records this estimate as a reduction of revenue in the period the related product revenue is recognized. We currently estimate product return liabilities using expected value method based on available industry data and our visibility into the inventory remaining in the distribution channel.
Other deductions: Co-pay assistance relates to financial assistance provided to qualified patients, whereby we may assist them with prescription drug co-payments required by the patient’s insurance provider. Reserves for co-pay assistance are recorded in the same period the related revenue is recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenue.
Collaboration Revenue
At contract inception, we analyze our collaboration arrangements to assess whether such arrangements involve joint operating activities performed by parties that are both active participants in the activities and exposed to significant risks and rewards dependent on the commercial success of such activities and therefore within the scope of ASC 808, Collaborative Arrangements, ASC 808. This assessment is performed throughout the life of the arrangement based on changes in the responsibilities of all parties in the arrangement. For collaboration arrangements within the scope of ASC 808 that contain multiple elements, we first determine which elements of the collaboration are deemed to be within the scope of ASC 808 and which elements of the collaboration are more reflective of a vendor-customer relationship and therefore within the scope of ASC 606.
For elements of collaboration arrangements that are accounted for pursuant to ASC 808, an appropriate recognition method is determined and applied consistently, either by analogy to authoritative accounting literature or by applying a reasonable and rational policy election. We evaluate the income statement classification for presentation of amounts due from or owed to other participants associated with multiple activities in a collaboration arrangement based on the nature of each separate activity. For the co-commercialization and marketing activities of certain of our products and product candidates in a collaboration arrangement, where we are the principal on sales transactions with third parties, we recognize revenue, cost of sales and operating expenses on a gross basis in their respective lines in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss). Where we are not the principal on sales transactions with third parties, we record our share of the revenues, cost of sales and operating expenses on a net basis as revenue (expenses) from the collaboration arrangement in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss).
For elements accounted within scope of ASC 606, to determine the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized for the arrangements, we perform the following steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation. As part of the accounting for these arrangements, we must use significant judgment to determine: (a) the performance obligations based on the determination under step (ii) above; (b) the transaction price under step (iii) above; and (c) the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract for the allocation of transaction price in step (iv) above. We use judgment to determine whether milestones or other variable consideration, except for royalties and sales-based milestones, should be included in the transaction price as described further below. The transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis, for which we recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied.
Exclusive Licenses. If the license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other promises or performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenue from non-refundable, upfront fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. In assessing whether a promise or performance obligation is distinct from the other promises, we consider factors such as the research, development, manufacturing and commercialization capabilities of the collaboration partner and the availability of the associated expertise in the general marketplace. In addition, we consider whether the collaboration partner can benefit from a promise for its intended purpose without the receipt of the remaining promise, whether the value of the promise is dependent on the unsatisfied promise, whether there are other vendors that could provide the remaining promise, and whether it is separately identifiable from the remaining promise. For licenses that are combined with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined
performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjusts the measure of performance and related revenue recognition. The measure of progress, and thereby periods over which revenue should be recognized, are subject to estimates by management and may change over the course of the research and development and licensing agreement. Such a change could have a material impact on the amount of revenue we record in future periods.
Research and Development Services. The promises under our collaboration agreements may include research and development services to be performed by our employees on behalf of the partner. Payments or reimbursements resulting from our research and development efforts are recognized as revenue when the services are performed and presented on a gross basis because we are the principal for such efforts. Payments or reimbursements from the partner that are the result of a collaborative relationship with the partner, instead of a customer relationship, such as co-development activities, are recorded as a reduction to research and development expense.
Customer Options. If an arrangement is determined to contain customer options that allow the customer to acquire additional goods or services, the goods and services underlying the customer options that are not determined to be material rights are not considered to be performance obligations at the outset of the arrangement, as they are contingent upon option exercise. We evaluate the customer options for material rights, or options to acquire additional goods or services for free or at a discount. If the customer options are determined to represent a material right, the material right is recognized as a separate performance obligation at the outset of the arrangement. We allocate the transaction price to material rights based on the relative standalone selling price, which is determined based on the identified discount and the probability that the customer will exercise the option. Amounts allocated to a material right are not recognized as revenue until, at the earliest, the option is exercised.
Milestone Payments. At the inception of each arrangement that includes research or development milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being achieved and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our control or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. We evaluate factors such as the scientific, clinical, regulatory, commercial, and other risks that must be overcome to achieve the particular milestone in making this assessment. There is considerable judgment involved in determining whether it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we reevaluate the probability of achievement of all milestones subject to constraint and, if necessary, adjusts its estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
Royalties. For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments upon first commercial sales and milestone payments based on a level of sales, which are the result of a customer-vendor relationship and for which the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied or partially satisfied. To date, we have not recognized any royalty revenue resulting from any of our licensing arrangements.
Consideration received prior to revenue recognition is recorded as deferred revenue in the consolidated balance sheets. Amounts expected to be recognized as revenue within the 12 months following the balance sheet date are classified as current portion of deferred revenue in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. Amounts not expected to be recognized as revenue within the 12 months following the balance sheet date are classified as deferred revenue, net of current portion. If we transfer goods or services to a customer before the customer pays consideration or before payment is due, we record a contract asset as unbilled accounts receivable on the consolidated balance sheets.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivables arise from product sales and amounts due from our collaboration partners. The amount from product sales represents amounts due from specialty pharmacy providers in the U.S. and in the European Union. We monitor economic conditions and the financial performance and credit worthiness of our counterparties to identify facts or circumstances that may indicate that our receivables are at risk of collection. We provide reserves against
accounts receivable for estimated losses that may result from a customer’s inability to pay based on the composition of our accounts receivable, considering past events, current economic conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts about the future economic conditions. The contractual life of our accounts receivable is generally short-term. Amounts determined to be uncollectible are charged or written-off against the reserve.
Inventory
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or estimated net realizable value with cost based on the first-in first-out method. Inventory that can be used in either the production of clinical or commercial products is expensed as research and development costs when identified for use in clinical trials. We classify our inventory costs as long-term when we expect to utilize the inventory beyond the normal operating cycle and include these costs in other assets in the consolidated balance sheets.
Prior to the regulatory approval of our drug candidates, we incur expenses for the manufacture of drug product supplies to support clinical development that could potentially be available to support the commercial launch of those drugs. Until the date at which regulatory approval has been received or is otherwise considered probable, we record all such costs as research and development expenses.
We perform an assessment of the recoverability of capitalized inventories during each reporting period and write down any excess and obsolete inventory to its net realizable value in the period in which the impairment is first identified. Such impairment charges, should they occur, are recorded as a component of cost of product sales in the condensed consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. The determination of whether inventory costs will be realizable requires the use of estimates by management. If actual market conditions are less favorable than projected by management, additional write-downs of inventory may be required.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses include the costs incurred for services performed by our vendors in connection with research and development activities for which we have not yet been invoiced.
We base our expenses related to research and development activities on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with vendors that conduct research and development on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the research and development expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid accordingly. Non-refundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities are expensed when the activity has been performed or when the goods have been received rather than when the payment is made.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Available-for-Sale Investments
We classify marketable securities with a remaining maturity when purchased of greater than three months as available-for-sale. Marketable securities with a remaining maturity date greater than one year are classified as non-current. Available-for-sale securities are maintained by an investment manager and mainly consist of U.S. Treasury securities and U.S. government agency securities. Available-for-sale securities are carried at fair value with the unrealized gains and losses included in other comprehensive income (loss) as a component of stockholders’ equity until realized. Any premium or discount arising at purchase is amortized and/or accreted to interest income and/or expense over the life of the instrument. Realized gains and losses are determined using the specific identification method and are included in other income (expense). We review our portfolio of available-for-sale debt securities, using both quantitative and qualitative factors, to determine if declines in fair value below cost have resulted from a credit-related loss or other factors. If the decline in fair value is due to credit-related factors, a loss is recognized in net income, whereas if the decline in fair value is not due to credit-related factors, the loss is recorded in other comprehensive income (loss).
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation awards in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation -Stock Compensation, which we refer to as ASC 718. We expense the fair value of stock-based awards granted to employees and members of the board of directors over the requisite service period, which is typically the vesting period. Compensation cost for stock-based awards issued to employees is measured using the estimated fair value at the grant date and is adjusted to reflect actual forfeitures. We estimate the fair value of options granted to employees at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model that requires management to apply judgment and make estimates, including:
● expected volatility, which is calculated based a blend of our reported volatility data for the length of time that market data is available for our stock and the historical data for a representative group of publicly traded companies, for which historical information is available. For these analyses, we select companies with comparable characteristics to ours including enterprise value, risk profiles, position within the industry, and with historical share price information sufficient to meet the expected life of the stock-based awards. We compute the historical volatility data using the daily closing prices for the selected companies’ shares during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of our stock-based awards. We intend to consistently apply this process using representative companies until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own share price becomes available;
● risk-free interest rate, which is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant commensurate with the expected term assumption;
● expected term, which we calculate using the simplified method, as prescribed by the Securities and Exchange Commission Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107, Share-Based Payment, as we have insufficient historical information regarding our stock options to provide a basis for an estimate. Under this approach, the weighted-average expected life is presumed to be the average of the contractual term of ten years and the weighted-average vesting term of the stock options, taking into consideration multiple vesting tranches; and
● dividend yield, which is zero based on the fact that we never paid cash dividends and do not expect to pay any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
Stock-based awards issued to non-employees, including directors for non-board-related services, are accounted for based on the fair value of such services received or the fair value of the award granted on the grant date, whichever is more reliably measured. Stock-based awards subject to service-based vesting conditions are expensed on a straight-line basis over the vesting period.
The purchase price of common stock under our 2015 employee stock purchase plan, as amended, or 2015 ESPP, is equal to 85% of the lesser of (i) the fair market value per share of the common stock on the first business day of an offering period and (ii) the fair market value per share of the common stock on the purchase date. The fair value of
the discounted purchases made under our 2015 ESPP is calculated using the Black-Scholes valuation model. The fair value of the look-back provision plus the 15% discount is recognized as compensation expense over the 180-day purchase period.
Leases
Leases are accounted for in accordance with ASC Topic 842, Leases, ASC 842. At the inception of a contract, we assess whether the contract is, or contains, a lease. The assessment is based on: (1) whether the contract involves the use of a distinct identified asset, (2) whether we obtain the right to substantially all the economic benefit from the use of the asset throughout the period, and (3) whether we have the right to direct the use of the asset. At inception of a lease, we allocate the consideration in the contract to each lease component based on its relative stand-alone price to determine the lease payments.
Leases are classified as either finance leases or operating leases. A lease is classified as a finance lease if any one of the following criteria are met: the lease transfers ownership of the asset by the end of the lease term, the lease contains an option to purchase the asset that is reasonably certain to be exercised, the lease term is for a major part of the remaining useful life of the asset or the present value of the lease payments equals or exceeds substantially all of the fair value of the asset. A lease is classified as an operating lease if it does not meet any of these criteria.
For all leases at the lease commencement date, a right-of-use asset and a lease liability are recognized. The right-of-use asset represents the right to use the leased asset for the lease term. The lease liability represents the present value of the lease payments under the lease.
The right-of-use asset is initially measured at cost, which primarily comprises the initial amount of the lease liability, plus any initial direct costs incurred if any, less any lease incentives received. All right-of-use assets are reviewed for impairment. The lease liability is initially measured at the present value of the lease payments, discounted using the interest rate implicit in the lease or, if that rate cannot be readily determined, our secured incremental borrowing rate for the same term as the underlying lease.
Lease payments included in the measurement of the lease liability comprise the following: the fixed noncancelable lease payments, payments for optional renewal periods where it is reasonably certain the renewal period will be exercised, and payments for early termination options unless it is reasonably certain the lease will not be terminated early.
Lease cost for operating leases consists of the lease payments plus any initial direct costs, primarily brokerage commissions, and is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Included in lease cost are any variable lease payments incurred in the period that are not included in the initial lease liability and lease payments incurred in the period for any leases with an initial term of 12 months or less. Lease cost for finance leases consists of the amortization of the right-of-use asset on a straight-line basis over the lease term and interest expense determined on an amortized cost basis. The lease payments are allocated between a reduction of the lease liability and interest expense.
We have made an accounting policy election to not recognize leases with an initial term of 12 months or less within our consolidated balance sheets and to recognize those lease payments on a straight-line basis in our consolidated statements of income over the lease term.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, together with the changes in those items in dollars and as a percentage:
Product Revenue, Net
Product revenue, net was $22.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We started generating revenue from sales of AYVAKIT in the first quarter of 2020 following FDA approval of AYVAKIT for the treatment of adults with unresectable or metastatic GIST harboring a PDGFRA exon 18 mutation, including PDGFRA D842V mutations. In September 2020, the European Commission granted conditional marketing authorization to avapritinib under the brand name AYVAKYT as a monotherapy for the treatment of adult patients with unresectable or metastatic GIST harboring the PDGFRA D842V mutation. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded net product revenue from the sale of AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT for a total of $21.2 million. We started generating revenue from sales of GAVRETO in the third quarter of 2020 following the initial FDA approval of GAVRETO. GAVRETO was originally approved for the treatment of adult patients with metastatic RET fusion-positive NSCLC and subsequently approved for adult and pediatric patients 12 years of age and older with advanced or metastatic RET-mutant MTC who require systemic therapy, or with advanced or metastatic RET fusion-positive thyroid cancer who require systemic therapy and who are radioactive iodine-refractory (if radioactive iodine is appropriate). For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded net product revenue from the sale of GAVRETO for a total of $0.9 million.
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue increased by $705.1 million from $66.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $771.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our collaboration revenue mainly consisted of $753.1 million in revenue under our collaboration agreement with Roche for pralsetinib, $14.6 million revenue under our cancer immunotherapy collaboration with Roche, and $3.6 million in revenue under our CStone collaboration. Revenue recognized under our collaboration with Roche for pralsetinib for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $695.7 million upfront cash payment including the $20.7 million premium associated with the $100.0 million equity investment by Roche, $55.0 million in specified regulatory and commercialization milestone payments and $2.4 million associated with services related to Roche territory-specific activities. We recognized $14.6 million in revenue under our cancer immunotherapy collaboration with Roche for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily related to the amortization of the total $64.5 million of upfront and milestone payments received as of such period. Revenue recognized under our CStone collaboration for the year ended
December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of $2.0 million in milestone revenue related to a development milestone that was achieved during the year and $1.6 million associated with drug supply related to CStone territory-specific activities.
Collaboration revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of $46.2 million revenue under the Clementia license agreement, $12.1 million in revenue under our CStone collaboration and $8.2 million revenue under our cancer immunotherapy collaboration with Roche. Revenue recognized under the Clementia license agreement for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of a $25.0 million upfront payment received, a $20.0 million cash milestone payment due and paid in the third quarter of 2020 and a $1.2 million inventory transfer. Revenue recognized under our CStone collaboration for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily consisted of $12.0 million in milestone revenue related to several development and regulatory milestones that were achieved during the year. We recognized $8.2 million in revenue under our cancer immunotherapy collaboration with Roche for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was primarily related to the amortization of the total $63.0 million of upfront and milestone payments received during such period.
Cost of sales
Cost of sales was $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and was related to manufacturing costs associated with our product sales. Costs associated with the manufacture of our drugs prior to FDA approval were recorded as research and development expenses and, therefore, are not included in cost of sales during such period.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense decreased by $4.6 million from $331.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $326.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in research and development expense was primarily related to $20.5 million reimbursement from the global development cost sharing arrangement under our collaboration with Roche for pralsetinib and approximately $12.6 million in decreased expenses associated with clinical and commercial manufacturing activities. This decrease in research and development expense was primarily offset by an increase of approximately $18.7 million in personnel expense, primarily due to an increase in headcount, which was driven by growth in the clinical and manufacturing organizations and an increase of $5.0 million in stock-based compensation expense.
Selling, general and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense increased by $61.4 million from $96.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $157.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in selling, general and administrative expense was primarily related to increased costs and personnel expenses, including an increase of $15.8 million in stock-based compensation expense, associated with building our commercial infrastructure and to support the overall growth of our business, as well as an increase of $17.5 million in commercial expenses to build our commercial infrastructure for commercialization of AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT and GAVRETO. The increase in selling, general and administrative expense was partially offset by a $10.6 million reimbursement in connection with the commercialization of GAVRETO in the U.S. under our collaboration with Roche for pralsetinib.
Interest Income (Expense), Net
Interest income (expense), net decreased by $7.1 million from $13.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a lower rate of return on investments caused by the severe liquidity crisis in the capital markets resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other expense, net increased by less than $0.3 million from $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily related to changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense consisted of $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, related to the income taxes provisions associated with the taxable income generated from our collaboration with Roche for pralsetinib and our product sales in certain state jurisdictions.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, together with the changes in those items in dollars and as a percentage:
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue increased by $22.0 million from $44.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $66.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Collaboration revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of $46.2 million revenue under the Clementia license agreement, $12.1 million in revenue under our CStone collaboration and $8.2 million revenue under our cancer immunotherapy collaboration with Roche. Revenue recognized under the Clementia license agreement for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of a $25.0 million upfront payment received, a $20.0 million cash milestone payment due and paid in the third quarter of 2020 and a $1.2 million inventory transfer. Revenue recognized under our CStone collaboration for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily consisted of $12.0 million in milestone revenue related to several development and regulatory milestones that were achieved during the year. We recognized $8.2 million in revenue under our cancer immunotherapy collaboration with Roche for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was primarily related to the amortization of the total $63.0 million of upfront and milestone payments received as of such period.
Collaboration revenue for the year ended December 31, 2018 was related to the CStone collaboration and cancer immunotherapy collaboration with Roche. We entered into the CStone agreement on June 1, 2018 and recognized collaboration revenue of $40.0 million from the upfront payment under the CStone agreement for the year ended December 31, 2018. We recognized $4.5 million in collaboration revenue under the cancer immunotherapy agreement with Roche for the year ended December 31, 2018, which was primarily related to amortization of the total $55.0 million upfront and milestone payments received as of such period.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense increased by $87.8 million from $243.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $331.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in research and development expense was primarily related to $35.3 million in increased expenses for external clinical activities related to avapritinib, pralsetinib and BLU-782 and $31.3 million in increased personnel expense, primarily due to an increase in headcount, which was driven by growth in the clinical and manufacturing organizations and an increase of $11.6 million in stock-based compensation expense.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense increased by $48.5 million from $47.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $96.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in general and administrative expense was primarily related to increased costs and personnel expenses, including an increase of $12.5 million in stock-based compensation expense, associated with building our commercial infrastructure and to support the overall growth of our business globally.
Interest Income (Expense), Net
Interest income (expense), net increased by $3.2 million from $10.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $13.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily related to higher average investment balances and a higher rate of return on investments.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net, decreased by $0.1 million from $0.2 million of expense for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $0.1 million of expense for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily related to changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through public offerings of our common stock, private placements of our convertible preferred and common stock, collaborations and a license agreement. Through December 31, 2020, we have received an aggregate of $2.9 billion from such transactions, including $1.9 billion in aggregate gross proceeds from the sale of common stock in our IPO, follow-on public offerings, through our “at the market” stock offering program and the equity investment by Roche, $115.1 million in gross proceeds from the issuance of convertible preferred stock, $910.8 million in upfront payments and milestone payments under our collaborations with Roche and CStone, our license agreement with Clementia and our former collaboration with Alexion. In addition, since January 2020, we have generated limited product revenue.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $1,549.7 million.
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Operating Activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, the $665.1 million increase in net cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to the increased net income during this period of $661.6 million, which was driven by the $753.1 million collaboration revenue recognized under our collaboration agreement with Roche for pralsetinib.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the same period in 2018, the $103.0 million increase in net cash used in operating activities was primarily due to the increase in net loss during this period of $110.0 million, which
was driven by increased payroll and payroll-related expenses and spending on pre-clinical, clinical and pre-commercial activities, partially offset by upfront and milestone payments received during year ended December 31, 2019. The net cash flows provided by operating activities for year ended December 31, 2019 reflect a $25.0 million upfront payment received under the Clementia agreement, an aggregate of $10.0 million in milestone payments received under the CStone agreement and an $8.0 million milestone payment received under the cancer immunotherapy agreement with Roche.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, the $417.8 million increase in net cash used in investing activities was primarily due to an increase in net purchases of available-for-sale investments.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the same period in 2018, the $144.6 million decrease in net cash used in investing activities was primarily due a decrease in net purchases of available-for-sale investments.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, the $277.1 million increase in net cash provided by financing activities was primarily due to the $175.7 million increase in proceeds received from our common stock offerings net of issuance costs, the $79.3 million received from the issuance of common stock related to the collaboration agreement with Roche for pralsetinib, and a $22.0 million increase in net proceeds received from stock option exercises and the issuance of common stock under our employee stock purchase plan.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the same period in 2018, the $336.2 million increase in net cash provided by financing activities was primarily due to a $327.5 million increase in net proceeds received from our April 2019 follow-on public offering, and a $6.9 million increase in net proceeds received from stock option exercises and the issuance of common stock under our employee stock purchase plan.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue the research and development of, initiate or continue clinical trials of, and seek marketing approval for our drug candidates, including marketing approval for avapritinib and pralsetinib for additional indications or in additional geographies. In addition, we expect to incur additional significant commercialization expenses for AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT, GAVRETO and other drug candidates, if approved, related to drug sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution to the extent that such sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution are not the responsibility of potential collaborators or licensors. We will also incur additional significant costs if we choose to pursue additional indications or geographies for any of our approved drugs or drug candidates or otherwise expand more rapidly than we presently anticipate. Accordingly, we may seek to obtain additional funding from time to time in connection with our continuing operations. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on attractive terms, we would be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate certain of our research and development programs or future commercialization efforts.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $1,549.7 million. Based on our current operating plans, we anticipate our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, together with anticipated future product revenues, will provide sufficient capital to enable us to achieve a self-sustainable financial profile.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the success of our commercialization efforts and market acceptance for AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT, GAVRETO or any of our current or future drug candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
● the costs of maintaining, expanding or contracting for sales, marketing and distribution capabilities in connection with commercialization of AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT, GAVRETO and any of our current or future drug candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
● the costs of securing manufacturing, packaging and labeling arrangements for development activities and commercial production, including active pharmaceutical ingredient, or API, drug substance and drug product material for use in pre-clinical studies, clinical trials, our compassionate use program and for use as commercial supply, as applicable;
● the scope, progress, results and costs of drug discovery, pre-clinical development, laboratory testing and clinical trials for our approved drugs and drug candidates;
● the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of marketing applications for our drug candidates, including seeking marketing approval for avapritinib and pralsetinib for additional indications or in additional geographies;
● the success of our collaborations with Roche and CStone and our license agreement with Clementia, as well as our ability to establish and maintain additional collaborations, partnerships or licenses on favorable terms, if at all;
● the achievement of milestones or occurrence of other developments that trigger payments under our existing collaboration or license agreements, or any collaboration, partnership or license agreements that we may enter into in the future;
● the extent to which we are obligated to reimburse, or entitled to reimbursement of, research and development, clinical or other costs under future collaboration agreements, if any;
● the extent to which we acquire or in-license other approved drugs, drug candidates or technologies and the terms of any such arrangements;
● the success of our current or future collaborations for the development and commercialization of companion diagnostic tests;
● the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims; and
● the costs of continuing to expand our operations.
Identifying potential drug candidates, conducting pre-clinical development and testing and clinical trials and, for any drug candidates that receive marketing approval, establishing and maintaining commercial infrastructure is a time-consuming, expensive and uncertain process that takes years to complete, and we may never generate the necessary data or results required to obtain additional marketing approvals, including for avapritinib and pralsetinib in additional indications or in additional geographies, and achieve substantial revenues for any of our drugs that receive marketing approval, including for AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT and GAVRETO. In addition, our drugs and any current or future drug candidates that receive marketing approvals, including avapritinib and pralsetinib for additional indications or in additional geographies, may not achieve commercial success. Accordingly, we may need to rely on additional financing to achieve our business objectives. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial drug revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs primarily through a combination of public and private equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. We do not have any committed external source of funds, other than our collaborations with Roche and CStone and the license agreement with Clementia, which are limited in scope and duration and subject to the achievement of milestones or royalties on sales of licensed products, if any. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of common stock or securities convertible or exchangeable into common stock, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that materially adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing, if available, would increase our fixed payment obligations and may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends.
If we raise funds through additional collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our intellectual property, future revenue streams, research programs, drugs or drug candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our drug development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market drug and drug candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations primarily consist of our obligations under non-cancellable operating leases and unconditional purchase obligations related to certain commercial manufacturing agreements.
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations as of payment due date by period at December 31, 2020:
In the normal course of business, we enter into agreements with contract research organizations for clinical trials and clinical supply manufacturing and with vendors for pre-clinical research studies, synthetic chemistry and other services and products for operating purposes. We have not included these payments in the table of contractual obligations above since the contracts are generally cancelable at any time by us upon less than 180 days’ prior written notice. Certain of these agreements require us to pay milestones to such third parties upon achievement of certain development, regulatory or commercial milestones. Amounts related to contingent milestone payments are not considered contractual obligations as they are contingent on the successful achievement of certain development, regulatory approval and commercial milestones, which may not be achieved.
We also have obligations to make future payments to third parties that become due and payable on the achievement of certain milestones, including future payments to third parties with whom we have entered into agreements to develop and commercialize companion diagnostic tests for certain of our drug candidates. We have not included these commitments on our balance sheet or in the table above because the achievement and timing of these milestones is not fixed and determinable.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have, during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under applicable SEC rules.