ITEM 7. TRUSTEE’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Trust is a passive entity. The Trustee’s activities are limited to collecting and distributing the revenues from the Royalty Interest and paying liabilities and expenses of the Trust. Generally, the Trust has no source of liquidity and no capital resources other than the revenue attributable to the Royalty Interest that it receives from time to time. See the discussion under “THE ROYALTY INTEREST” in Item 1 for a description of the calculation of the Per Barrel Royalty, and the discussion under “THE PRUDHOE BAY UNIT AND FIELD - Reserve Estimates” in Item 1 for information concerning the estimated future net revenues of the Trust. However, the Trust Agreement gives the Trustee power to borrow, establish a cash reserve, or dispose of all or part of the Trust property under limited circumstances. See the discussion under “THE TRUST - Sales of Royalty Interest; Borrowings and Reserves” in Item 1.
In July 1999, the Trustee established a cash reserve to provide liquidity to the Trust during any future periods in which the Trust does not receive a distribution from HNS. The Trustee draws funds from the cash reserve account during any quarter in which the quarterly distribution received by the Trust does not exceed the liabilities and expenses of the Trust, and replenishes the reserve from future quarterly distributions, if any. The Trustee may increase or decrease the targeted amount at any time, and may increase or decrease the rate at which it is withholding funds to build the cash reserve at any time, without advance notice to the Unit holders. The Trustee anticipates that it will keep this cash reserve program in place, to the extent that it receives a distribution from HNS, until termination of the Trust. In December 2018, the Trust announced that the Trustee had determined to gradually increase the Trustee’s existing cash reserve for the payment of future expenses and liabilities of the Trust, as permitted by the Trust Agreement. Commencing with the distribution to Unit holders payable in April, 2019, the Trustee began withholding the greater of $33,750 or 0.17% of the funds otherwise available for distribution each quarter to gradually increase existing cash reserves.
Cash held in reserve will be invested as required by the Trust Agreement. Any cash reserved in excess of the amount necessary to pay or provide for the payment of future known, anticipated or contingent expenses or liabilities eventually will be distributed to Unit holders, together with interest earned on the funds. Any amounts set aside for the cash reserve are invested by the Trustee in U.S. government or agency securities secured by the full faith and credit of the United States, or mutual funds investing in such securities.
A novel strain of coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2), surfaced in late 2019 and has since spread around the world. In March 2020, the World Health Organization characterized the disease caused by the virus-COVID-19-as a pandemic. Due to the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, the markets experienced a decline in oil prices in response to oil demand concerns and global storage considerations. As a result of, among other things, lower oil prices and the increase in Chargeable Costs, the Trust received no Royalty Payment for the quarters ended March 31, June 30, and September 30, 2020 and, as discussed in Note 8 to the financial statements, did not receive a Royalty Payment in January 2021 for the quarter ended December 31, 2020 given oil prices were below the “break-even” WTI price of $54.34 during such periods. The 2020 12-month average WTI Price was $39.57 per barrel.
Because the Trust did not receive any Royalty Payments attributable to the four quarters during 2020, the Trust has been unable to make a quarterly deduction to replenish the funds on deposit in the cash reserve account since the January 2020 distribution made for Royalty Payments attributed to the fourth quarter of 2019. In December 2020, the remaining funds on deposit in the cash reserve were insufficient to pay the current Administrative Expenses and the Trustee made a demand for indemnity and reimbursement of expenses upon HNS in accordance with the Trust Agreement in the amount of $537,835, representing the Trust’s current unpaid expenses through December 18, 2020. On December 28, 2020, HNS paid the requested funds to the Trustee and the Trustee applied those funds to the Trust’s current unpaid Administrative Expenses in accordance with the Trust Agreement. Although HNS agreed to make an indemnity payment to reimburse the Trust for current Administrative Expenses incurred by the Trustee on behalf of the Trust through December 18, 2020, there can be no assurance that HNS will make any further indemnification payments and in such case, the Trustee will continue to review its options under the Trust Agreement and Support Agreement to enforce such indemnity, if necessary, or otherwise obtain funds to pay the Trusts’ Administrative Expenses.
At December 31, 2020, the cash balance of the cash reserve account was $188,579. The Trust anticipates incurring additional Administrative Expenses in excess of the cash balance of the reserve fund. The Trust is exploring the options available under the Trust Agreement to address the Trust’s continuing operational shortfall. These steps may include obtaining a loan for the Trust, selling a portion of the Trust assets, or selling all of the Trust assets and taking the necessary steps to terminate the Trust. The Trustee has engaged a firm with expertise in the oil industry to provide financial advisory, investment banking, valuation, and consulting services to assist the Trust in identifying a potential lender or potential purchaser of Trust assets, and to advise the Trust with respect to the timing of its potential termination pursuant to the Trust Agreement. There can be no assurance that the Trust will be able to secure a loan or arrange for the sale of Trust assets, or if it can that the loan or sale will be on terms that are acceptable to the Trust.
Although the Trust did not receive Royalty Payments attributable to any quarter in 2020, in part due to the decline in WTI prices, the increase in Chargeable Costs and the payment of Production Taxes, coupled with decreased Royalty Production from the Prudhoe Bay Field, significantly reduce the likelihood of any material Royalty Payments to Unit holders in the first or second quarter of 2021, notwithstanding the current upward trend in the WTI Price.
The Trustee expects to retain in reserve future Royalty Payments, if any, made in fiscal 2021 or subsequent periods for future Administrative Expenses of at least $1,270,000 and potentially more in an amount sufficient to pay Trust fees and expenses for at least one year plus anticipated expenses in connection with the termination of the Trust. In order to comply with the Trust Agreement’s termination process and requirements, the Trust is likely to incur significant additional expenditures. Accordingly, even if the Trust receives Royalty Payments during 2021 or 2022, it is not currently anticipated that Unit holders will receive Royalty Payments on outstanding Units during such periods.
If the Trust does not receive any additional Royalty Payments in 2021 or thereafter, or obtain alternative funding, the Trust’s ability to meet its obligations would be adversely affected, which raises substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern. As noted above, as a general matter, the Trust is expected to terminate at such time the net revenues from the Royalty Interest for two successive years are less than $1,000,000 per year.
Results of Operations
Relatively modest changes in oil prices significantly affect the Trust’s revenues and results of operations. Crude oil prices are subject to significant changes in response to fluctuations in the domestic and world supply and demand and other market conditions as well as the world political situation as it affects OPEC and other producing countries. The effect of changing economic conditions on the demand and supply for energy throughout the world and future prices of oil cannot be accurately projected.
Royalty revenues are generally received on the Quarterly Record Date (generally the fifteenth day of the month) following the end of the calendar quarter in which the related Royalty Production occurred. The Trustee, to the extent possible, pays all expenses of the Trust for each quarter on the Quarterly Record Date on which the revenues for the quarter are received. For the statement of cash earnings and distributions, revenues and Trust expenses are recorded on a cash basis and, as a result, distributions to Unit holders in each calendar year ending December 31 are attributable to HNS’s operations during the twelve-month period ended on the preceding September 30.
When HNS’s average net production of oil and condensate per quarter from the 1989 Working Interests exceeds 90,000 barrels a day, the principal factors affecting the Trust’s revenues and distributions to Unit holders are changes in WTI Prices, scheduled annual increases in Chargeable Costs, changes in the Consumer Price Index and changes in Production Taxes. However, it is likely that the Trust’s revenues in future periods also will be affected by increases and decreases in production from the 1989 Working Interests. HNS’s net production of oil and condensate allocated to the Trust from proved reserves was less than 90,000 barrels per day on an annual basis during 2018, 2019 and 2020. The Trustee has been advised that HNS expects that average net production allocated to the Trust from the proved reserves will be less than 90,000 barrels a day on an annual basis in future years.
HNS estimates Royalty Production from the 1989 Working Interests for purposes of calculating quarterly royalty payments to the Trust because complete actual field production data for the preceding calendar quarter generally is not available by the Quarterly Record Date. To the extent that average net production from the 1989 Working Interests is below 90,000 barrels per day, calculation by HNS of actual Royalty Production data may result in revisions of prior Royalty Production estimates. Revisions by HNS of its Royalty Production calculations may result in quarterly royalty payments by HNS which reflect adjustments for overpayments or underpayments of royalties with respect to prior quarters. Such adjustments, if material, may adversely affect certain Unit holders who buy or sell Units between the Quarterly Record Dates for the Quarterly Distributions affected. See Note 7 of Notes to Financial Statements in Item 8. Because the annual statement of cash earnings and distributions of the Trust is prepared on a modified cash basis, royalty revenues for the calendar year do not include the amounts of underpayments or overpayments affecting payments received during the fourth quarter of the year.
During the years 2018 and 2019, WTI Prices were above the level necessary for the Trust to receive a Per Barrel Royalty. However, during, 2020 WTI Prices were below the level necessary for the Trust to receive a Per Barrel Royalty. Whether the Trust will be entitled to future distributions during the remainder of 2021 will depend on, among other things, WTI Prices prevailing during the remainder of the year.
As also discussed above in Item 1A “RISK FACTORS”, on January 1, 2021, the “break-even” WTI price (the price at which all taxes and prescribed deductions are equal to the WTI price) for the Trust to receive a positive Per Barrel Royalty with respect to a particular day’s production was $60.72. From the beginning of the first quarter of 2021 through March 8, 2021, the WTI crude oil spot price fluctuated between a high of $66.09 per barrel on March 5, 2021, and a low of $47.62 per barrel on January 4, 2021. The WTI crude oil spot price on March 8, 2021 was $65.05 per barrel. The quarterly royalty payment by HNS to the Trust is the sum of the individual revenues attributed to the Trust as calculated each day during the quarter. Any single calculation of a calendar day will not reflect the value of the dividend paid to the Trust for the quarter, nor will it reflect the estimated future value of the Trust. However, if a low oil price environment should occur for a protracted period, quarterly royalty payments are likely to be insignificant or be zero.
As explained in Note 3 of Notes to Financial Statements below, the financial statements of the Trust are prepared on a modified cash basis and differ from financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in that (a) revenues are recorded when received (generally within 15 days of the end of the preceding quarter) and distributions to Trust Unit holders are recorded when paid and (b) Trust expenses are recorded on an accrual basis. As a consequence, Trust royalty revenues for the fiscal year are based on Royalty Production during the twelve months ended September 30 of the fiscal year.
2020 Compared to 2019
Average WTI prices during the twelve months ended September 30, 2020, decreased by approximately 24.8 percent compared to the preceding twelve-month period. Average monthly WTI prices during this period ranged from a high of $59.84 during the December 2019 to a low of $18.20 during April 2020. The increase in the Consumer Price Index used to calculate the Cost Adjustment Factor, as well as the scheduled increase in Chargeable Costs from $23.75 in calendar 2019 to $26.50 in calendar 2020, resulted in the 15 percent increase in Adjusted Chargeable Costs during the twelve months ended September 30, 2020. The decrease in the average Per Barrel Royalty for the period resulted primarily from the decrease in WTI prices and the increase in Adjusted Chargeable Costs. As provided in the Trust Agreement, the payment with respect to the Royalty Interest for any calendar quarter may not be less than zero. See Note 6 of Notes to Financial Statements in Item 8 below.
The period-to-period decreases in royalty revenues, cash earnings and cash distributions are due to the substantial decline in the average Per Barrel Royalty as a result of the lower average WTI Price, the increase in Adjusted Chargeable Costs and the decline in average net production that prevailed during 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in administrative expenses reflects an increase in overall expenses relating to the Trust’s efforts to address the diminished amount of cash available to fund expenses and lack of royalty revenues attributable to the 2020 calendar year, including an increase in professional fees, and timing differences in accruals of expenses. The decrease in the Trust corpus reflects the increase in accrued expenses for the period and significant decline in revenue.
2019 Compared to 2018
Average WTI prices during the twelve months ended September 30, 2019 decreased by approximately 10 percent compared to the preceding twelve-month period. Average monthly WTI prices during this period ranged from a high of $70.72 during the first month of the period in October 2018 to a low of $48.82 at the end of December 2018. The increase in the Consumer Price Index used to calculate the Cost Adjustment Factor, as well as the scheduled increase in Chargeable Costs from $20.00 in calendar 2018 to $23.75 in calendar 2019, resulted in the 20 percent increase in Adjusted Chargeable Costs during the twelve months ended September 30, 2019. The decrease in the average Per Barrel Royalty for the period resulted primarily from the decrease in WTI prices and the increase in Adjusted Chargeable Costs. This decrease was modestly offset by the decline in Production Taxes, which remained historically low for the twelve months ended September 30, 2019 because Production Taxes during the period were calculated on the basis of the minimum tax under the Act and the 2014 Letter Agreement. See Note 6 of Notes to Financial Statements in Item 8 below.
The period-to-period decreases in royalty revenues, cash earnings and cash distributions are due to the substantial decline in the average Per Barrel Royalty as a result of the lower average WTI Price, the increase in Adjusted Chargeable Costs and the decline in average net production that prevailed during 2019 compared to 2018. The decrease in administrative expenses reflects lower overall costs of supplies and services and timing differences in accruals of expenses. The increase in the Trust corpus reflects the decrease in accrued expenses for the period.