ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
In addition to historical information, this Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements that involve significant risks and uncertainties, which may cause our actual results to differ materially from plans and results discussed in forward-looking statements. We encourage you to review the risks and uncertainties, discussed in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The risks and uncertainties can cause actual results to differ significantly from those forecasted in forward-looking statements or implied in historical results and trends.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a clinical and preclinical stage oncology focused RNAi nanoparticle drug development company utilizing a novel technology that achieves systemic delivery for target specific protein inhibition for any gene product that is over-expressed in disease. Our drug delivery and antisense technology, called DNAbilize®, is a platform that uses P-ethoxy, which is a DNA backbone modification that is intended to protect the DNA from destruction by the body’s enzymes when circulating in vivo, incorporated inside of a lipid bilayer having neutral charge. We believe this combination allows for high efficiency loading of antisense DNA into non-toxic, cell-membrane-like structures for delivery of the antisense drug substance into cells. In vivo, the DNAbilize® delivered antisense drug substances are systemically distributed throughout the body to allow for reduction or elimination of target proteins in blood diseases and solid tumors. Through testing in numerous animal studies and treatment in over 80 patients, the Company’s DNAbilize® drug candidates have demonstrated an excellent safety profile. DNAbilize® is a registered trademark of the Company.
Using DNAbilize® as a platform for drug development and manufacturing, we currently have four drug candidates in development to treat at least five different cancer disease indications. Our lead drug candidate, prexigebersen (pronounced prex” i je ber’ sen), which targets growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (Grb2), initially started the efficacy portion of a Phase 2 clinical trial for untreated AML patients in combination with LDAC. The interim data released on March 6, 2019 showed that 11 (65%) of the 17 evaluable patients had a response, including five (29%) who achieved CR, including one CRi and one morphologic leukemia free state, and six (35%) stable disease responses, including two patients who had greater than a 50% reduction in bone marrow blasts. However, DNA hypomethylating agents are now the most frequently used agents in the treatment of elderly AML patients in the U.S. and Europe. As a result, Stage 2 of the Phase 2 trial in AML was amended to remove the combination treatment of prexigebersen and LDAC and replace it with the combination treatment prexigebersen and decitabine, a DNA hypomethylating agent, for treatment of a second cohort of untreated AML patients. Since decitabine is also used as a treatment for relapsed/refractory AML patients, a cohort of relapsed/refractory AML patients was also added to the study.
The FDA recently granted approval of venetoclax in combination with LDAC, decitabine or azacytidine (the latter two drugs are DNA hypomethylating agents) as frontline therapy for newly diagnosed AML in adults who are 75 years or older, or who have comorbidities precluding intensive induction chemotherapy. We believe this recent approval of the frontline venetoclax and decitabine combination therapy provides an opportunity for combining prexigebersen with the combination therapy for the treatment of de novo AML patients. Preclinical efficacy studies for the triple combination treatment of prexigebersen, decitabine and venetoclax in AML have been successfully completed. In the preclinical efficacy studies, four AML cancer cell lines were treated with three different combinations of decitabine, venetoclax and prexigebersen. Decrease in AML cell viability was the primary measure of efficacy. The triple combination of decitabine, venetoclax and prexigebersen showed significant improvement in efficacy in three of the four AML cell lines. Based on these results, the Company believes that adding prexigebersen to the treatment combination of decitabine and venetoclax could lead to improved efficacy in AML patients. Accordingly, the Company further amended Stage 2 of this Phase 2 clinical trial to add the triple combination treatment comprised of prexigebersen, decitabine and venetoclax, which amendment has been approved by the FDA.
Bio-Path’s approved amended Stage 2 for this Phase 2 clinical trial currently has three cohorts of patients. The first two cohorts will treat patients with the triple combination of prexigebersen, decitabine and venetoclax. The first cohort will include untreated AML patients, and the second cohort will include relapsed/refractory AML patients. Finally, the third cohort will treat relapsed/refractory AML patients who are venetoclax-resistant or -intolerant with the two-drug combination of prexigebersen and decitabine. The full trial design plans have approximately 98 evaluable patients for the first cohort having untreated AML patients with a preliminary review performed after 19 evaluable patients and a formal interim analysis after 38 evaluable patients. The full trial design plans have approximately 54 evaluable patients for each of the second cohort, having relapsed/refractory AML patients, and the third cohort, having AML patients who are venetoclax-resistant or -intolerant, in each case with a review performed after 19 evaluable patients. The study is anticipated to be conducted at ten clinical sites in the U.S., and Gail J. Roboz, MD will be the national coordinating Principal Investigator for the Phase 2 trial. Dr. Roboz is a professor of medicine and director of the Clinical and Translational Leukemia Program at the Weill Medical College of Cornell University and the New York-Presbyterian Hospital in New York City. On August 13, 2020, we announced the enrollment and dosing of the first patient in this approved amended Stage 2 of the Phase 2 clinical study.
Our second drug candidate, BP1002, targets the protein Bcl-2, which is responsible for driving cell survival in up to 60% of all cancers. On November 21, 2019, we announced that the FDA cleared an IND application for BP1002. An initial Phase 1 clinical trial will evaluate the ability of BP1002 to treat refractory/relapsed lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients. The Phase 1 clinical trial is being conducted at several leading cancer centers, including MD Anderson, the Georgia Cancer Center and the Sarah Cannon Research Institute. Ian W. Flynn, MD will be the national coordinating Principal Investigator for the Phase 1 trial. Dr. Flynn serves as the director of lymphoma research at the Sarah Cannon Research Institute. On November 19, 2020, we announced the enrollment and dosing of the first patient in the Phase 1 clinical trial.
Our third drug candidate, BP1003, targets the STAT3 protein and is currently in IND enabling studies as a potential treatment of pancreatic cancer, NSCLC and AML. Preclinical models have shown BP1003 to inhibit cell viability and STAT3 protein expression in NSCLC and AML cell lines. Further, BP1003 successfully penetrated pancreatic tumors and significantly enhanced the efficacy of gemcitabine, a treatment for patients with advanced pancreatic cancer, in a pancreatic cancer patient derived tumor model. Our lead indication for BP1003 is pancreatic cancer due to the severity of this disease and the lack of effective, life-extending treatments. For example, pancreatic adenocarcinoma is projected to be the second most lethal cancer behind lung cancer by 2030. Typical survival for a metastatic pancreatic cancer patient is about three to six months from diagnosis. We expect to complete several IND enabling studies of BP1003 in 2021. If those studies are successful, our goal is to file an IND in 2021 for the first-in-humans Phase 1 study of BP1003 in patients with refractory, metastatic solid tumors, including pancreatic cancer and NSCLC.
In addition, a modified product named prexigebersen-A, Bio-Path’s fourth drug candidate, has shown to enhance chemotherapy efficacy in preclinical solid tumor models. Prexigebersen-A incorporates the same drug substance as prexigebersen but has a slightly modified formulation designed to enhance nanoparticle properties. In late 2019, we filed an IND application to initiate a Phase 1 clinical trial of prexigebersen-A in patients with solid tumors, including ovarian, endometrial, pancreatic and breast cancer. Ovarian cancer is one of the most common type of gynecologic malignancies, with approximately 50% of all cases occurring in women older than 63 years. This trial is expected to commence after the IND has been cleared by the FDA, which we currently anticipate being in 2021.
Our DNAbilize® technology-based products are available for out-licensing or partnering. We intend to apply our drug delivery technology template to new disease-causing protein targets to develop new nanoparticle antisense RNAi drug candidates. We have a new product identification template in place to define a process of scientific, preclinical, commercial and intellectual property evaluation of potential new drug candidates for inclusion into our drug product development pipeline. As we expand, we will look at indications where a systemic delivery is needed and antisense RNAi nanoparticles can be used to slow, reverse or cure a disease, either alone or in combination with another drug. On September 25, 2019, we announced that the USPTO issued a patent for claims related to DNAbilize®, including its use in the treatment of cancers, autoimmune diseases and infectious diseases. On October 22, 2020, we announced that the USPTO issued a Notice of Allowance for U.S. Patent Application No. 16/333,221 entitled “Combination Therapy with Liposomal Antisense Oligonucleotides.” In addition, on February 10, 2021, we announced that the USPTO granted U.S. Patent No. 10,898,506 titled, “P-ethoxy nucleic acids for liposomal formulation.” The new patent builds on earlier patents granted that protect the platform technology for DNAbilize®, the Company’s novel RNAi nanoparticle drugs. The new patent is the third patent in our family of platform intellectual property and offers expanded defense of our DNAbilize® platform technology..
We have certain intellectual property as the basis for our current drug products in clinical development, prexigebersen, prexigebersen-A, BP1002 and BP1003. We are developing RNAi antisense nanoparticle drug candidates based on our own patented technology to treat cancer and autoimmune disorders where targeting a single protein may be advantageous and result in reduced patient adverse effects as compared to small molecule inhibitors with off-target and non-specific effects. We have composition of matter and method of use intellectual property for the design and manufacture of antisense RNAi nanoparticle drug products.
As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $67.2 million. Our net loss was $10.9 million and $8.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We expect to continue to incur significant operating losses, and we anticipate that our losses may increase substantially as we expand our drug development programs and commercialization efforts. To achieve profitability, we must enter into license or development agreements with third parties, or successfully develop and obtain regulatory approval for one or more of our drug candidates and effectively commercialize any drug candidates we develop. In addition, if we obtain regulatory approval of one or more of our drug candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. Even if we succeed in developing and commercializing one or more of our drug candidates, we may not be able to generate sufficient revenue and we may never be able to achieve or sustain profitability. We expect to finance our foreseeable cash requirements through cash on hand, cash from operations, debt financings and public or private equity offerings. We may seek to access the public or private equity markets whenever conditions are favorable; however, there can be no assurance that we will be able to raise additional capital when needed or on terms that are favorable to us, if at all. Additionally, we may seek collaborations and license arrangements for our drug candidates. We currently have no lines of credit or other arranged access to debt financing.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
We have not generated significant revenues to date. Our ability to generate revenues from our drug candidates, which we do not expect will occur for many years, if ever, will depend heavily on the successful development and eventual commercialization of our drug candidates.
In the future, we may generate revenue from a combination of product sales, third-party grants, service agreements, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. We expect that any revenue we generate will fluctuate due to the timing and amount of services performed, milestones achieved, license fees earned and payments received upon the eventual sales of our drug candidates, in the event any are successfully commercialized. If we fail to complete the development of any of our drug candidates or obtain regulatory approval for them, our ability to generate future revenue will be adversely affected.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs associated with our research activities, including the development of our drug candidates. Our research and development expenses consist of:
• expenses related to research and development personnel, including salaries and benefits, travel and stock-based compensation;
• external research and development expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, such as contract research organizations, clinical investigative sites, laboratories, manufacturing organizations and consultants; and
• costs of materials used during research and development activities.
Costs and expenses that can be clearly identified as research and development are charged to expense as incurred. Advance payments, including nonrefundable amounts, for goods or services that will be used or rendered for future research and development activities are deferred and capitalized. Such amounts will be recognized as an expense as the related goods are delivered or the related services are performed. If the goods will not be delivered, or services will not be rendered, then the capitalized advance payment is charged to expense.
We expect research and development expenses associated with the completion of the associated clinical trials to be substantial and to increase over time. The successful development of our drug candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and estimated costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete development of our drug candidates or the period, if any, in which material net cash inflows from our drug candidates may commence. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing drugs, including the uncertainty of:
• the rate of progress, results and costs of completion of ongoing clinical trials of our drug candidates;
• the size, scope, rate of progress, results and costs of completion of any potential future clinical trials and preclinical tests of our drug candidates that we may initiate;
• competing technological and market developments;
• the performance of third-party manufacturers and suppliers;
• the ability of our drug candidates, if they receive regulatory approval, to achieve market success;
• disputes or other developments relating to proprietary rights, including patents, litigation matters and our ability to obtain patent protection for our drug candidates; and
• the impact, risks and uncertainties related to COVID-19 and actions taken by governmental authorities or others in connection therewith.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a drug candidate could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that drug candidate. For example, if the FDA or other regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those which we currently anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development of a drug candidate or if we experience significant delays in enrollment in any clinical trials, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development.
General and administrative expenses
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and benefits for management and administrative personnel, professional fees for legal, accounting and other services, travel costs and facility-related costs such as rent, utilities and other general office expenses.
Results of Operations
Comparisons of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue. We had no revenue for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Research and Development Expenses. Our research and development expense was $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $2.0 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in research and development expense was primarily due to increased enrollment for our Phase 2 clinical trial of prexigebersen in AML, startup costs related to our Phase 1 clinical trials for BP1002 in lymphoma and prexigebersen-A in solid tumors, increased preclinical expenses for BP1003 and increased drug material manufacturing activities. The following table sets forth our research and development expenses (in thousands):
General and Administrative Expenses. Our general and administrative expense was $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $0.2 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in general and administrative expense was primarily due to increased franchise tax expense, which was partially offset by a decrease in stock-based compensation expense. The following table sets forth our general and administrative expenses (in thousands):
Net Operating Loss. Our net loss from operations was $10.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $2.2 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net Loss. Our net loss was $10.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $2.3 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net Loss per Share. Net loss per share, both basic and diluted, was $2.83 per share for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $3.24 per share for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net loss per share is calculated using the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the applicable periods and excludes stock options and warrants because they are antidilutive.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
We have not generated significant revenues to date. Since our inception, we have funded our operations primarily through public and private offerings of our capital stock and other securities. We expect to finance our foreseeable cash requirements through cash on hand, cash from operations, debt financings and public or private equity offerings. We may seek to access the public or private equity markets whenever conditions are favorable; however, there can be no assurance that we will be able to raise additional capital when needed or on terms that are favorable to us, if at all. Additionally, we may seek collaborations and license arrangements for our drug candidates. We currently have no lines of credit or other arranged access to debt financing.
We had a cash balance of $13.8 million at December 31, 2020, a decrease of $6.7 million compared to December 31, 2019. We believe that our available cash at December 31, 2020, together with the net proceeds received from the 2021 Registered Direct Offering and sales of our common stock under the Offering Agreement, each as described below, in addition to net proceeds received from warrant exercises subsequent to December 31, 2020, will be sufficient to meet obligations and fund our liquidity and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months from the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cash Flows
For the Year Ended December 31,
Operating Activities. Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $11.0 million. Excluding non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $0.6 million and depreciation and amortization expenses of $0.2 million, net cash used in operating activities consisted primarily of the net loss for the period of $10.9 million, an increase in current assets of $0.6 million and a decrease in operating liabilities of $0.2 million.
Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of net proceeds of $4.3 million from the offer and sale of shares of our common stock under the Offering Agreement, as described below.
For the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Operating Activities. Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $8.4 million. Excluding non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $0.7 million and amortization and depreciation expenses of $0.2 million, net cash used in operating activities consisted primarily of the net loss for the period of $8.6 million, an increase in current assets of $0.4 million and a decrease in current liabilities of $0.2 million.
Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of net proceeds of $26.7 million from the 2019 Underwritten Offering, the January 2019 Registered Direct Offering and January 2019 Private Placement, the March 2019 Registered Direct Offering and the November 2019 Registered Direct Offering, each as described below, as well as net proceeds of $1.1 million from the exercise of warrants to purchase shares of our common stock.
2019 Shelf Registration Statement
On May 16, 2019, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC, which was declared effective by the SEC on June 5, 2019 (File No. 333-231537) (the “2019 Shelf Registration Statement”), at which time the offering of unsold securities under a previous shelf registration statement on Form S-3 filed with the SEC, which was declared effective by the SEC on January 9, 2017 (File No. 333-215205) (the “2017 Shelf Registration Statement”), was deemed terminated pursuant to Rule 415(a)(6) under the Securities Act. The 2019 Shelf Registration Statement was filed to register the offering, issuance and sale of (i) up to $125.0 million of our common stock, preferred stock, warrants to purchase common stock or preferred stock or any combination thereof, either individually or in units, and (ii) up to 5,149 shares of our common stock pursuant to the exercise of warrants that were issued in connection with a registered direct offering in 2016. Because our public float is less than $75 million, our ability to offer and sell any securities under the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement is currently limited pursuant to Instruction I.B.6 to Form S-3. For so long as the Company's public float is less than $75 million, the aggregate market value of securities sold by the Company under the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement pursuant to Instruction I.B.6 to Form S-3 during any 12 consecutive months may not exceed one-third of the Company’s public float. The foregoing does not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy securities, and shall not constitute an offer, solicitation or sale in any jurisdiction in which such offer, solicitation or sale would be unlawful prior to registration or qualification under the securities laws of that jurisdiction.
2019 Underwritten Offering
On January 14, 2019, we entered into an underwriting agreement with H. C. Wainwright & Co., LLC (“Wainwright”) relating to an underwritten public offering of 429,616 shares of our common stock for gross proceeds of approximately $1.1 million under the 2017 Shelf Registration Statement (the “2019 Underwritten Offering”). The offering price to the public in the 2019 Underwritten Offering was $2.60 per share, and Wainwright agreed to purchase the shares in the 2019 Underwritten Offering from the Company pursuant to the underwriting agreement at a price of $2.418 per share. Additionally, we issued warrants to purchase up to 25,777 shares of our common stock in a private placement to Wainwright as compensation for its services as underwriter in connection with the 2019 Underwritten Offering. The 2019 Underwritten Offering closed on January 17, 2019. The net proceeds to the Company from the 2019 Underwritten Offering, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and expenses and the Company’s offering expenses, and excluding the proceeds, if any, from the exercise of the underwriter warrants, were approximately $0.9 million.
January 2019 Registered Direct Offering and January 2019 Private Placement
On January 18, 2019, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain investors pursuant to which we agreed to sell, in a registered direct offering, an aggregate of 648,233 shares of our common stock for gross proceeds of approximately $1.7 million under the 2017 Shelf Registration Statement (the “January 2019 Registered Direct Offering”). In a concurrent private placement, we also agreed pursuant to the securities purchase agreement to issue to such investors Series A warrants to purchase up to 324,117 shares of our common stock (the “January 2019 Private Placement”). Additionally, we issued warrants to purchase up to 38,894 shares of our common stock in a private placement to Wainwright as compensation for its services as a placement agent in connection with the January 2019 Registered Direct Offering and the January 2019 Private Placement. The January 2019 Registered Direct Offering and the January 2019 Private Placement closed on January 23, 2019. The net proceeds to the Company from the offerings, after deducting the placement agent’s fees and expenses and the Company’s offering expenses, and excluding the proceeds, if any, from the exercise of the warrants issued in the offerings, were approximately $1.5 million.
March 2019 Registered Direct Offering
On March 12, 2019, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain investors pursuant to which we agreed to sell, in a registered direct offering, an aggregate of 712,910 shares of our common stock for gross proceeds of approximately $18.5 million under the 2017 Shelf Registration Statement (the “March 2019 Registered Direct Offering”). Additionally, we issued warrants to purchase up to 42,775 shares of our common stock in a private placement to Wainwright as compensation for its services as a placement agent in connection with the March 2019 Registered Direct Offering. The March 2019 Registered Direct Offering closed on March 14, 2019. The net proceeds to the Company from the offerings, after deducting the placement agent’s fees and expenses and the Company’s offering expenses, and excluding the proceeds, if any, from the exercise of the warrants issued in the offerings, were approximately $17.0 million.
November 2019 Registered Direct Offering
On November 21, 2019, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain investors pursuant to which we agreed to sell, in a registered direct offering, an aggregate of 808,080 shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase up to 606,060 shares of our common stock for gross proceeds of approximately $8.0 million under the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement (the “November 2019 Registered Direct Offering”). Additionally, we issued warrants to purchase up to 48,485 shares of our common stock to Wainwright as compensation for its services as a placement agent in connection with the November 2019 Registered Direct Offering, which warrants and the common stock issuable upon exercise of such warrants were registered under the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement. The November 2019 Registered Direct Offering closed on November 25, 2019. The net proceeds to the Company from the offerings, after deducting the placement agent’s fees and expenses, and the Company’s offering expenses, and excluding the proceeds, if any, from the exercise of the warrants issued in the offerings, were approximately $7.3 million.
At-The-Market Offering Agreement
On July 13, 2020, we entered into an At-The-Market Offering Agreement (the “Offering Agreement”) with Wainwright, as sales agent and/or principal, pursuant to which we may offer and sell, from time to time, through or to Wainwright, shares of our common stock. Sales of shares of common stock under the Offering Agreement will be made pursuant to the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement and a related prospectus supplement filed with the SEC on July 14, 2020, for an aggregate offering price of up to $7.0 million, provided that we may be limited in the amount of securities that we can sell under the Offering Agreement pursuant to Instruction I.B.6 to Form S-3 for so long as our public float remains less than $75.0 million. Under the Offering Agreement, Wainwright may sell shares by any method deemed to be an “at the market” offering as defined in Rule 415 under the Securities Act. We will pay Wainwright a commission of 3% of the aggregate gross proceeds from each sale of shares under the Offering Agreement and have agreed to provide Wainwright with customary indemnification and contribution rights. We have also agreed to reimburse Wainwright for certain specified expenses. As of December 31, 2020, we had offered and sold 850,000 shares of our common stock under the Offering Agreement for gross proceeds of approximately $4.6 million. The net proceeds to the Company from the offering, after deducting commissions and the Company’s offering expenses, were approximately $4.3 million. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, we offered and sold 278,800 shares of our common stock under the Offering Agreement for gross proceeds of approximately $2.3 million. The net proceeds to the Company from the offering, after deducting commissions and the Company’s offering expenses, were approximately $2.2 million.
2021 Registered Direct Offering
On February 16, 2021, we entered into a placement agency agreement with Roth Capital Partners, LLC relating to a public offering of 1,710,600 shares of our common stock for gross proceeds of approximately $13.0 million under the 2019 Shelf Registration Statement (the “2021 Registered Direct Offering”). In addition, on February 16, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional investors pursuant to which we agreed to sell an aggregate of 1,650,000 shares of our common stock in the 2021 Registered Direct Offering to such investors. The 2021 Registered Direct Offering closed on February 18, 2021. The net proceeds to the Company from the offerings, after deducting the placement agent’s fees and expenses and the Company’s offering expenses, were approximately $12.2 million.
Future Capital Requirements
We expect to continue to incur significant operating expenses in connection with our ongoing activities, including conducting clinical trials, manufacturing and seeking regulatory approval of our drug candidates, prexigebersen, prexigebersen-A, BP1002 and BP1003. Accordingly, we will continue to require substantial additional capital to fund our projected operating requirements. Such additional capital may not be available when needed or on terms favorable to us. In addition, we may seek additional capital due to favorable market conditions or strategic considerations, even if we believe we have sufficient funds for our current and future operating plan. There can be no assurance that we will be able to continue to raise additional capital through the sale of our securities in the future. Our future capital requirements may change and will depend on numerous factors, which are discussed in detail in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any material off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with GAAP in the U.S. The preparation of such financial statements has required our management to make assumptions, estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements, including the notes thereto, and related disclosures of commitments and contingencies, if any. We consider our critical accounting policies to be those that require the more significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of financial statements, including the following:
Research and Development Costs - Costs and expenses that can be clearly identified as research and development are charged to expense as incurred. Advance payments, including nonrefundable amounts, for goods or services that will be used or rendered for future research and development activities are deferred and capitalized. Such amounts will be recognized as an expense as the related goods are delivered or the related services are performed. If the goods will not be delivered, or services will not be rendered, then the capitalized advance payment is charged to expense.
The Company estimates its clinical trial expense accrual each period based on a cost per patient calculation which is derived from estimated start-up costs, clinical trial costs based on the number of patients and length of treatment and clinical study report costs. These services are performed by the Company’s third-party clinical research organizations, laboratories and clinical investigative sites. The expense accrual is recorded in research and development expense each period. Amounts that have been prepaid in advance of work performed are recorded in other current assets.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $6.6 million and $4.6 million, respectively, of costs classified as research and development expense.