ITEM 7: MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following presents management’s discussion and analysis of the Company’s consolidated financial condition and the results of the Company’s operations. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the Company’s consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto presented in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Information, of this Form 10-K.
Cautionary Note About Forward-Looking Statements
The Company makes certain forward-looking statements in this Form 10-K that are subject to risks and uncertainties. These forward-looking statements represent plans, estimates, objectives, goals, guidelines, expectations, intentions, projections, and statements of management’s beliefs concerning future events, business plans, objectives, expected operating results, and the assumptions upon which those statements are based. Forward-looking statements include without limitation, any statement that may predict, forecast, indicate, or imply future results, performance or achievements, and are typically identified with words such as “may,” “could,” “should,” “will,” “would,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “expect,” “aim,” “intend,” “plan,” or words or phases of similar meaning. The Company cautions that the forward-looking statements are based largely on management’s expectations and are subject to a number of known and unknown risks and uncertainties that are subject to change based on factors which are, in many instances, beyond the its control. Actual results, performance or achievements could differ materially from those contemplated, expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements.
The following factors, among others, could cause the Company’s financial performance to differ materially from that expressed in such forward-looking statements:
•
the strength of the United States economy in general and the strength of the local economies in which it conducts operations;
•
changes in the level of the Company’s non-performing assets and charge-offs;
•
management of risks inherent in the Company’s real estate loan portfolio, and the risk of a prolonged downturn in the real estate market, which could impair the value of collateral and the ability to sell collateral upon any foreclosure;
•
the effects of, and changes in, trade, monetary and fiscal policies and laws, including interest rate policies of the Federal Reserve, inflation, interest rate, market, and monetary fluctuations;
•
changes in consumer spending and savings habits;
•
technological and social media changes impacting the Company, the Bank, and the financial services industry, in general;
•
changing bank regulatory conditions, laws, regulations, policies or programs, whether arising as new legislation or regulatory initiatives, that could lead to restrictions on activities of banks generally, or the Bank in particular, more restrictive regulatory capital requirements, increased costs, including deposit insurance premiums, regulation or prohibition of certain income producing activities, or changes in the secondary market for loans and other products;
•
the impact of changes in laws, regulations, and policies affecting the real estate industry;
•
the effect of changes in accounting policies and practices, as may be adopted from time to time by bank regulatory agencies, the SEC, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, the FASB, or other accounting standards setting bodies;
•
the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated efforts by the Company and others to limit the spread of the virus;
•
the occurrence of significant natural disasters, including severe weather conditions, floods, health related issues, and other catastrophic events;
•
geopolitical conditions, including acts or threats of terrorism, or actions taken by the U.S. or other governments in response to acts or threats of terrorism and/or military conflicts, which could impact business and economic conditions in the U.S. and abroad;
•
the timely development of competitive new products and services and the acceptance of these products and services by new and existing customers;
•
the willingness of users to substitute competitors’ products and services for the Company’s products and services;
•
the Company’s inability to successfully manage growth or implement its growth strategy;
•
the effect of acquisitions the Company may make, including, without limitation, the failure to achieve the expected revenue growth and/or expense savings from such acquisitions;
•
the Company’s participation in the PPP established by the U.S. government and its administration of the loans and processing fees earned under the program;
•
the Company’s involvement, from time to time, in legal proceedings and examination and remedial actions by regulators;
•
the Company’s potential exposure to fraud, negligence, computer theft, and cyber-crime; and
•
the Bank’s ability to pay dividends.
On January 31, 2021, the Company completed its previously announced merger with Bay Banks. In addition to the factors described above, business plans, operations, performance, financial condition, operating results, and business strategy may be affected by the following factors:
•
the businesses of the Company and Bay Banks may not be integrated successfully or such integration may be more difficult, time-consuming, or costly than expected;
•
expected revenue synergies and cost savings from the merger may not be fully realized or realized within the expected timeframe;
•
revenues following the merger may be lower than expected; and
•
customer and employee relationships and business operations may be disrupted by the merger.
The foregoing factors should not be considered exhaustive and should be read together with other cautionary statements that are included in this Form 10-K, including those discussed in the section entitled "Risk Factors" in Item 1A above. If one or more of the factors affecting forward-looking information and statements proves incorrect, then actual results, performance or achievements could differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by, forward-looking information and statements contained in this Form 10-K. Therefore, the Company cautions you not to place undue reliance on its forward-looking information and statements. The Company will not update the forward-looking statements to reflect actual results or changes in the factors affecting the forward-looking statements. New risks and uncertainties may emerge from time to time, and it is not possible for the Company to predict their occurrence or how these risks and uncertainties will affect it.
Critical Accounting Policies
General
The accounting principles the Company applies under GAAP are complex and require management to apply significant judgment to various accounting, reporting, and disclosure matters. Management must use assumptions, judgments, and estimates when applying these principles where precise measurements are not possible or practical. These policies are critical because they are highly dependent upon subjective or complex judgments, assumptions, and estimates. Changes in such judgments, assumptions, and estimates may have a significant impact on the consolidated financial statements. Actual results, in fact, could differ from initial estimates.
The accounting policies the Company views as critical are those relating to judgments, assumptions, and estimates regarding the determination of the allowance for loan losses, the fair value measurements of certain assets and liabilities, derivatives, and income taxes.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses is maintained at a level believed to be adequate to absorb probable losses inherent in the portfolio and is based on the size and current risk characteristics of the loan portfolio, an assessment of individual problem loans and actual loss experience, current economic events in specific industries, and other pertinent factors, such as regulatory guidance and general economic conditions. The Company’s allowance for loan losses is established through a provision for loan losses charged to earnings. Loans identified as losses and deemed uncollectible by management are charged to the allowance. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance. The allowance for loan losses is evaluated on a regular basis by management.
The allowance for loan losses consists of specific, general, and unallocated components, if any. The specific component relates to loans that are classified as impaired, for which an allowance is established when the fair value of the loan is lower than its carrying value. The general component covers non-impaired loans and is based on historical loss experience adjusted for qualitative and environmental factors. Historical losses are categorized into risk-similar loan pools and a loss ratio factor is applied to each group’s loan balances to determine the allocation.
Qualitative and environmental factors include external risk factors that the Company believes affects its overall lending environment. Environmental factors that routinely analyze include levels and trends in delinquencies and impaired loans, levels and trends in charge-offs and recoveries, trends in volume and terms of loans, effects of changes in risk selection and underwriting practices, experience, ability, depth of lending management and staff, national and local economic trends, conditions such as unemployment rates, housing statistics, banking industry conditions, and the effect of changes in credit concentrations. Determination of the allowance for loan losses is inherently subjective as it requires significant estimates, including the amounts and timing of expected future cash flows on impaired loans, estimated losses on pools of homogeneous loans based on historical loss experience, and consideration of current economic trends, all of which may be susceptible to significant change.
Credit losses are an inherent part of the Company’s business and, although management believes the methodologies for determining the allowance for loan losses and the current level of the allowance are appropriate, it is possible that there may be unidentified losses in the portfolio at any particular time that may become evident at a future date pursuant to additional internal analysis or regulatory comment. Additional provisions for such losses, if necessary, would be recorded, as a change to earnings.
Allowance for Loan Losses-Acquired Loans
Acquired loans accounted for under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 310-30
For acquired loans, to the extent there is a deterioration in borrower credit quality resulting in a decrease in expected cash flows subsequent to the acquisition of the loans, an allowance for loan losses would be established based on the previously described allowance methodology.
Acquired loans accounted for under ASC 310-20
Subsequent to the acquisition date, an allowance for loan losses may be established through a provision for loan losses, based upon a process that is similar to the evaluation process used for originated loans. This evaluation, which includes a review of loans on which full collectability may not be reasonably assured, considers, among other factors, the estimated fair value of the underlying collateral, economic conditions, historical net loan loss experience, carrying value of the loans, which includes the remaining net purchase discount or premium, and other factors that warrant recognition in determining the allowance for loan losses.
Purchased Credit-Impaired Loans
Purchased credit-impaired ("PCI") loans, which are the loans acquired at a discount (that is due, in part, to credit quality), are accounted for under ASC 310-30. These loans are initially recorded at fair value (as determined by the present value of expected future cash flows) with no allowance for loan losses. The Company recognizes interest income on all loans acquired at a discount (that is due, in part, to credit quality) based on the acquired loans' expected cash flows. The acquired loans may be aggregated and accounted for as a pool of loans if the loans being aggregated have common risk characteristics. A pool is accounted for as a single asset with a single composite interest rate and an aggregate expectation of cash flow. The
difference between the cash flows expected at acquisition and the investment in the loans, or the accretable yield, is recognized as interest income utilizing the level-yield method over the life of each pool. Increases in expected cash flows subsequent to the acquisition are recognized prospectively through adjustment of the yield on the pool over its remaining life, while decreases in expected cash flows are recognized as impairment through a loss provision and an increase in the allowance for loan losses. Therefore, the allowance for loan losses on these impaired pools reflects only losses incurred after the acquisition (representing the present value of all cash flows that were expected at acquisition but currently are not expected to be received).
Management periodically evaluates the remaining contractual required payments due and estimates of cash flows expected to be collected. These evaluations, performed quarterly, require the continued use of key assumptions and estimates, similar to the initial estimate of fair value. Changes in the contractual required payments due and estimated cash flows expected to be collected may result in changes in the accretable yield and non-accretable difference or reclassifications between accretable yield and the non-accretable difference. On an aggregate basis, if the acquired pools of PCI loans perform better than originally expected and greater cash flows are expected than originally modeled at the acquisition date, the forecasted increase would be recorded as an additional accretable yield recognized as a prospective increase to interest income.
Fair Value Measurements
The Company determines the fair values of financial instruments based on the fair value hierarchy, which requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. The hierarchy describes three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value. For example, the Company’s available-for-sale investment securities are recorded at fair value using reliable and unbiased evaluations by an industry-wide valuation service. This service uses evaluated pricing models that vary based on asset class and include available trade, bid, and other market information. Generally, the methodology includes broker quotes, proprietary models, vast descriptive terms and conditions databases, as well as extensive quality control programs. Depending on the availability of observable inputs and prices, different valuation models could produce materially different fair value estimates. The values presented may not represent future fair values and may not be realizable.
Derivatives
Derivatives are recognized as assets and liabilities on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets and measured at fair value. The Company’s derivatives consist of forward sales of to-be-announced mortgage-backed securities and interest rate lock commitments. The Company’s hedging policies permit the use of various derivative financial instruments to manage interest rate risk or to hedge specified assets and liabilities. All derivatives are recorded at fair value on the consolidated balance sheets. The Company may be required to recognize certain contracts and commitments as derivatives when the characteristics of those contracts and commitments meet the definition of a derivative. If derivative instruments are designated as hedges of fair values, both the change in the fair value of the hedge and the hedged item are included in current earnings.
During the normal course of business, the Company enters into commitments to originate mortgage loans whereby the interest rate on the loan is determined prior to funding (“rate lock commitments”). For commitments issued in connection with potential loans intended for sale, the Bank enters into positions of forward month mortgage-backed securities to be announced (“TBA”) contracts on a mandatory basis or on a one-to-one forward sales contract on a best efforts basis. The Company enters into TBA contracts in order to control interest rate risk during the period between the rate lock commitment and mandatory sale of the mortgage loan. Both the rate lock commitment and the forward TBA contract is considered a derivative. A mortgage loan sold on a best efforts basis is locked into a forward sales contract with a counterparty on the same day as the rate lock commitment to control interest rate risk during the period between the commitment and the sale of the mortgage loan. Both the rate lock commitment and the forward sales contract are considered derivatives.
The market values of rate lock commitments and best efforts forward delivery commitments is not readily ascertainable with precision because rate lock commitments and best efforts contracts are not actively traded in stand-alone markets. The Company determines the fair value of rate lock commitments, delivery contracts, and forward sales contracts of mortgage backed securities (“MBS”) by measuring the change in the value of the underlying asset, while taking into consideration the probability that the rate lock commitments will close or will be funded. Certain risks arise from the forward delivery contracts in that the counterparties to the contracts may not be able to meet the terms of the contracts. Additional risks inherent in mandatory delivery programs include the risk that, if the Company does not close the loans subject to rate lock commitments, it will still be obligated to deliver MBS to the counterparty under the forward sales agreement.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for using the balance sheet method in accordance with ASC 740, Accounting for Income Taxes. Per ASC 740, the objective is to recognize (a) the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current year, and (b) defer tax liabilities and assets for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in the financial statements or federal income tax returns. A net deferred tax asset or liability is determined based on the tax effects of the temporary differences between the book (i.e., financial statement) and tax bases of the various balance sheet assets and liabilities and gives current recognition to changes in tax rates and laws. Temporary differences are reversed in the period in which an amount or amounts become taxable or deductible.
Comparison of Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company reported net income of $17.7 million compared to $4.6 million reported for 2019. Basic and diluted earnings per share were $3.11 in 2020 compared to $1.10 in 2019.
Net Interest Income. Net interest income is the excess of interest earned on loans and investments over the interest paid on deposits and borrowings and is the Company’s primary revenue source. Net interest income is thereby affected by overall balance sheet growth, changes in interest rates and changes in the mix of investments, loans, deposits, and borrowings.
Net interest income was $44.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $21.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net interest margin was 3.49% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 3.35% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net interest income in 2020 was primarily due to continued growth in the loan portfolio, particularly loans made pursuant to the PPP. The positive impact on net interest margin as a result of PPP loans and related funding was twelve basis points. Average balances of PPP loans were $237.2 million in 2020, whereas there were none in 2019. Growth in average balances of loans excluding PPP loans was 8.5% for 2020 compared to 2019. Included in net interest income for 2020 was approximately $9.6 million in net interest and fees related to PPP loans. The Company utilized borrowings from the Federal Reserve’s Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (“PPPLF”) to fund PPP loans during 2020. These borrowings were at an annual rate of 0.35% and resulted in interest expense of $784 thousand during 2020. Additionally, the Company participated in the Federal Reserve’s Main Street Lending Program and recognized loan origination fees from this program of approximately $1.5 million in 2020.
The following table shows the average balance sheets for each of the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. In addition, the amounts of interest earned on interest-earning assets, with related yields, and interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities, with related rates, are shown.
(1)
Computed on a fully taxable equivalent basis using a 21% effective tax rate.
(2)
Non-accrual loans have been included in the computations of average loan balances.
Interest income and expense are affected by changes in interest rates, by changes in the volumes of earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, and by changes in the mix of these assets and liabilities. The following rate-volume variance analysis shows the year-to-year changes in the components of net interest income:
Provision for Loan Losses. The provision for loan losses was $10.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $8.8 million. Net charge-offs amounted to $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $750 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in the provision for loan losses during 2020 was primarily due to a factor added for the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the amount of $9.2 million. This factor was based on Federal Reserve annualized charge-off rates from recent recessions in addition to statistics on hotel occupancy rates to arrive at a COVID-19 severity factor. This factor was applied to loans of specific NAICS codes that were deemed more susceptible to the impacts of the pandemic, including loans in part collateralized by restaurants, hospitality, and other public venues.
Non-interest Income. The Company’s non-interest income sources include deposit account service charges and other fees, residential mortgage banking income, including net gains on sales of mortgages and mortgage servicing rights income, gains on the sale of guaranteed United States Department of Agriculture (“USDA”) loans, and income from bank owned life insurance. Non-interest income totaled $56.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $18.8 million in 2019. The increase in non-interest income was largely due to an increase of $30.0 million related to the origination and sale of held for sale mortgages, as a result of increased home refinancing and purchasing due to the low interest rate environment for a majority of 2020. The Company expanded its mortgage operations in 2020 to include a wholesale mortgage business through LenderSelect Mortgage Group, which also contributed to the increased mortgage volume in 2020. Mortgage volume surpassed $1 billion in 2020, a record for the Company. Beginning in second quarter 2020, the Company began retaining mortgage servicing rights at the sale of residential loans resulting in additional non-interest income of approximately $7.1 million for the year. Additionally, gains on the sale of guaranteed USDA loans resulted in income of approximately $880 thousand, an increase of $582 thousand over the prior year. The following table provides detail for non-interest income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Non-interest Expense. Non-interest expense totaled $68.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $32.8 million for 2019, a 108.2% increase. This was primarily due to an increase in salaries and employee benefits of $26.1 million, which was primarily a result of the Bank expanding its retail mortgage operations through Monarch Mortgage and the acquisition of LenderSelect Mortgage Group in late 2019. The increased mortgage volume in 2020 resulted in increased headcount, bonuses, and commissions tied to these record volumes. Additionally, occupancy and equipment expenses increased $1.0 million due to additional leased locations for the expanded mortgage division and a full year of expenses with the VCB acquisition, which occurred in late 2019. Data processing costs increased $781 thousand primarily due to growth from the 2019 acquisition of VCB and higher mortgage processing software costs from the increased volume in 2020. Also included in non-interest expense were merger related costs of $2.4 million and $1.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, that are primarily included in data processing, legal, issuer, and regulatory filing fees and other contractual services. The following table provides detail for non-interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Income Tax Expense. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a provision for income taxes of $4.8 million (effective tax rate of 21.4%) as compared to a provision of $973 thousand (effective tax rate of 17.4%) for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Analysis of Financial Condition
Loan Portfolio. The Company makes loans to individuals as well as to commercial entities. Specific loan terms vary as to interest rate, repayment, and collateral requirements based on the type of loan requested and the creditworthiness of the prospective borrower. Credit risk tends to be geographically concentrated in that a majority of the loan customers are located in the markets serviced by the Bank. All loans are underwritten within specific lending policy guidelines that are designed to maximize the Company’s profitability within an acceptable level of business risk.
The following table sets forth the distribution of the Company’s loan portfolio at the dates indicated by category of loan and the percentage of loans in each category to total loans:
The following table sets forth the repricing characteristics and sensitivity to interest rate changes of the Company’s loan portfolio at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
The Company prepares a quarterly analysis of the allowance for loan losses, with the objective of quantifying portfolio risk into a dollar amount of inherent losses. The allowance for loan losses is established as losses are estimated to have occurred through a provision for loan losses charged against income and decreased by loans charged-off (net of recoveries, if any). The Company’s periodic evaluation of the adequacy of the allowance is based on past loan loss experience, known and inherent risks in the portfolio, adverse situations that may affect the borrower’s ability to repay, the estimated value of any underlying collateral, and current economic conditions. While management uses the best information available to make evaluations, future adjustments may be necessary, if economic or other conditions differ substantially from the assumptions used. The allowance consists of specific and general components. The specific component relates to loans that are identified as impaired. For loans that are classified as impaired, an allowance is established when the discounted cash flows or the net realizable value of underlying collateral, which is equal to the estimated fair value less estimated costs to sell, of the impaired loan is lower than the carrying value of that loan. The general component covers non-classified loans and those loans classified over a minimum dollar amount that are not impaired and is based on historical loss experience adjusted for other internal or external influences on credit quality that are not fully reflected in the historical data.
The Company follows applicable guidance issued by FASB. This guidance requires that losses be accrued when they are probable of occurring and can be estimated. It also requires that impaired loans, within its scope, be measured based on the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate, except that as a practical expedient, a creditor may measure impairment based on a loan’s observable market price, or the fair value of the collateral if the loan is collateral dependent.
Loans are evaluated for non-accrual status when principal or interest is delinquent for 90 days or more and are placed on non-accrual status when a loan is specifically determined to be impaired. Any unpaid interest previously accrued on those loans is reversed from income. Any interest payments subsequently received are recognized as income or amortized over the life of the loan depending on the specific circumstances. Interest payments received on loans where management believes a potential for loss remains are applied as a reduction of the loan principal balance.
Management believes that the allowance for loan losses was adequate as of December 31, 2020. There can be no assurance that adjustments to the provision for loan losses will not be required in the future. Changes in the economic assumptions underlying management’s estimates and judgments; adverse developments in the economy, on a national basis or in the Company’s market area; or changes in the circumstances of particular borrowers are criteria that could require adjustments to the provision for loan losses.
The following table presents a summary of the provision and allowance for loan losses for the periods indicated:
The allowance for loan losses includes specific and a general allowance applicable to all loan categories; however, management has allocated the allowance by loan type to provide an indication of the relative risk characteristics of the loan portfolio. The allocation is an estimate and should not be interpreted as an indication that charge-offs will occur in these amounts, or that the allocation indicates future trends, and does not restrict the usage of the allowance for any specific loan or category. The allocation of the allowance and as a percent of the applicable loan segment was as follows at the periods indicated:
Non-performing Assets. Non-performing assets consist of non-accrual loans, loans past due 90 days and still accruing interest, and OREO (foreclosed properties). The level of non-performing assets increased by $1.5 million during 2020 to $6.6 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $5.2 million at December 31, 2019. The Company has established specific loan loss reserves on impaired loans equal to the estimated collateral deficiency (if any), plus the cost of sale of the underlying collateral, as applicable.
Loans are placed in non-accrual status when in the opinion of management the collection of additional interest is unlikely or a specific loan meets the criteria for non-accrual status established by regulatory authorities. No interest is taken into income on non-accrual loans. A loan remains on non-accrual status until the loan is current as to both principal and interest or the borrower demonstrates the ability to pay and remain current, or both.
Foreclosed real estate properties include properties that have been substantively repossessed or acquired in complete or partial satisfaction of debt. Such properties, which are held for resale, are carried at fair value, including a reduction for the estimated selling expenses.
Impaired loans also include certain loans that have been modified in TDRs where economic concessions have been granted to borrowers who have experienced or are expected to experience financial difficulties. These concessions typically result from the Company’s loss mitigation activities and could include reductions in the interest rate, payment extensions, forgiveness of principal, forbearance, or other actions. Certain TDRs are classified as non-performing at the time of restructure and may only be returned to performing status after considering the borrower’s sustained repayment performance for a reasonable period, generally six months. The Company had two TDRs in the amount of $142 thousand and $144 thousand at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. One loan was classified as a TDR due to a change in interest rate and payment terms and the other loan was classified as a TDR due to a change in payment terms. These loans are not included in the non-performing asset totals in the following table.
The following is a summary of information pertaining to risk elements and non-performing assets at the dates indicated:
Potential Problem Loans
From a credit risk standpoint, the Company grades watchlist and problem loans into one of five categories: pass/watch, special mention, substandard, doubtful, or loss. The classifications of loans reflect a judgment about the risks of default and loss associated with the loan. Credit ratings are reviewed regularly by management by management. Ratings are adjusted regularly to reflect the degree of risk and loss that the Company’s management believes to be appropriate for each credit. The methodology is structured so that specific reserve allocations are increased in accordance with deterioration in credit quality (and a corresponding increase in risk and loss) or decreased in accordance with improvement in credit quality (and a corresponding decrease in risk and loss). The Company’s lending policy requires the routine monitoring of daily past due and overdraft reports, monthly maturing loans, monthly risk rating reports, and internal loan review reports. The lending and credit management of the Bank meet once a month to review loans rated pass/watch. The focus of each meeting is to identify and promptly determine any necessary required action with this loan population, which consists of loans that, although considered satisfactory and performing to terms, may exhibit special risk features that warrant management’s attention.
Loans that are deemed special mention, substandard, doubtful, or loss are listed in the Bank’s Problem Loan Report or Special Asset Report.
The Bank uses the following definitions for watch list risk ratings:
•
Pass/Watch. Borrowers who are considered satisfactory and performing to terms, however exhibiting special risk features such as declining earnings, strained cash flow, increasing leverage, and/or weakening fundamentals that indicate above average risk.
•
Special Mention. A special mention loan has potential weaknesses deserving of management’s attention. If uncorrected, such weaknesses may result in deterioration of the repayment prospects for the asset or in credit position at some future date.
•
Substandard. A substandard loan is inadequately protected by the current financial condition and paying capacity of the obligor or of the collateral pledged, if any. Assets so classified have a well-defined weakness or weaknesses that jeopardize the liquidation of the debt. They are characterized by the distinct possibility that the Company will sustain some loss if deficiencies are not corrected. Loss potential, while existing in the aggregate amount of substandard assets, does not have to exist in individual assets that are classified as substandard.
•
Doubtful. A doubtful loan has all weaknesses inherent in one classified as substandard, with the added characteristic that weaknesses make collection or liquidation in full, on the basis of existing facts, conditions, and values, highly questionable and improbable. The probability of loss is extremely high, but certain important and reasonably specific factors that may work to the advantage and strengthening of the asset exist. Therefore, its classification as an estimated loss is deferred until a more precise status may be determined by management. Pending factors include proposed merger, acquisition or liquidation procedures, capital injection, perfecting liens on additional collateral, and refinancing plans.
•
Loss. Credits rated as loss are charged-off, as the Company has no expectation of the recovery of any payments.
Loans not meeting the criteria above are considered to be pass-rated loans. The following tables present the loan balances by category as well as risk rating. No assets were classified as loss or doubtful during the periods presented.
Investment Securities. The investment portfolio is used as a source of interest income, credit risk diversification, and liquidity, as well as to manage rate sensitivity and provide collateral for short-term borrowings. Securities in the investment portfolio classified as securities available-for-sale may be sold in response to changes in market interest rates, changes in the securities’ prepayment risk, increased loan demand, general liquidity needs, and other similar factors, and are carried at estimated fair value. The fair value of the Company’s investment securities available-for-sale was $109.5 million at December 31, 2020, an increase of $904 thousand, or 0.83%, from $108.6 million at December 31, 2019. During 2020, the Company purchased $44.2 million in investment securities available-for-sale to offset redemptions and sales and to enhance the yield of the portfolio. The Company did not hold any investment securities held-to-maturity at December 31, 2020, whereas at December 31, 2019 held-to-maturity investments totaled $12.2 million. Securities in the investment portfolio classified as held-to-maturity were those securities that the Company had the ability and intent to hold to maturity and were carried at amortized cost.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the majority of the investment securities portfolio consisted of securities rated A to AAA by a leading rating agency. Investment securities which carry a AAA rating are judged to be of the best quality and carry the smallest degree of investment risk. The market value of investment securities that were pledged to secure public deposits totaled $12.5 million and $12.0 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
The Company completes reviews for other-than-temporary impairment at least quarterly. At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, only investment grade securities were in an unrealized loss position. Investment securities with unrealized losses are a result of pricing changes due to recent and negative conditions in the current market environment and were not deemed a result of permanent credit impairment. Contractual cash flows for the agency mortgage-backed securities are guaranteed and/or funded by the U.S. government. Municipal securities show no indication that the contractual cash flows will not be received when due. The Company does not intend to sell nor does it believe that it will be required to sell any of its temporarily impaired securities prior to the recovery of the amortized cost.
No other-than-temporary impairment has been recognized for the securities in the Company’s investment portfolio as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
The Company holds restricted investments in equities of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond (“FRB”), the FHLB, and its correspondent bank, Community Banker’s Bank (“CBB”). At December 31, 2020, the Company held $5.8 million of FHLB stock, $2.2 million of FRB stock, and $248 thousand of CBB stock. At December 31, 2019, the Company held $6.0 million of FHLB stock, $963 thousand of FRB stock, and $248 thousand of CBB stock. At December 31, 2018, the Company held $3.5 million of FHLB stock, $813 thousand of FRB stock, and $168 thousand of CBB stock.
The following table reflects the composition of the Company’s investment portfolio, at amortized cost, for the periods stated:
The following table presents the amortized cost of the Company’s investment portfolio by their stated maturities, as well as the weighted average yields for each of the maturity ranges at December 31, 2020:
Deposits. The principal sources of funds for the Company are core deposits (demand deposits, interest-bearing transaction accounts, money market accounts, savings deposits, and certificates of deposit) from its market area. The Company’s deposit base includes transaction accounts, time and savings accounts, and other accounts that customers use for cash management purposes and which provide the Bank a source of fee income and cross-marketing opportunities as well as a low-cost source of funding.
Approximately 26.6% of the Company’s deposits at December 31, 2020 were made up of time deposits, which are generally the most expensive form of deposit because of their fixed rate and term, compared to 36.1% and 40.9% at December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, respectively.
The following tables provide a summary of the Company’s deposit base at the dates indicated and the maturity distribution of certificates of deposit of $100,000 or more as of the end of the periods indicated:
Maturities of Time Deposits ($100,000 or greater)
Brokered and listing service deposits made up of both certificate of deposits and money market demand accounts totaled $46.6 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $49.8 million at December 31, 2019 and $23.5 million at December 31, 2018.
Borrowings. The following table provides information on the balances and interest rates borrowings at the dates indicated:
FHLB advances are secured by collateral consisting of a blanket lien on qualifying loans in the Company’s residential, multifamily, and commercial real estate mortgage loan portfolios, as well as selected investment portfolio securities. FRB borrowings in the 2020 period consist exclusively of PPPLF advances secured by PPP loans.
Liquidity. Liquidity in the banking industry is defined as the ability to meet the demand for funds of both depositors and borrowers. The Company must be able to meet these needs by obtaining funding from depositors or other lenders or by converting non-cash items into cash. The objective of the Company’s liquidity management program is to ensure that it always has sufficient resources to meet the demands of depositors and borrowers. Stable core deposits and a strong capital position provide the base for the Company’s liquidity position. Management believes the Company has demonstrated its ability to attract deposits because of its convenient branch locations, personal service, technology, and pricing.
In addition to deposits, the Company has access to the different wholesale funding markets. These markets include the brokered certificate of deposit market, listing service deposit market, and the federal funds market. The Bank is a member of the IntraFi Network, which allows banking customers to access FDIC insurance protection on deposits through the Bank, which exceed FDIC insurance limits. The Bank has one-way authority with IntraFi for both their Certificate of Deposit Account Registry Service and Insured Cash Swap Service products, which provides the Bank the ability to access additional wholesale funding as needed. The Company also maintains secured lines of credit with the FRB and the FHLB for which the Bank can borrow up to the allowable amount for the collateral pledged. Having diverse funding alternatives reduces the Company’s reliance on any one source for funding.
Cash flow from amortizing or maturing assets also provides funding to meet the needs of depositors and borrowers.
The Company has established a formal liquidity contingency plan, which provides guidelines for liquidity management. For the Company’s liquidity management program, the Company first determines current liquidity position and then forecasts liquidity based on anticipated changes in the balance sheet. In this forecast, the Company expects to maintain a liquidity cushion. The Company then stresses its liquidity position under several different stress scenarios, from moderate to severe. Guidelines for the forecasted liquidity cushion and for liquidity cushions for each stress scenario have been established. Management believes that it has sufficient resources to meet its liquidity needs.
The Company had a credit line available of $177.1 million with the FHLB with an outstanding balance of $135 million, inclusive of a $20 million letter of credit for use as pledging to the Commonwealth of Virginia for public deposits, as of December 31, 2020. The FHLB may provide a credit line up to 30% of the Bank’s asset value as of the prior quarter-end,
subject to certain eligibility requirements and lending collateral, increasing this credit line to approximately $450 million. As of December 31, 2019, the outstanding balance of borrowings and commitments with the FHLB totaled $124.8 million.
The Company had four unsecured federal fund lines available with correspondent banks for overnight borrowing totaling $38.0 million and $24.0 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. These lines bear interest at the prevailing rate for such lines and are cancellable at any time by the correspondent banks. These lines were not drawn upon at December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Liquidity is essential to the Company’s business. The Company’s liquidity could be impaired by an inability to access the capital markets or by unforeseen outflows of cash, including deposits. This situation may arise due to circumstances that the Company may be unable to control, such as general market disruption, negative views about the financial services industry generally, or an operational problem that affects a third party or the Company. The Company’s ability to borrow from other financial institutions on favorable terms or at all could be adversely affected by disruptions in the capital markets or other events. Management monitor liquidity position daily through cash flow forecasting and regular testing against minimum policy ratios and it believes the Company’s level of liquidity and capital is adequate to conduct its business.
Capital. Capital adequacy is an important measure of financial stability and performance. the Company’s objectives are to maintain a level of capitalization that is sufficient to sustain asset growth and promote depositor and investor confidence.
Regulatory agencies measure capital adequacy utilizing a formula that considers the individual risk profile of the financial institution. The minimum capital requirements for the Bank are: (i) a common equity Tier 1 (“CET1”) capital ratio of 4.5%; (ii) a Tier 1 to risk-based assets capital ratio of 6%; (iii) a total risk-based capital ratio of 8%; and (iv) a Tier 1 leverage ratio of 4%. Additionally, a capital conservation buffer requirement of 2.5% of risk-weighted assets is designed to absorb losses during periods of economic stress and is applicable to the Bank’s CET1 capital, Tier 1 capital and total capital ratios. Including the conservation buffer, the Bank’s minimum capital ratios are as follows: 7.00% for CET1; 8.50% for Tier 1 capital; and 10.50% for total risk-based capital. Banking institutions with a ratio of CET1 to risk-weighted assets above the minimum but below the conservation buffer will face constraints on dividends, equity repurchases, and compensation. The Bank was considered “well capitalized” for regulatory purposes at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
On September 17, 2019, the federal banking agencies jointly issued a final rule required by the EGRRCPA that permits qualifying banks and bank holding companies that have less than $10 billion in consolidated assets to elect to be subject to the CBLR. Under the rule, which became effective on January 1, 2020, banks and bank holding companies that opt into the CBLR framework and maintain a CBLR of greater than 9% are not subject to other risk-based and leverage capital requirements under the Basel III Capital Rules and would be deemed to have met the well capitalized ratio requirements under the “prompt corrective action” framework. The Company has not opted into the CBLR framework.
As noted above, regulatory capital levels for the Bank meet those established for "well capitalized" institutions. While the Bank is currently considered "well capitalized," it may from time to time find it necessary to access the capital markets to meet the Company’s growth objectives or capitalize on specific business opportunities.
The following table shows the minimum capital requirement and the capital position at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 for the Bank.
(1)
Except with regard to the Bank’s Tier 1 to average assets (leverage) ratio, the minimum capital requirement includes the Basel III Capital Rules capital conservation buffer.
Off-Balance Sheet Activities
Standby letters of credit are conditional commitments issued by the Bank to guarantee the performance of a customer to a third party. These guarantees are primarily issued to support public and private borrowing arrangements and, generally, have terms of one year or less. The credit risk involved in issuing letters of credit is essentially the same as that involved in extending loan facilities to customers; the Bank generally holds collateral supporting these commitments. In the event the customer does not perform in accordance with the terms of the agreement with the third party, the Bank would be required to fund the commitment. The maximum potential amount of future payments the Company could be required to make is represented by the contractual amount of the commitment. If the commitment is funded, the Bank would be entitled to seek recovery from the customer. The maximum potential amount of future advances on standby letters of credit available through the Company at December 31, 2020 and 2019, totaled $6.1 million and $641 thousand, respectively.
Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to a customer as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Since many of the commitments are expected to expire without being drawn upon, the total commitment amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. The Company evaluates each customer’s credit worthiness on a case-by-case basis. The amount of collateral obtained, if deemed necessary by the Company upon extension of credit, is based on management’s credit evaluation of the counterparty. Collateral held varies but may include real estate and income producing commercial properties. The approved commitments to extend credit that was available but unused at December 31, 2020 and 2019 totaled $126.0 million and $107.7 million, respectively.
Interest Rate Risk Management
As a financial institution, the Company is exposed to various business risks, including interest rate risk. Interest rate risk is the risk to earnings and value arising from volatility in market interest rates. Interest rate risk arises from timing differences in the repricing and maturities of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, changes in the expected maturities of assets and liabilities arising from embedded options, such as borrowers' ability to prepay loans and depositors' ability to redeem certificates of deposit before maturity, changes in the shape of the yield curve where interest rates increase or decrease in a nonparallel fashion, and changes in spread relationships between different yield curves, such as U.S. Treasuries and LIBOR. The Company’s goal is to maximize net interest income without incurring excessive interest rate risk. Management of net interest income and interest rate risk must be consistent with the level of capital and liquidity that the Bank maintains. The Company manages interest rate risk through an asset and liability committee (“ALCO”). ALCO is responsible for monitoring the Company’s interest rate risk in conjunction with liquidity and capital management.
The Company employs an independent consulting firm to model its interest rate sensitivity that uses a net interest income simulation model as its primary tool to measure interest rate sensitivity. Assumptions for modeling are developed based on expected activity in the balance sheet. For maturing assets, assumptions are created for the redeployment of these assets. For maturing liabilities, assumptions are developed for the replacement of these funding sources. Assumptions are also developed for assets and liabilities that could reprice during the modeled time period. These assumptions also cover how management expects rates to change on non-maturity deposits such as interest checking, money market checking, savings accounts, as well as certificates of deposit. Based on inputs that include the current balance sheet, the current level of interest rates and the developed assumptions, the model then produces an expected level of net interest income assuming that market rates remain unchanged. This is considered the base case. Next, the model determines what net interest income would be based on specific changes in interest rates. The rate simulations are performed for a two-year period and include rapid rate changes of down 100 basis points to 200 basis points and up 100 basis points to 400 basis points. The results of these simulations are then compared to the base case.
Stress testing the balance sheet and net interest income using instantaneous parallel shock movements in the yield curve of 100 to 400 basis points is a regulatory and banking industry practice. However, these stress tests may not represent a realistic forecast of future interest rate movements in the yield curve. In addition, instantaneous parallel interest rate shock modeling is not a predictor of actual future performance of earnings. It is a financial metric used to manage interest rate risk and track the movement of the Company’s interest rate risk position over a historical time frame for comparison purposes.
The asset and liability repricing characteristics of Bay Banks’ assets and liabilities will have a significant impact on the Company’s future interest rate risk profile.