Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Forward Looking Statements
This report and other reports filed by our Company from time to time with the SEC (collectively the “Filings”) contain or may contain forward-looking statements and information that are based upon beliefs of, and information currently available to, our management as well as estimates and assumptions made by our management. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which are only predictions and speak only as of the date hereof.
When used in the filings, the words “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “future,” “intend,” “plan,” or the negative of these terms and similar expressions as they relate to us or our management identify forward-looking statements. Such statements reflect our current view with respect to future events and are subject to risks, uncertainties, assumptions, and other factors, including those set forth in the Risk Factors on page 5. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should the underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may differ significantly from those anticipated, believed, estimated, expected, intended, or planned.
Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance, or achievements. Except, as required by applicable law, including the securities laws of the United States, we do not intend to update any of the forward-looking statements to conform these statements to actual results.
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). These accounting principles require us to make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions. We believe that the estimates, judgments and assumptions upon which we rely are reasonable based upon information available to us at the time that these estimates, judgments and assumptions are made. These estimates, judgments and assumptions can affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. Our financial statements would be affected to the extent there are material differences between these estimates and actual results. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by GAAP and does not require management’s judgment in its application. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting any available alternative would not produce a materially different result. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this report.
General
Management’s discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition is intended to assist the reader in the understanding and assessment of significant changes and trends related to the results of operations and financial position of the Company together with its subsidiary. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying financial notes, and with the Critical Accounting Policies noted below.
Plan of Operation
The Bergio brand is our most important asset. The Bergio brand is associated with high-quality, handcrafted and individually designed pieces with European sensibility, Italian craftsmanship and a bold flair for the unexpected. Bergio, is one of the most coveted brands of fine jewelry. Established in 1995, Bergio’s signature innovative design, coupled with extraordinary diamonds and precious stones, earned the company recognition as a highly sought-after purveyor of rare and exquisite treasures from around the globe.
When designer and PEO, Berge Abajian, creates a collection, he looks well beyond the drawing board. Berge focuses on the woman who will ultimately wear his pieces, bringing to creation a magnificent piece of jewelry that reflects the beauty and vitality a woman possesses. Bergio creations are a seamless blend of classic elegance and subtle flair, adding to a woman’s charm while never overpowering her.
It is our intention to establish Bergio as a holding company for the purpose of establishing retails stores worldwide. Our branded product lines are products and/or collections designed by our designer and CEO Berge Abajian and will be the centerpiece of our retail stores. We also intend to complement our own quality-designed jewelry with other products and our own specially designed handbags. This is in line with our strategy and belief that a brand name can
create an association with innovation, design and quality which helps add value to the individual products as well as facilitate the introduction of new products.
It is our intention to open elegant stores in “high-end” areas and provide excellent service in our stores which will be staffed with knowledgeable professionals.
We also intend to sell our products on a wholesale basis to limited customers.
We have spent over $3 million in branding the Bergio name through tradeshows, trade advertising, national advertising and billboard advertising since launching the line in 1995.
In 2019 we introduced The Silver Fashion Collection ranging in price from $50 to $1,200. The Company also introduced the Bergio Handbag Collection, manufactured in Italy with top quality Italian leather ranging in price from $450 to $875, which are very competitive entry prices.
Our products consist of a wide range of unique styles and designs made from precious metals such as, gold, platinum, and Karat gold, as well as diamonds and other precious stones. We currently design and produce approximately 100 to 150 product styles. Current retail prices for our products range from $400 to $200,000. We have manufacturing control over our line as a result of having a manufacturing facility in New Jersey as well as subcontracts with facilities located in Italy.
On March 5, 2014, the Company formed a wholly owned subsidiary called Crown Luxe, Inc. in the State of Delaware (“Crown Luxe”). Crown Lux was established to operate the Company’s first retail store, which was opened in Bergen County, New Jersey in the fourth quarter of 2014.
During the fall of 2018, we opened our second retail store at the new Ocean Resort Casino in Atlantic City, New Jersey. We are also contemplating the opening of new stores in the future.
On February 10, 2021, Bergio International, Inc. entered into an Acquisition Agreement with Digital Age Business, Inc., a Florida corporation, (“Digital Age”), pursuant to which the shareholders of Digital Age agreed to sell all of the assets and liabilities of its Aphrodite’s business to a recently formed wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company known as Aphrodite’s Marketing, Inc., a Wyoming corporation in exchange for newly created Series B Preferred Stock of the Company, which collectively, shall be convertible at Shareholders’ option, at any time, in whole or in part, into that number of shares of common stock of the Company which shall equal thirty percent (30%) of the total issued and outstanding common stock of the Company (as determined at the earlier of (i) the date of conversion of the Series B Preferred Stock; and (ii) eighteen (18) months following the Closing). In addition, the Company will provide an additional $5,000,000 in financing for Aphrodite’s Marketing, Inc. (See Note to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional detail and Form 8-K file with the SEC on February 17, 2021.
The funding for this acquisition will be a combination of proceeds from the issuance of common stock from our S-1 Registration Statement and debt.
Aphrodite is expected to increase our online presence and provide for expansion of the Bergio Brand. Aphrodite is a one-stop shop for jewelry, gifts, and surprises for any occasion. The online store provides for a unique gifting experience in the ecommerce space. With their technological experience in ecommerce, we expect to grow the Bergio Brand, and in conjunction with Bergio’s design expertise and years of experience in the jewelry industry, we believe we can successfully grow the business We are now amassing one of the best teams and technology in this space.
The Company has instituted various cost saving measures to conserve cash and has worked with its debtors in an attempt to negotiate the debt terms. The Company has been also investigating various strategies to increase sales and expand its business. The Company is in negotiations with some potential partners, but, at this time, there is nothing concrete, but the Company remains positive about its prospects. However, there is no assurance that the Company will be successful in its endeavors or that it will be able to increase its business.
Our future operations are contingent upon increasing revenues and raising capital for on-going operations and expansion of our product lines. Because we have a limited operating history, you may have difficulty evaluating our business and future prospects.
The Company’s retail operations have been and continue to be affected by the recent and ongoing outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) which in March 2020, was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. The ultimate disruption which may be caused by the outbreak is uncertain; however, it may result in a material adverse impact on the Company’s financial position, operations and cash flows. Possible areas that may be affected include, but are not limited to, disruption to the Company’s customers and revenue, labor workforce, unavailability of products and supplies used in operations, and the decline in value of assets held by the Company, including property and equipment.
Results of Operations - For the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Overview
Sales were stable for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year despite the impact of the current pandemic. Our retail operations have severely impacted by the pandemic. We continue to evaluate our initiatives. We have held special events and expanded our marketing efforts within the confines of our available resources. We are expanding our online presence and have been experiencing some positive results. As discussed in our Plan of Operation above we acquired 51% ownership of Aphrodite’s Marketing (Aphrodite”). Aphrodite is expected to increase our online presence and provide for expansion of the Bergio Brand. Aphrodite is a one-stop shop for jewelry, gifts, and surprises for any occasion. The Company continues to position itself for the future to take advantage of the Bergio brand and establish a chain of retail stores worldwide. Our branded product lines are products and/or collections designed by our designer and CEO Berge Abajian and will be the centerpiece of our retail stores. We also intend to complement our own quality-designed jewelry with other products and our own specially-designed handbags. This is in line with our strategy and belief that a brand name can create an association with innovation, design and quality which helps add value to the individual products as well as facilitate the introduction of new products. It is our intention to open elegant stores in “high-end” areas and provide excellent service in our stores which will be staffed with knowledgeable professionals. We continue to be excited about our store in Atlantic City, NJ. Our initial store in northern New Jersey has not done as well as we had hoped and the wholesale market has also not been favorable as we spend our limited resources in building our high-end retail operations. The Company has leveraged itself such that as sales increase a larger portion of dollars will flow to the bottom line.
The Company continues to pursue additional financing opportunities and have initiate measures to strengthen our financial position. As a result, we have accomplished the following:
·We have negotiated some of our convertible debt.
·Pursuant to a Settlement Agreement, Livingston Asset Management acquired $362,285 (the “Claim Amount”) of Company liabilities from certain creditors. In satisfaction of the Claim Amount, the Company agreed to issue shares of the Company’s common stock in one or more tranches to Livingston in the manner contemplated in the Settlement Agreement and Stipulation Agreement. The effect of this will be to convert debt to equity.
·Filed a S-1 registration statement with the SEC. The Company has received proceeds from this offering.
·Raised additional funding from loans.
These events have allowed us to reduce our debt and provide limited funding for operations. We continue to pursue other opportunities. Moreover, there is no assurance that sufficient funding will be available, or if available, that its terms will be favorable to the Company. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
We continue to believe that our plan to establish a chain of retail stores in strategic markets will be step in the right direction.
Sales
Net sales for year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $16,175 (2.7%) to $584,806, as compared to $600,981 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is mostly attributed impact on the economy and consumer spending because of the pandemic. The Company was forced to close its retail stores for a period of time. The Company now has two retail stores, which have opened in the third quarter, but the stores still feel the impact of
reduced consumer spending. We were able to minimize the impact of the effect on our retail stores by our efforts on our wholesale operations, expanding our online presence, but it is too early to assess the real impact.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $38,758 (10.2%) to $341,118 as compared to $379,876 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease in gross profit is primarily due to the change in sales mix as our retail sales have declined which yields a higher gross profit than our wholesale business. Gross profit as a percentage of sales was 58.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 63.2% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Total selling, general and administrative expenses increased $78,900 (15.0%) to $604,852 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $525,952 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase is attributed to higher consulting expenses, partially offset by lower rent, travel, depreciation and commission expenses. The Company incurred $148,000 of consulting expense to provide brand awareness for the Company’s new line of fashion accessories and to develop strategies for global expansion. These services were paid for with the Company’s common stock and did not involve any cash.
Loss from Operations
As a result of the above, the Company had a loss from operations in the amount of $263,734 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $146,076 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had other income of $115,684 as compared to other expense of $2,888,967 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase is mostly attributed to the gain on the extinguishment of debt in the amount of $32,676 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a loss on the extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2019 in the amount of $2,290,000.
Net Loss
As a result of the above, the Company had a net loss of $148,050 or the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $3,035,043 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table summarizes total current assets, liabilities and working capital at December 31, 2020, compared to December 31, 2019.
Our working capital was $215,314 at December 31, 2020 as compared to negative working capital of $257,106 at December 31, 2019. This increase is primarily attributed to lower accounts payable and accrued liabilities, convertible debt and advances from stockholder offset partially by an increase in loans payable.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had a net increase in cash of $47,291. The Company’s principal sources and uses of funds were as follows:
Cash used in operating activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company used $180,102 in cash for operations as compared to $84,954 in cash for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase in cash used in
operations is mostly attributed to decrease in accounts payable and accrued liabilities offset partially by the increase in deferred compensation.
Cash used in investing activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company used $-0- in investing activities as compared to using $7,572 for the year ended December 31, 2019 as result of the decrease in the acquisition of capital assets.
Cash provided financing activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020 the Company provided $227,393 in financing activities as compared to $115,316 in cash for financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase is primarily the result of an increase in proceeds from convertible debt, loans payable partially and proceeds from the sale of stock offset by higher payments of loans payable and advances from stockholder.
Our indebtedness is comprised of various convertible debt and advances from a stockholder/officer intended to provide capital for the ongoing manufacturing of our jewelry line, in advance of receipt of the payment from our retail distributors.
Convertible Debt
The Company enters into certain financing agreements for convertible debt. For the most part, the Company settles these obligations with the Company’s common stock. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had outstanding convertible debt in the amount of $232,870.
Loans Payable
The Company has loans payable of $312,300 at December 31, 2020.
Satisfaction of Our Cash Obligations for the Next 12 Months
A critical component of our operating plan impacting our continued existence is to increase sales and efficiently manage the production of our jewelry lines and successfully develop new lines through our Company or through possible acquisitions and/or mergers. Our ability to obtain capital through additional equity and/or debt financing, and joint venture partnerships will also be important to our expansion plans. In the event we experience any significant problems assimilating acquired assets into our operations or cannot obtain the necessary capital to pursue our strategic plan, we may have to reduce the growth of our operations. This may materially impact our ability to increase revenue and continue our growth.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, which contemplates continuation of the Company as a going concern.
The Company has suffered recurring losses, and at December 31, 2020, the Company had a stockholders’ deficit of $171,048. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had only $70,081 cash on hand and $545,170 in convertible debt and loans payable on December 31, 2020. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern. The recoverability of a major portion of the recorded asset amounts shown in the accompanying consolidated balance sheet is dependent upon continued operations of the Company, which in turn, is dependent upon the Company's ability to raise capital and/or generate positive cash flows from operations.
In addition to obtaining new customers and increasing sales to existing customers, management plans to achieve profitability by also establishing Bergio as a holding company for the purpose of establishing retails stores worldwide. These consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded assets, or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary in the event the Company cannot continue in existence.
On February 10, 2021, Bergio International, Inc. entered into an Acquisition Agreement with Digital Age Business, Inc., a Florida corporation, (“Digital Age”), pursuant to which the shareholders of Digital Age agreed to sell all of the assets and liabilities of its Aphrodite’s business to a recently formed wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company known as Aphrodite’s Marketing, Inc., a Wyoming corporation in exchange for newly created Series B Preferred Stock of the Company, which collectively, shall be convertible at Shareholders’ option, at any time, in whole or in part, into that number of shares of common stock of the Company which shall equal thirty percent (30%) of the total
issued and outstanding common stock of the Company (as determined at the earlier of (i) the date of conversion of the Series B Preferred Stock; and (ii) eighteen (18) months following the Closing). In addition, the Company will provide an additional $5,000,000 in financing for Aphrodite’s Marketing, Inc. (See Note to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional detail and Form 8-K file with the SEC on February 17, 2021.
The funding for this acquisition will be a combination of proceeds from the issuance of common stock from our S-1 Registration Statement and debt.
Aphrodite is expected to increase our online presence and provide for expansion of the Bergio Brand. Aphrodite is a one-stop shop for jewelry, gifts, and surprises for any occasion. The online store provides for a unique gifting experience in the ecommerce space. With their technological experience in ecommerce, we expect to grow the Bergio Brand, and in conjunction with Bergio’s design expertise and years of experience in the jewelry industry, we believe we can successfully grow the business We are now amassing one of the best teams and technology in this space. However, there can be no assurance that this venture will be successful or that the Company can raise the required capital to fund this operation.
In addition to obtaining new customers and increasing sales to existing customers, management plans to achieve profitability by also establishing Bergio as a holding company for the purpose of establishing retails stores worldwide. These consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded assets, or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary in the event the Company cannot continue in existence.
Research and Development
We are not anticipating significant research and development expenditures in the near future.
Expected Purchase or Sale of Plant and Significant Equipment
We do not anticipate the purchase or sale of any plant or significant equipment; as such items are not required by us at this time.
Critical Accounting Policies
The Company prepares its financial statements in accordance with GAAP. In preparing the financial statements and accounting for the underlying transactions and balances, the Company applies its accounting policies as disclosed in Note 2 of our Notes to Financial Statements. The Company’s accounting policies that require a higher degree of judgment and complexity used in the preparation of financial statements include:
Revenue Recognition - the Company’s management recognizes revenue when realized or realizable and earned. In connection with revenue, the Company established a sales return and allowance reserve for anticipated merchandise to be returned based on historical operations. The Company’s sole revenue producing activity as a manufacturer and distributor of upscale jewelry is affected by movement in fashion trends and customer desire for new designs, varying economic conditions affecting consumer spending and changing product demand by retailers affecting their desired inventory levels. Realizing that this may, and in some periods has, resulted in a significant amount of sales returns, management revised the Company policy of accepting merchandise returns. Whereas under prior policy customers had up to 360 days to return merchandise and were allowed credits as offsets to their outstanding accounts receivable, under the current return policy merchandise, with limited exceptions, cannot be returned.
Accounts receivable - the Company performs ongoing credit evaluations of its customers and adjusts credit limits based on customer payment and current credit worthiness, as determined by review of their current credit information. The Company continuously monitors credits and payments from its customers and maintains provision for estimated credit losses based on its historical experience and any specific customer issues that have been identified. While such credit losses have historically been within our expectation and the provision established, the Company cannot guarantee that it will continue to receive positive results. Management has provided an allowance for doubtful accounts of $-0- at December 31, 2020 and $-0- at December 31, 2019.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments - The Company follows guidance issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) on “Fair Value Measurements” for assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis. This guidance establishes a common definition for fair value to be applied to existing generally accepted accounting
principles that require the use of fair value measurements, establishes a framework for measuring fair value, and expands disclosure about such fair value measurements.
The FASB defines fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. Additionally, the FASB requires the use of valuation techniques that maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs.
These inputs are prioritized below:
·Level 1: Observable inputs such as quoted market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
·Level 2: Observable market-based inputs or unobservable inputs that are corroborated by market data.
·Level 3: Unobservable inputs for which there is little or no market data, which require the use of the reporting entity’s own assumptions.
The Company discloses the estimated fair value for all financial instruments for which it is practicable to estimate fair value. As of December 31, 2020, the fair value of short-term financial instruments including accounts receivable, accounts payable and accrued expenses, approximates book value due to their short-term maturity. The fair value of property and equipment is estimated to approximate its net book value. The fair value of debt obligations, other than convertible debt obligations, approximates their face values due to their short-term maturities and/or the variable rates of interest associated with the underlying obligations.
Income taxes - deferred tax assets arise from a variety of sources, the most significant being: a) tax losses that can be carried forward to be utilized against profits in future years; b) expenses recognized in the books but disallowed in the tax return until the associated cash flow occurs; and c) valuation changes of assets which need to be tax effected for book purposes but are deductible only when the valuation change is realized.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using enacted tax rates and laws that are expected to be in effect when such differences are expected to reverse. The measurement of deferred tax assets is reduced, if necessary, by a valuation allowance for any tax benefit which is not more likely than not to be realized. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, future taxable income is estimated, considering the realization of tax loss carryforwards. Valuation allowances related to deferred tax assets can also be affected by changes to tax laws, changes to statutory tax rates and future taxable income levels. In the event it was determined that the Company would not be able to realize all or a portion of its deferred tax assets in the future, the Company would reduce such amounts through a charge to income in the period in which that determination is made. Conversely, if it were determined that it would be able to realize the deferred tax assets in the future in excess of the net carrying amounts, the Company would decrease the recorded valuation allowance through an increase to income in the period in which that determination is made. In its evaluation of a valuation allowance, the Company takes into account existing contracts and backlog, and the probability that options under these contract awards will be exercised as well as sales of existing products. The Company prepares profit projections based on the revenue and expenses forecast to determine that such revenues will produce sufficient taxable income to realize the deferred tax assets.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company is not party to any off-balance sheet arrangements that may affect its financial position or its results of operations.
Recently Adopted Authoritative Pronouncements
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes - simplifying the accounting for income taxes (Topic 740), which is meant to simplify the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740, Income Taxes. The amendment also improves consistent application and simplify GAAP for other areas of Topic 740 by clarifying and amending existing guidance. We do not expect the adoption of this standard to have a significant impact on our financial position and results of operations.
No other recently issued accounting pronouncements had or are expected to have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
No other recently issued accounting pronouncements had or are expected to have a material impact on the Company’s condensed consolidated financial statements.