Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Introduction
The Company, a Delaware corporation, operates as a multi-bank holding company for Brookline Bank and its subsidiaries; BankRI and its subsidiaries; and Brookline Securities Corp.
As a commercially-focused financial institution with 50 full-service banking offices throughout greater Boston, the north shore of Massachusetts and Rhode Island, the Company, through the Banks, offers a wide range of commercial, business and retail banking services, including a full complement of cash management products, foreign exchange services, on-line and mobile banking services, consumer and residential loans and investment advisory services, designed to meet the financial needs of small- to mid-sized businesses and individuals throughout central New England. Specialty lending activities including equipment financing, comprise 27.8% in the New York and New Jersey metropolitan area.
The Company focuses its business efforts on profitably growing its commercial lending businesses, both organically and through acquisitions. The Company’s customer focus, multi-bank structure, and risk management are integral to its organic growth strategy and serve to differentiate the Company from its competitors. As full-service financial institutions, the Banks and their subsidiaries focus their efforts on developing and deepening long-term banking relationships with qualified customers through a full complement of products and excellent customer service, and strong risk management.
The Company manages the Banks under uniform strategic objectives, with one set of uniform policies consistently applied by one executive management team. Within this environment, the Company believes that the ability to make customer decisions locally enhances management's motivation, service levels and, as a consequence, the Company's financial results. As such, while most back-office functions are consolidated at the holding company level, branding and decision-making, including credit decisions and pricing, remain largely local in order to better meet the needs of bank customers and further motivate the Banks’ commercial, business and retail bankers. These credit decisions, at the local level, are executed through corporate policies overseen by the Company's credit department.
The competition for loans and leases and deposits remains intense. The Company expects the operating environment to remain challenging. The volume of loan and lease originations and loan and lease losses will depend, to a large extent, on how the economy performs. Loan and lease growth and deposit growth are also greatly influenced by the rate-setting actions of the FRB. A sustained, low interest rate environment with a flat interest rate curve may negatively impact the Company's yields and net interest margin. While the Company is slightly asset sensitive and should benefit from rising rates, changes in interest rates could also precipitate a change in the mix and volume of the Company's deposits and loans. The future operating results of the Company will depend on its ability to maintain or increase the current net interest margin, while minimizing exposure to credit risk, along with increasing sources of non-interest income, while controlling the growth of non-interest expenses.
The Company and the Banks are supervised, examined and regulated by the FRB. As a Massachusetts-chartered trust company, Brookline Bank is also subject to regulation under the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the jurisdiction of the Massachusetts Division of Banks. As a Rhode Island-chartered financial institution, BankRI is also subject to regulation under the laws of the State of Rhode Island and the jurisdiction of the Banking Division of the Rhode Island Department of Business Regulation. The FDIC continues to insure each of the Banks’ deposits up to $250,000 per depositor. Until July 31, 2019, Brookline Bank was a member bank of the Depositors Insurance Fund (the “DIF”), a private, industry-sponsored insurance fund that insures all deposits above FDIC limits for Massachusetts-chartered savings banks. Brookline Bank converted its charter from a Massachusetts-chartered savings bank to a Massachusetts-chartered trust company and ended its membership in the DIF on July 31, 2019. Term deposits in excess of the FDIC insurance coverage will continue to be insured by the DIF until they reach maturity.
The Company’s common stock is traded on the Nasdaq Global Select MarketSM under the symbol “BRKL.”
Executive Overview
Growth
Total assets of $8.9 billion as of December 31, 2020 increased $1.1 billion, or 13.8%, from December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by increases in loans and leases, cash and cash equivalents and investment securities.
Total loans and leases of $7.3 billion as of December 31, 2020 increased $531.7 million, or 7.9%, from December 31, 2019. The Company's commercial loan portfolios, which are comprised of commercial real estate loans and commercial loans and leases, totaled $6.1 billion, or 83.9% of total loans and leases as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $590.8 million, or 10.7%, from $5.5 billion, or 81.7% of total loans and leases, as of December 31, 2019.
Total deposits of $6.9 billion as of December 31, 2020 increased $1.1 billion, or 18.5%, from $5.8 billion as of December 31, 2019. Core deposits, which include demand checking, NOW, money market and savings accounts, totaled $4.8 billion, or 69.8% of total deposits as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.0 billion, from $3.8 billion, or 65.3% of total deposits as of December 31, 2019. Certificate of deposit balances totaled $1.4 billion, or 20.1% of total deposits as of December 31, 2020, a decrease of $281.7 million, or 16.9% on an annualized basis from $1.7 billion, or 28.7% of total deposits, as of December 31, 2019. Brokered deposit balances totaled $693.9 million, or 10.0% of total deposits as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $344.0 million, or 98.3% on an annualized basis from $349.9 million, or 6.0% of total deposits, as of December 31, 2019.
Asset Quality
Nonperforming assets as of December 31, 2020 totaled $45.0 million, or 0.50% of total assets, compared to $22.1 million, or 0.28% of total assets, as of December 31, 2019. Net charge-offs for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $13.0 million, or 0.18% of average loans and leases, compared to $7.2 million, or 0.11% of average loans and leases, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in nonperforming assets was primarily driven by the inclusion of one commercial relationship of $4.3 million, one construction relationship of $3.9 million, and one commercial relationship classified as OREO loan of $5.4 million during the year ending December 31, 2020.
The ratio of the allowance for loan and lease losses to total loans and leases was 1.57% as of December 31, 2020, compared to 0.91% as of December 31, 2019. On January 1, 2020, the Company implemented the CECL methodology to calculate the allowance for credit losses. Refer also to Note 7, "Allowance for Credit Losses."
Capital Strength
The Company is a "well-capitalized" bank holding company as defined in the FRB's Regulation Y. The Company's common equity Tier 1 Capital Ratio was 11.04% as of December 31, 2020, compared to 11.44% as of December 31, 2019. The Company's Tier 1 Leverage Ratio was 8.92% as of December 31, 2020, compared to 10.28% as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, the Company's Tier 1 Risk-Based Ratio was 11.18%, compared to 11.58% as of December 31, 2019. The Company's Total Risk-Based Ratio was 13.51% as of December 31, 2020, compared to 13.59% as of December 31, 2019.
The Company's ratio of stockholders' equity to total assets was 10.53% and 12.04% as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The Company's tangible equity ratio was 8.86% and 10.15% as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Net Income
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company reported net income of $47.6 million, or $0.60 per basic and diluted share, a decrease of $40.1 million, or 45.7%, from $87.7 million, or $1.10 per basic and diluted share for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net income is primarily the result of an increase in the provision for credit losses of $52.3 million, an increase in non-interest expense of $3.4 million and a decrease in non-interest income of $5.1 million, partially offset by an increase in net interest income of $6.9 million and a decrease in the provision for income taxes of $13.8 million.
The return on average assets was 0.55% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 1.15% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The return on average stockholders' equity was 5.09% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 9.56% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The net interest margin was 3.17% for the year ended December 31, 2020 down from 3.51% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in the net interest margin is a result of a decrease in the yield on interest-earning assets of 82 basis points to 3.99% in 2020 from 4.81% in 2019, partially offset by a decrease of 54 basis points in the Company's overall cost of funds to 0.89% in 2020 from 1.43% in 2019.
Results for 2020 included a $61.9 million provision for credit losses, as discussed in the "Allowance for Credit Losses-Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses" section below.
Non-interest income decreased $5.1 million to $24.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $29.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Several factors contributed to the year over year decrease, including decreases of $4.0 million in loan level derivative income, net, $1.6 million in deposit fees, $0.6 million in gain on sales of loans and leases and $0.4 million in other non-interest income, partially offset by an increase of $1.5 million in gain on sales of investment securities, net.
Non-interest expense increased $3.4 million to $160.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $157.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was largely attributable to increases of $4.4 million in compensation and employee benefits expense and $2.8 million in FDIC insurance expense, partially offset by decreases of $1.6 million in other
non-interest expense, $1.3 million in equipment and data processing expense, and $1.1 million in merger and acquisition expense.
Critical Accounting Policies
The accounting policies described below are considered critical to understanding the Company's financial condition and operating results. Such accounting policies are considered to be especially important because they involve a higher degree of complexity and require management to make difficult and subjective judgments which often require assumptions or estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. The use of different judgments, assumptions and estimates could result in material differences in the Company's operating results or financial condition.
Allowance for Credit Losses
The allowance for credit losses represents management's estimate of expected losses over the life of the loan and lease portfolio. The allowance for credit losses consists of the allowance for loan and lease losses and reserve for unfunded commitments, which are classified as a contra-asset and liability within other liabilities, respectively, on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Additions to the allowance for credit losses are made by charges to the provision for credit losses. Losses on loans and leases are deducted from the allowance when all or a portion of a loan or lease is considered uncollectible. The determination of the loans on which full collectability is not reasonably assured, the estimates of the fair value of the underlying collateral, and the assessment of economic and other conditions are subject to assumptions and judgments by management. Valuation allowances could differ materially as a result of changes in, or different interpretations of, these assumptions and judgments.
Management evaluates the adequacy of the allowance on a quarterly basis and reviews its conclusion as to the amount to be established with the Audit Committee and the Board of Directors.
As a result of the adoption of ASU 2016-13 effective January 1, 2020, the Company updated its critical accounting policy for the allowance for credit losses. The updates in this standard replace the incurred loss impairment GAAP methodology with the CECL methodology. The CECL methodology incorporates current condition, and "reasonable and supportable" forecasts, as well as prepayments, to estimate credit losses over the life of the loan.
See Note 7, "Allowance for Credit Losses," to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion on the new policy and processes.
Impairment of Goodwill
Goodwill is presumed to have an indefinite useful life and is tested at least annually for impairment. Impairment exists when the carrying amount of goodwill exceeds its implied fair value. If fair value exceeds the carrying amount at the time of testing, goodwill is not considered impaired. Quoted market prices in active markets are the best evidence of fair value and are considered to be used as the basis for measurement, when available. Other acceptable valuation methods include present-value measurements based on multiples of earnings or revenues, or similar performance measures. Differences in valuation techniques could result in materially different evaluations of impairment. In September 2011, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") 2011-08 which provides guidance for companies when testing goodwill for impairment. The objective of the ASU is to simplify how entities test goodwill for impairment. Pursuant to the ASU, entities may now assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform the one-step goodwill impairment test. The more likely than not threshold is defined as having a likelihood of more than 50%.
To determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, an entity should consider the extent to which each of the adverse events or circumstances identified could affect the comparison of a reporting unit's fair value with its carrying amount.
Pursuant to the ASU, an entity should place more weight on the events and circumstances that have the greatest impact on a reporting unit's fair value or the carrying amount of its net assets; and may affect its determination of whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount.
In accordance with ASC 350-20-35-3B, an entity can bypass the qualitative assessment and perform the quantitative impairment test. Given the current economic environment, a quantitative analysis was performed where management selected a sample of comparable acquisitions and calculated the control premium associated with each sale. The Company’s market capitalization times the sampled control premium allowed management to compare the calculated market capitalization to the Company’s current book value to determine if an adjustment to goodwill is warranted. The Company did not have any impairment of Goodwill and other identified intangible assets as of December 31, 2020. Further analysis of the Company’s
goodwill can be found in Note 9 “Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets” within the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
Recent Accounting Developments
In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-04, "Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848)-Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting" to provide optional expedients and exceptions for applying GAAP to certain contracts, hedging relationships, and other transactions affected by reference rate reform if certain criteria are met. The amendments in this update apply only to contracts, hedging relationships, and other transactions that reference LIBOR or another reference rate expected to be discontinued because of reference rate reform. The expedients and exceptions provided by the amendments do not apply to contract modifications made and hedging relationships existing as of December 31, 2022, for which an entity has elected certain optional expedients provided that those elections are retained through the end of the hedging relationship. The amendments in this update are effective for all entities as of March 12, 2020 through December 31, 2022 and do not apply to contract modifications made after December 31, 2022. The Company has not yet adopted the amendments in this update and is currently in the process of reviewing its contracts and existing processes in order to assess the risks and potential impact to the Company.
See Note 1, “Basis of Presentation” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding recent accounting developments.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures and Reconciliation to GAAP
In addition to evaluating the Company’s results of operations in accordance with GAAP, management periodically supplements this evaluation with an analysis of certain non-GAAP financial measures, such as operating earnings metrics, the return on average tangible assets, return on average tangible equity, the tangible equity ratio, tangible book value per share and dividend payout ratio. Management believes that these non-GAAP financial measures provide information useful to investors in understanding the Company’s underlying operating performance and trends, and facilitates comparisons with the performance assessment of financial performance, including non-interest expense control, while the tangible equity ratio and tangible book value per share are used to analyze the relative strength of the Company’s capital position.
In light of diversity in presentation among financial institutions, the methodologies used by the Company for determining the non-GAAP financial measures discussed above may differ from those used by other financial institutions.
Operating Earnings
Operating earnings exclude the after-tax impact of securities gains and merger and acquisition expense as well as the impact of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the "Tax Act"). By excluding such items, the Company's results can be measured and assessed on a more consistent basis from period to period. Items excluded from operating earnings are also excluded when calculating the operating return and operating efficiency ratios.
The following table summarizes the Company's operating earnings and operating earnings per share ("EPS") for the periods indicated:
_________________________________________________________________________
(1) Merger and acquisition expense related to the acquisition of First Commons Bank in the first quarter of 2018 and the purchase of the remaining minority interest of Eastern Funding in the first quarter of 2019.
The following table summarizes the Company's operating return on average assets, operating return on average tangible assets, operating return on average stockholders' equity and operating return on average tangible stockholders' equity for the periods indicated:
The following table summarizes the Company’s return on average tangible assets and return on average tangible stockholders’ equity for the periods indicated:
The following table summarizes the Company's tangible equity ratio for the periods indicated:
The following table summarizes the Company's tangible book value per share for the periods indicated:
The following table summarizes the Company's dividend payout ratio for the periods indicated:
The following table summarizes the Company’s allowance for loan and lease losses as a percentage of total loans and leases, excluding PPP loans, for the periods indicated:
Financial Condition
Loans and Leases
The following table summarizes the Company's portfolio of loans and leases receivables as of the dates indicated:
The following table sets forth the growth in the Company’s loan and lease portfolios during the year ending December 31, 2020
The Company's loan portfolio consists primarily of first mortgage loans secured by commercial, multi-family and residential real estate properties located in the Company's primary lending area, loans to business entities, including commercial lines of credit, loans to condominium associations and loans and leases used to finance equipment used by small businesses. The Company also provides financing for construction and development projects, home equity and other consumer loans.
The Company employs seasoned commercial lenders and retail bankers who rely on community and business contacts as well as referrals from customers, attorneys and other professionals to generate loans and deposits. Existing borrowers are also an important source of business since many of them have more than one loan outstanding with the Company. The Company's ability to originate loans depends on the strength of the economy, trends in interest rates, and levels of customer demand and market competition.
The Company's current policy is that the total credit exposure to one obligor relationship may not exceed $50.0 million unless approved by the Board Credit Committee, a committee of the Company's Board of Directors. As of December 31, 2020, there were two borrowers with commitments over $50.0 million. The total of those commitments was $114.4 million or 1.3% of total loans and commitments as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2019, there were three borrowers with loans and commitments over $50.0 million. The total of those loans and commitments was $194.3 million, or 2.4% of total loans and commitments, as of December 31, 2019.
The Company has written underwriting policies to control the inherent risks in loan origination. The policies address approval limits, loan-to-value ratios, appraisal requirements, debt service coverage ratios, loan concentration limits and other matters relevant to loan underwriting.
Commercial Real Estate Loans
The commercial real estate portfolio is comprised of commercial real estate loans, multi-family mortgage loans, and construction loans and is the largest component of the Company's overall loan portfolio, representing 52.5% of total loans and leases outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
Typically, commercial real estate loans are larger in size and involve a greater degree of risk than owner-occupied residential mortgage loans. Loan repayment is usually dependent on the successful operation and management of the properties and the value of the properties securing the loans. Economic conditions can greatly affect cash flows and property values.
A number of factors are considered in originating commercial real estate and multi-family mortgage loans. The qualifications and financial condition of the borrower (including credit history), as well as the potential income generation and the value and condition of the underlying property, are evaluated. When evaluating the qualifications of the borrower, the Company considers the financial resources of the borrower, the borrower's experience in owning or managing similar property and the borrower's payment history with the Company and other financial institutions. Factors considered in evaluating the underlying property include the net operating income of the mortgaged premises before debt service and depreciation, the debt service coverage ratio (the ratio of cash flow before debt service to debt service), the use of conservative capitalization rates, and the ratio of the loan amount to the appraised value. Generally, personal guarantees are obtained from commercial real estate loan borrowers.
Commercial real estate and multi-family mortgage loans are typically originated for terms of five to fifteen years with amortization periods of 20 to 30 years. Many of the loans are priced at inception on a fixed-rate basis generally for periods ranging from two to five years with repricing periods for longer-term loans. When possible, prepayment penalties are included in loan covenants on these loans. For commercial customers who are interested in loans with terms longer than five years, the Company offers loan level derivatives to accommodate customer need.
The Company's urban and suburban market area is characterized by a large number of apartment buildings, condominiums and office buildings. As a result, commercial real estate and multi-family mortgage lending has been a significant part of the Company's activities for many years. These types of loans typically generate higher yields, but also involve greater credit risk. Many of the Company's borrowers have more than one multi-family or commercial real estate loan outstanding with the Company.
The commercial real estate portfolio was composed primarily of loans secured by apartment buildings ($927.0 million), office buildings ($668.4 million), retail stores ($606.3 million), industrial properties ($443.2 million), mixed-use properties ($329.1 million), lodging services ($149.2 million) and food services ($55.9 million) as of December 31, 2020. As of that date, approximately 96.6% of the commercial real estate loans outstanding were secured by properties located in New England.
Construction and development financing is generally considered to involve a higher degree of risk than long-term financing on improved, occupied real estate and thus has lower concentration limits than do other commercial credit classes. Risk of loss on a construction loan is largely dependent upon the accuracy of the initial estimate of construction costs, the estimated time to sell or rent the completed property at an adequate price or rate of occupancy, and market conditions. If the estimates and projections prove to be inaccurate, the Company may be confronted with a project which, upon completion, has a value that is insufficient to assure full loan repayment.
Criteria applied in underwriting construction loans for which the primary source of repayment is the sale of the property is different from the criteria applied in underwriting construction loans for which the primary source of repayment is the stabilized cash flow from the completed project. For those loans where the primary source of repayment is from resale of the property, in addition to the normal credit analysis performed for other loans, the Company also analyzes project costs, the attractiveness of the property in relation to the market in which it is located and demand within the market area. For those construction loans where the source of repayment is the stabilized cash flow from the completed project, the Company analyzes not only project costs but also how long it might take to achieve satisfactory occupancy and the reasonableness of projected rental rates in relation to market rental rates.
Commercial Loans
The commercial loan and lease portfolio is comprised of commercial loans, equipment financing loans and leases and condominium association loans representing 31.3% of total loans outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
The commercial loan and lease portfolio is composed primarily of loans to small businesses ($680.2 million), transportation services ($386.8 million), food services ($214.4 million), recreation services ($160.0 million), rental and leasing services ($114.8 million), manufacturing ($141.2 million), and retail ($98.0 million) as of December 31, 2020.
The Company provides commercial banking services to companies in its market area. Approximately 54.0% of the commercial loans outstanding as of December 31, 2020 were made to borrowers located in New England. The remaining 46.0% of the commercial loans outstanding were made to borrowers in other areas in the United States of America, primarily by the Company's equipment financing divisions. Product offerings include lines of credit, term loans, letters of credit, deposit services and cash management. These types of credit facilities have as their primary source of repayment cash flows from the operations of a business. Interest rates offered are available on a floating basis tied to the prime rate or a similar index or on a fixed-rate basis referenced on the Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston ("FHLBB") index.
Credit extensions are made to established businesses on the basis of loan purpose and assessment of capacity to repay as determined by an analysis of their financial statements, the nature of collateral to secure the credit extension and, in most instances, the personal guarantee of the owner of the business as well as industry and general economic conditions. The Company also participates in U.S. Government programs such as the SBA in both the 7A program and as an SBA preferred lender. Included in the commercial loans balances are the PPP loans totaling $463.5 million as of December 31, 2020.
The Company’s equipment financing divisions focus on market niches in which its lenders have deep experience and industry contacts, and on making loans to customers with business experience. An important part of the Company’s equipment financing loan origination volume comes from equipment manufacturers and existing customers as they expand their operations. The equipment financing portfolio is composed primarily of loans to finance laundry, tow trucks, fitness, dry cleaning and convenience store equipment. Approximately 13.4% of the commercial loans outstanding were in the equipment financing divisions made to borrowers located primarily in the greater New York and New Jersey metropolitan area. Typically, the loans are priced at a fixed rate of interest and require monthly payments over their three- to seven-year life. The yields earned on equipment financing loans are higher than those earned on the commercial loans made by the Banks because they involve a higher degree of credit risk. Equipment financing customers are typically small-business owners who operate with limited financial resources and who face greater risks when the economy weakens or unforeseen adverse events arise. Because of these characteristics, personal guarantees of borrowers are usually obtained along with liens on available assets. The size of loan is determined by an analysis of cash flow and other characteristics pertaining to the business and the equipment to be financed, based on detailed revenue and profitability data of similar operations.
Loans to condominium associations are for the purpose of funding capital improvements, are made for five- to ten-year terms and are secured by a general assignment of condominium association revenues. Among the factors considered in the underwriting of such loans are the level of owner occupancy, the financial condition and history of the condominium association, the attractiveness of the property in relation to the market in which it is located and the reasonableness of estimates of the cost of capital improvements to be made. Depending on loan size, funds are advanced as capital improvements are made and, in more complex situations, after completion of engineering inspections.
Consumer Loans
The consumer loan portfolio is comprised of residential mortgage loans, home equity loans and lines of credit, and other consumer loans representing, 16.2% of total loans outstanding as of December 31, 2020. The Company focuses its mortgage and home equity lending on existing and new customers within its branch networks in its urban and suburban marketplaces in the greater Boston and Providence metropolitan areas.
The Company originates adjustable and fixed rate residential mortgage loans secured by one-to-four-family residences. Each residential mortgage loan granted is subject to a satisfactorily completed application, employment verification, credit
history and a demonstrated ability to repay the debt. Generally, loans are not made when the loan-to-value ratio exceeds 80% unless private mortgage insurance is obtained and/or there is a financially strong guarantor. Appraisals are performed by outside independent fee appraisers.
Underwriting guidelines for home equity loans and lines of credit are similar to those for residential mortgage loans. Home equity loans and lines of credit are limited to no more than 80% of the appraised value of the property securing the loan including the amount of any existing first mortgage liens.
Other consumer loans have historically been a modest part of the Company's loan originations. As of December 31, 2020, other consumer loans equaled $32.9 million, or 0.5% of total loans outstanding.
Asset Quality
Criticized and Classified Assets
The Company's management rates certain loans and leases as "other assets especially mentioned" ("OAEM"), "substandard" or "doubtful" based on criteria established under banking regulations. These loans and leases are collectively referred to as "criticized" assets. Loans and leases rated OAEM have potential weaknesses that deserve management's close attention. If left uncorrected, these potential weaknesses may result in deterioration of the repayment prospects of the loan or lease at some future date. Loans and leases rated as substandard are inadequately protected by the payment capacity of the obligor or of the collateral pledged, if any. Substandard loans and leases have a well-defined weakness or weaknesses that jeopardize the liquidation of debt and are characterized by the distinct possibility that the Company will sustain some loss if existing deficiencies are not corrected. Loans and leases rated as doubtful have well-defined weaknesses that jeopardize the orderly liquidation of debt and partial loss of principal is likely. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $72.8 million of total assets that were designated as criticized. This compares to $67.2 million of assets designated as criticized as of December 31, 2019. The increase of $5.6 million in criticized assets was primarily due to two construction relationships totaling $7.6 million, six commercial real estate relationships totaling $7.5 million, and various equipment financing relationships totaling $7.0 million which become criticized during the year ending December 31, 2020, partially offset by the three commercial real estate relationships totaling $16.7 million paid off and charged off during the year ending December 31, 2020.
Nonperforming Assets
"Nonperforming assets" consist of nonaccrual loans and leases, other real estate owned ("OREO") and other repossessed assets. Under certain circumstances, the Company may restructure the terms of a loan or lease as a concession to a borrower, except for acquired loans and leases which are individually evaluated against expected performance on the date of acquisition. These restructured loans and leases are generally considered "nonperforming loans and leases" until a history of collection of at least six months on the restructured terms of the loan or lease has been established. OREO consists of real estate acquired through foreclosure proceedings and real estate acquired through acceptance of a deed in lieu of foreclosure. Other repossessed assets consist of assets that have been acquired through foreclosure that are not real estate and are included in other assets on the Company's consolidated balance sheets.
Accrual of interest on loans generally is discontinued when contractual payment of principal or interest becomes past due 90 days or, if in management's judgment, reasonable doubt exists as to the full timely collection of interest. Prior to the adoption of ASC 326, loans categorized as ASC 310-30 (purchased loans with deteriorating credit quality) accrued regardless of past due status. Exceptions may be made if the loan has matured and is in the process of renewal or is well-secured and in the process of collection. When a loan is placed on non-accrual status, interest accruals cease and uncollected accrued interest is reversed and charged against current interest income. Interest payments on non-accrual loans are generally applied to principal. If collection of the principal is reasonably assured, interest payments are recognized as income on the cash basis. Loans are generally returned to accrual status when principal and interest payments are current, full collectability of principal and interest is reasonably assured and a consistent record of at least six months of performance has been achieved. The adoption of ASC 326 required purchase credit-impaired loans to be classified as non-accruing based on performance.
In cases where a borrower experiences financial difficulties and the Company makes or reasonably expects to make certain concessionary modifications to contractual terms, the loan is classified as a troubled debt restructured loan. In determining whether a debtor is experiencing financial difficulties, the Company considers, among other factors, if the debtor is in payment default or is likely to be in payment default in the foreseeable future without the modification, the debtor declared or is in the process of declaring bankruptcy, there is substantial doubt that the debtor will continue as a going concern, the debtor's entity-specific projected cash flows will not be sufficient to service its debt, or the debtor cannot obtain funds from sources other than the existing creditors at market terms for debt with similar risk characteristics.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had nonperforming assets of $45.0 million, representing 0.50% of total assets, compared to nonperforming assets of $22.1 million, or 0.28% of total assets as of December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by the adoption of ASC 326 which required purchase credit-impaired loans to be classified as non-accruing based on performance. There were $9.0 million loans previously categorized as performing assets that are now classified as non-accruing. This amount includes one commercial relationship of $4.3 million and one construction relationship of $3.9 million. In addition, there was one commercial relationship classified as OREO in the amount of $5.4 million during the year ending December 31, 2020.
The Company evaluates the underlying collateral of each nonaccrual loan and lease and continues to pursue the collection of interest and principal. Management believes that the current level of nonperforming assets remains manageable relative to the size of the Company's loan and lease portfolio. If economic conditions were to worsen or if the marketplace were to experience prolonged economic stress, management believes it is likely that the level of nonperforming assets would increase, as would the level of charged-off loans.
Past Due and Accruing
From March 1, 2020 through the earlier of January 1, 2022 or 60 days after the termination date of the national emergency declared by the President on March 13, 2020 concerning the COVID-19 outbreak (the “national emergency”), a financial institution may elect to suspend the requirements under U.S. GAAP for loan modifications related to the COVID-19 pandemic that would otherwise be categorized as a troubled debt restructured, including impairment accounting. This troubled debt restructuring relief applies for the term of the loan modification that occurs during the applicable period for a loan that was not more than 30 days past due as of December 31, 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had loans and leases greater than 90 days past due and accruing of $12.0 million, or 0.16% of total loans and leases, compared to $10.1 million, or 0.15% of total loans and leases, as of December 31, 2019, representing an increase of $1.9 million. The increase in 90 days past due and accruing loans was primarily due to three commercial relationships totaling $3.5 million, one construction relationship of $3.8 million and one commercial real estate relationship of $4.7 million 90 days past due and accruing, partially offset by $9.0 million of past due and accruing acquired loans previously accounted for under ASC 310-30, which are now disclosed as being on non-accrual status.
The following table sets forth information regarding nonperforming assets for the periods indicated:
Troubled Debt Restructured Loans and Leases
Total TDR loans decreased by $4.2 million to $19.0 million at December 31, 2020 from $23.2 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease was driven primarily by the payments and payoffs of the commercial and construction TDRs during the year ending December 31, 2020.
The following table sets forth information regarding troubled debt restructured loans and leases at the dates indicated:
The following table sets forth information regarding troubled debt restructured loans and leases at the dates indicated:
Changes in troubled debt restructured loans and leases were as follows for the periods indicated:
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security ("CARES") Act and regulatory guidance issued by the Federal banking agencies provides that certain short-term loan modifications to borrowers experiencing financial distress as a result of the economic impacts created by the COVID-19 pandemic are not required to be treated as TDRs under GAAP. As such, the Company suspended TDR accounting for COVID-19 pandemic related loan modifications meeting the loan modification criteria set forth under the CARES Act or as specified in the regulatory guidance. Further, loans granted payment deferrals related to the COVID-19 pandemic are not required to be reported as past due or placed on non-accrual status (provided the loans were not past due or on non-accrual status prior to the deferral). As of December 31, 2020, the Company granted 4,989 short-term deferments on loan and lease balances totaling $1.1 billion. Of these modifications, 4,691 loans and leases with total balances of $1.0 billion have returned to payment status and 298 loans and leases with total balances of $90.4 million remain on the deferral status, which represents 1.2% of total loan and leases balances.
Allowances for Credit Losses
The allowance for credit losses consists of general and specific allowances and reflects management's estimate of expected loan and lease losses over the life of loan or lease. Management uses a consistent and systematic process and methodology to evaluate the adequacy of the allowance for credit losses on a quarterly basis. Management continuously evaluates and challenges inputs and assumptions in the allowance for credit losses.
While management evaluates currently available information in establishing the allowance for credit losses, future adjustments to the allowance for loan and lease losses may be necessary if conditions differ substantially from the assumptions used in making the evaluations. Management performs a comprehensive review of the allowance for credit losses on a quarterly basis. In addition, various regulatory agencies, as an integral part of their examination process, periodically review a financial institution's allowance for credit losses and carrying amounts of other real estate owned. Such agencies may require the financial institution to recognize additions or reductions to the allowance based on their judgments about information available to them at the time of their examination.
The Company’s allowance methodology provides a quantification of probable losses in the portfolio. Under the current methodology, management estimates losses over the life of the loan using reasonable and supportable forecasts. Forecasts, loan data, and model documentation are extensively analyzed and reviewed throughout the quarter to ensure estimated losses are accurate at quarter end. Qualitative adjustments are applied when model output does not align with management expectations. These adjustments are thoroughly reviewed and documented to provide clarity and a reasonable basis for any deviations from the model. For December 31, 2020, qualitative adjustments were applied to the CRE, C&I, and Retail portfolios resulting in a net addition in total reserves compared to modeled calculations.
The following tables present the changes in the allowance for loans and lease losses by portfolio category for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017, and 2016, respectively.
Beginning January 1, 2020, the Company implemented the CECL methodology to calculate the allowance for credit losses. As of January 1, 2020, the Company increased the allowance for loan and lease losses by $6.6 million, and increased the allowances for the unfunded commitment by $8.9 million due to CECL which requires the inclusion of the credit losses over the expected life of the loans, as well as consideration of the risks based on the current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts about the future.
At December 31, 2020, the allowance for loan and lease losses increased to $114.4 million, or 1.57% of total loans and leases outstanding, as a result of the latest available forecast of the economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company's loan and lease portfolios. This excluded PPP loans which are not subject to an allowance reserve since they are guaranteed by the SBA. This compared to an allowance for loan and lease losses of $61.1 million, or 0.91% of total loans and leases outstanding, as of December 31, 2019. Prior to January 1, 2020, the Company calculated the allowance for loan and lease losses using the incurred losses methodology.
Net charge-offs in the loans and leases for year ending December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $13.0 million and $7.2 million, respectively. The increase in the net charge-offs of $5.8 million was driven primarily by the charge-offs on four commercial real estate relationships of $3.6 million as well as the increase on the charge-offs on commercial loans by $1.9 million loans and equipment financing loans by $0.5 million.
Management believes that the allowance for loan and lease losses as of December 31, 2020 is appropriate based on the facts and circumstances discussed further below.
The following tables set forth the Company's percent of allowance for loan and lease losses to the total allowance for loan and lease losses and the percent of loans to total loans for each of the categories listed at the dates indicated.
Investment Securities and Restricted Equity Securities
The investment portfolio exists primarily for liquidity purposes, and secondarily as sources of interest and dividend income, interest-rate risk management and tax planning as a counterbalance to loan and deposit flows. Investment securities are utilized as part of the Company's asset/liability management and may be sold in response to, or in anticipation of, factors such as changes in market conditions and interest rates, security prepayment rates, deposit outflows, liquidity concentrations and regulatory capital requirements.
The investment policy of the Company, which is reviewed and approved by the Board of Directors on an annual basis, specifies the types of investments that are acceptable, required investment ratings by at least one nationally recognized rating agency, concentration limits and duration guidelines. Compliance with the investment policy is monitored on a regular basis. In general, the Company seeks to maintain a high degree of liquidity and targets cash, cash equivalents and investment securities available-for-sale balances between 10% and 30% of total assets.
Cash, cash equivalents, and investment securities increased $514.1 million, or 77.1%, to $1.2 billion as of December 31, 2020 from $667.1 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by growth in short-term investments and investment securities available-for-sale. Cash, cash equivalents, and investment securities were 13.21% of total assets as of December 31, 2020, compared to 8.49% of total assets at December 31, 2019.
The following table sets forth certain information regarding the amortized cost and market value of the Company's investment securities at the dates indicated:
Total investment securities and restricted equity securities primarily consist of investment securities available-for-sale, investment securities held-to-maturity, stock in the FHLBB and stock in the FRB. The total securities portfolio increased $153.0 million, or 23.8% since December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, total securities portfolio was 8.90% of total assets, compared to 8.19% of total assets as of December 31, 2019.
The fair value of investment securities is based principally on market prices and dealer quotes received from third-party, nationally-recognized pricing services for identical investment securities such as U.S. Treasury and agency securities. The Company's equity securities held-for-trading are priced this way and are included in Level 1. These prices are validated by comparing the primary pricing source with an alternative pricing source when available. When quoted market prices for identical securities are unavailable, the Company uses market prices provided by independent pricing services based on recent trading activity and other observable information, including but not limited to market interest-rate curves, referenced credit spreads and estimated prepayment speeds where applicable. These investments include certain U.S. and government agency debt securities, municipal and corporate debt securities, GSE residential MBSs and CMOs, trust preferred securities, and equity securities held-for-trading, all of which are included in Level 1 and 2.
Additionally, management reviews changes in fair value from period to period and performs testing to ensure that prices received from the third parties are consistent with their expectation of the market. Changes in the prices obtained from the pricing service are analyzed from month to month, taking into consideration changes in market conditions including changes in mortgage spreads, changes in U.S. Treasury security yields and changes in generic pricing of 15-year and 30-year securities.
Additional analysis may include a review of prices provided by other independent parties, a yield analysis, a review of average life changes using Bloomberg analytics and a review of historical pricing for the particular security.
As of December 31, 2020, the fair value of all investment securities available-for-sale was $745.8 million and carried a total of $21.3 million of net unrealized gains, compared to a fair value of $499.0 million and net unrealized gains of $2.8 million as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, $86.9 million, or 11.7%, of the portfolio, had gross unrealized losses of $0.7 million. This compares to $205.6 million, or 41.2%, of the portfolio with gross unrealized losses of $1.8 million as of December 31, 2019. The Company's unrealized loss position decreased in 2020 driven by a change in the portfolio mix from shorter duration MBS to longer duration agency debentures. For additional discussion on investment securities available-for-sale by security type, see Note 4, "Investment Securities."
The Company reviews its debt securities portfolio on a quarterly basis in accordance with ASC 326. This analysis is done using probability of default ("PD") and loss given default ("LGD") assumptions where a model is created to determine current expected credit loss (CECL) for the remaining life of the securities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the company did not recognize an amount as allowance or provision for credit loss. For additional discussion on how the Company validates fair values provided by the third-party pricing service, see Note 21, “Fair Value of Financial Instruments.”
Effective March 31, 2020, all investment securities classified as held-to-maturity were reclassified as available for sale to prudently reflect the ability and intent to not hold these assets to maturity due to the economic uncertainty created by the COVID-19 pandemic. As of December 31, 2019, the fair value of investment securities held-to-maturity was $87.6 million with net unrealized gains of $0.8 million. As of December 31, 2019, $22.3 million, or 25.5% of the portfolio had gross unrealized losses of $0.2 million.
Maturities, calls and principal repayments for investment securities available-for-sale totaled $214.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $68.2 million for the same period in 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company sold $142.7 million of investment securities available for sale, compared to none for the same period in 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company purchased $503.5 million of investment securities available-for-sale, compared to $50.4 million for the same period in 2019.
Maturities, calls and principal repayments for investment securities held-to-maturity totaled $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $28.9 million for the same period in 2019. There were no sales of investment securities held-to-maturity for the ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company did not purchase any investment securities held-to-maturity, compared to $1.4 million in purchases of investment securities held-to-maturity for the same period in 2019. During the three months ended September 30, 2020, all held-to-maturity securities were transferred to the available-for-sale portfolio.
Restricted Equity Securities
FHLBB Stock-The Company invests in the stock of the FHLBB as one of the requirements to borrow. The Company maintains an excess balance of capital stock, which allows for additional borrowing capacity at each of the Banks. As of December 31, 2020, the excess balance of capital stock is $1.0 million, as compared to $0.7 million at December 31, 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company owned stock in the FHLBB with a carrying value of $31.3 million, a decrease of $4.2 million from $35.5 million as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, the FHLBB had total assets of $38.5 billion and total capital of $2.8 billion, of which $1.5 billion was retained earnings. The FHLBB stated that it remained in compliance with all regulatory capital ratios as of December 31, 2020 and was classified as "adequately capitalized" by its regulator, based on the FHLBB's financial information as of September 30, 2020. See Note 5, "Restricted Equity Securities" to the consolidated financial statements for further information about the FHLBB.
Federal Reserve Bank Stock-The Company invests in the stock of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, as a condition of the membership for the Banks in the Federal Reserve System. In 2020, the Company maintained its investment in the stock of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston to adjust for deposit growth. The FRB is the primary federal regulator for the Company and the Banks.
Carrying Value, Weighted Average Yields, and Contractual Maturities of Investment and Restricted Equity Securities
The table below sets forth certain information regarding the carrying value, weighted average yields and contractual maturities of the Company's investment and restricted equity securities portfolio at the date indicated._______________________________________________________________________________
(1) Yields have been calculated on a tax-equivalent basis.
(2) Equity securities have no contractual maturity, therefore they are reported above in the over ten year maturity column.
Deposits
The following table presents the Company's deposit mix at the dates indicated.
The Company seeks to increase its core (non-certificate of deposit) deposits and decrease its loan-to-deposit ratio over time, while continuing to increase deposits as a percentage of total funding sources. The Company's loan-to-deposit ratio was 105.2% as of December 31, 2020, compared to 115.6% as of December 31, 2019.
Total deposits increased $1.1 billion, or 18.5%, to $6.9 billion as of December 31, 2020, compared to $5.8 billion as of December 31, 2019. Deposits as a percentage of total assets increased from 74.2% as of December 31, 2019 to 77.3% as of December 31, 2020. The increase in deposits as a percentage of total assets is primarily due to the growth in the core deposit accounts. The decrease in certificate of deposit accounts was offset by the increase in brokered deposit accounts.
In 2020, core deposits increased $1.0 billion. The ratio of core deposits to total deposits increased from 65.3% as of December 31, 2019 to 69.8% as of December 31, 2020, due to an increase in all core deposit accounts.
Certificate of deposit accounts decreased $0.3 billion to $1.4 billion as of December 31, 2020, compared to $1.7 billion as of December 31, 2019. Certificate of deposit accounts have decreased as a percentage of total deposits to 20.1% as of December 31, 2020 from 28.7% as of December 31, 2019.
Brokered deposits increased $344.0 million to $693.9 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $349.9 as of December 31, 2019. Brokered deposits have increased as a percentage of total deposits to 10.0% as of December 31, 2020 from 6.0% as of December 31, 2019. The increase in Brokered deposits was driven by two new product offerings. Brokered deposits allow the Company to seek additional funding by attracting deposits from outside the Company's core market. The Company's investment policy limits the amount of brokered deposits to 15% of total assets.
The Company's growth in deposits and the shift in the mix of deposits in 2020 and 2019 were due in part to expansion of the Company's cash management services and increased efforts in seeking deposits from existing customer relationships. A rise in interest rates could cause a shift from core deposit accounts to certificate of deposit accounts with longer maturities. Generally, the rates paid on certificates of deposit are higher than those paid on core deposit accounts.
The following table sets forth the distribution of the average balances of the Company's deposit accounts for the years indicated and the weighted average interest rates on each category of deposits presented. Averages for the years presented are based on daily balances.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had outstanding certificate of deposit of $100,000 or more, maturing as follows:
Borrowed Funds
The following table sets forth certain information regarding FHLBB advances, subordinated debentures and notes and other borrowed funds for the periods indicated:
Advances from the FHLBB
On a long-term basis, the Company intends to continue to increase its core deposits. The Company also uses FHLBB borrowings and other wholesale borrowings as part of the Company's overall strategy to fund loan growth and manage interest-rate risk and liquidity. The advances are secured by a blanket security agreement which requires the Banks to maintain certain qualifying assets as collateral, principally mortgage loans and securities in an aggregate amount at least equal to outstanding advances. The maximum amount that the FHLBB will advance to member institutions, including the Company, fluctuates from
time to time in accordance with the policies of the FHLBB. The Company may also borrow from the FRB's "discount window" as necessary.
FHLBB borrowings decreased by $109.6 million to $648.8 million as of December 31, 2020 from the December 31, 2019 balance of $758.5 million. The decrease in FHLBB borrowings was primarily due to maturing advances from the FHLBB.
Other Borrowed Funds
In addition to advances from the FHLBB and subordinated debentures and notes, the Company utilizes other funding
sources as part of the overall liquidity strategy. Those funding sources include repurchase agreements, committed and uncommitted lines of credit with several financial institutions.
The Company periodically enters into repurchase agreements with its larger deposit and commercial customers as part of its cash management services which are typically overnight borrowings. Repurchase agreements with customers increased
$15.0 million to $57.7 million as of December 31, 2020 from $42.7 million as of December 31, 2019.
The Company has access to a $12.0 million committed line of credit as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company did not have any borrowings on this committed line of credit outstanding.
The Banks also have access to funding through several uncommitted lines of credit of $865.0 million. As of
December 31, 2020, the Company had $30.0 million in borrowings on outstanding uncommitted lines as compared to December 31, 2019, when the Company had $18.0 million borrowings on outstanding uncommitted lines.
Subordinated Debentures and Notes
In connection with the acquisition of Bancorp Rhode Island, Inc., the Company assumed three subordinated debentures issued by a subsidiary of Bancorp Rhode Island, Inc.
On September 15, 2014, the Company offered $75.0 million of 6.0% fixed-to-floating subordinated notes due September
15, 2029. The Company is obligated to pay 6.0% interest semiannually between September 2014 and September 2024. Subsequently, the Company is obligated to pay 3-month LIBOR plus 3.315% quarterly until the notes mature in September 2029. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had capitalized costs of $0.9 million in relation to the issuance of these subordinated notes.
The following table summarizes the Company's subordinated debentures and notes at the dates indicated.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company has entered into loan level derivatives, risk participation agreements, and foreign exchange contracts with certain commercial customers and concurrently enters into offsetting swaps with third-party financial institutions. The Company may also, from time to time, enter into risk participation agreements. The Company uses interest rate futures that are designated and qualify as cash flow hedging instruments.
The following table summarizes certain information concerning the Company's loan level derivatives, risk participation agreements, and foreign exchange contracts at December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Stockholders' Equity and Dividends
The Company's total stockholders' equity was $941.8 million as of December 31, 2020, representing a $3.8 million decrease compared to $945.6 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease primarily reflects dividends paid by the Company of $36.4 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, a reduction of $20.0 million due to repurchase shares of treasury stock, and $11.5 million due to the implementation of CECL, partially offset by net income attributable to the Company of $47.6 million, and unrealized gain on securities available-for-sale of $14.2 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the dividend payout ratio was 76.4%, compared to 40.0% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The dividends paid in the fourth quarter of 2020 represented the Company's 87th consecutive quarter of dividend payments. The Company's quarterly dividend distribution was $0.115 per share for each quarter of 2020.
On December 4, 2019, the Company's Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase program (the "2020 Stock Repurchase Plan") authorizing management to repurchase up to $10.0 million of the Company’s common stock over a period of twelve months commencing on January 1, 2020. On March 9, 2020, the Board of Directors approved an increase in the repurchase amount of $10.0 million bringing the total authorized amount to $20.0 million. Effective March 24, 2020, the Company suspended the 2020 Stock Repurchase Plan. On October 28, 2020, the Board of Directors authorized the resumption of the 2020 Stock Repurchase Plan. As of December 31, 2020, the Company repurchased 1,715,730 shares at a weighted average price of $11.66.
Stockholders' equity represented 10.53% of total assets as of December 31, 2020 and 12.04% of total assets as of December 31, 2019. Tangible stockholders' equity (total stockholders' equity less goodwill and identified intangible assets, net) represented 8.86% of tangible assets (total assets less goodwill and identified intangible assets, net) as of December 31, 2020 and 10.15% as of December 31, 2019.
Results of Operations
The primary drivers of the Company's net income are net interest income, which is strongly affected by the net yield on and growth of interest-earning assets and liabilities ("net interest margin"), the quality of the Company's assets, its levels of non-interest income and non-interest expense, and its tax provision.
The Company's net interest income represents the difference between interest income earned on its investments, loans and leases, and its cost of funds. Interest income is dependent on the amount of interest-earning assets outstanding during the period and the yield earned thereon. Cost of funds is a function of the average amount of deposits and borrowed money outstanding during the year and the interest rates paid thereon. The net interest margin is calculated by dividing net interest income by average interest-earning assets. Net interest spread is the difference between the average rate earned on interest-earning assets and the average rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities. The increases or decreases, as applicable, in the components of interest income and interest expense, expressed in terms of fluctuation in average volume and rate, are summarized under "Rate/Volume Analysis" below. Information as to the components of interest income, interest expense and average rates is provided under "Average Balances, Net Interest Income, Interest-Rate Spread and Net Interest Margin" below.
Because the Company's assets and liabilities are not identical in duration and in repricing dates, the differential between the two is vulnerable to changes in market interest rates as well as the overall shape of the yield curve. These vulnerabilities are inherent to the business of banking and are commonly referred to as "interest-rate risk." How interest-rate risk is measured and, once measured, how much interest-rate risk is taken are based on numerous assumptions and other subjective judgments. See the discussion in the "Measuring Interest-Rate Risk" section of Item 7A, "Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk" below.
The quality of the Company's assets also influences its earnings. Loans and leases that are not paid on a timely basis and exhibit other weaknesses can result in the loss of principal and/or interest income. Additionally, the Company must make timely provisions to the allowance for loan and lease losses based on estimates of probable losses inherent in the loan and lease portfolio. These additions, which are charged against earnings, are necessarily greater when greater probable losses are expected. Further, the Company incurs expenses as a result of resolving troubled assets. These variables reflect the "credit risk" that the Company takes on in the ordinary course of business and are further discussed under "Financial Condition-Asset Quality" above.
Average Balances, Net Interest Income, Interest-Rate Spread and Net Interest Margin
The following table sets forth information about the Company's average balances, interest income and interest rates earned on average interest-earning assets, interest expense and interest rates paid on average interest-bearing liabilities, interest-rate spread and net interest margin for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. Average balances are derived from daily average balances and yields include fees, costs and purchase-accounting-related premiums and discounts which are considered adjustments to coupon yields in accordance with GAAP. Certain amounts previously reported have been reclassified to conform to the current presentation.
_________________________________________________________________________
(1) Tax-exempt income on debt securities, equity securities and industrial revenue bonds are included in commercial real estate loans on a tax-equivalent basis.
(2) Loans on nonaccrual status are included in the average balances.
(3) Including non-interest-bearing checking accounts, the average interest rate on total deposits was 0.75%, 1.23% and 0.81% in the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(4) Interest-rate spread represents the difference between the yield on interest-earning assets and the cost of interest-bearing liabilities.
(5) Net interest margin represents net interest income (tax equivalent basis) divided by average interest-earning assets.
See "Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019" and "Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018" below for a discussion of average assets and liabilities, net interest income, interest-rate spread and net interest margin.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following table presents, on a tax-equivalent basis, the extent to which changes in interest rates and changes in volume of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities have affected the Company's interest income and interest expense during the periods indicated. Information is provided in each category with respect to: (i) changes attributable to changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior rate), (ii) changes attributable to changes in rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume), and (iii) the net change. The changes attributable to the combined impact of volume and rate have been allocated proportionately to the changes due to volume and the changes due to rate.
See "Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019" and "Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018" below for a discussion of changes in interest income, interest-rate spread and net interest margin resulting from changes in rates and volumes.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Net Interest Income
Net interest income increased $6.9 million to $260.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $253.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase year over year reflects a $20.5 million decrease in interest income on loans and leases, partially offset by a $1.5 million increase in interest income on debt securities and a $27.7 million decrease in interest expense on deposit and borrowings, which is reflective of the sustained, low interest rate environment being offset by balance sheet growth and income from participation in the Paycheck Protection Program.
Net interest margin decreased by 34 basis points to 3.17% in 2020 from 3.51% in 2019. The Company's weighted average interest rate on loans (prior to purchase accounting adjustments) decreased to 4.30% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 5.07% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Interest amortization and accretion on acquired loans totaled $0.3 million and did not impact 2020 loan yields, compared to $0.6 million and 1 basis point in 2019. The decrease in net interest margin over the period is a result of the Company's asset sensitive positioning as interest rates fell to sustained, low levels.
The yield on interest-earning assets decreased to 3.99% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 4.81% for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is the result of lower yields on loans and leases. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded $4.5 million in prepayment penalties and late charges, which contributed 5 basis points to yields on interest-earning assets in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $5.0 million, or 7 basis points, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The overall cost of funds (including non-interest-bearing demand checking accounts) decreased 60 basis points to 1.11% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 1.71% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Refer to "Financial Condition - Borrowed Funds" above for more details.
Management seeks to position the balance sheet to be neutral to asset sensitive to changes in interest rates. From 2017 through 2019, short term interest rates rose while at the same time net interest income, net interest spread, and net interest margin also increased. During 2020, interest rates declined sharply in response to the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. In general, the Company's balance sheet position should respond positively in a rising interest rate environment and when the rate curves are steepening, which should result in a positive impact to net interest income, net interest spread, and the net interest margin. A declining interest rate or flattening yield curve environment is expected to have a negative impact on the Company's yields and net interest margin. Due to, among other things, ongoing pricing pressures in the loan and deposit portfolios, net interest income may also be negatively affected by changes in the amount of accretion on acquired loans and leases, deposits and borrowed funds, which is included in interest income and interest expense, respectively.
Interest Income-Loans and Leases
Interest income from loans and leases was $309.8 million for 2020, and represented a yield on total loans of 4.30%. This compares to $330.3 million of interest on loans and a yield of 5.07% for 2019. This $20.5 million decrease in interest income from loans and leases was attributable to an increase in the origination volume of $30.8 million and a decrease of $51.5 million due to the changes in interest rates.
Interest Income-Investments
Total investment income was $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $17.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, the yield on total investments was 1.71% as compared to 2.45% as of December 31, 2019. This year over year decrease in total investment income of $0.3 million, or 1.5%, was driven by a $4.7 million decrease due to rates and a $4.4 million increase due to volume.
Interest Expense-Deposits and Borrowed Funds
Deposits
In 2020, interest paid on deposits decreased $21.2 million, or 30.4%, as compared to 2019. The decrease in interest expense on deposits was driven by a decrease of $25.6 million due to lower in interest rates, partially offset by an increase of $4.4 million due to the growth in deposits. Purchase accounting amortization on acquired deposits for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $44.0 thousand, compared to $382.0 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019. Purchase accounting amortization had no impact on the Company's net interest margin in 2020, compared to 1 basis point in 2019.
Borrowed Funds
As of December 31, 2020, the Company's borrowed funds include: $648.8 million in FHLBB advances, $83.7 million in subordinated debentures and notes, and $87.7 million in other borrowed funds. In 2020, the average balance of FHLBB advances increased $101.8 million, or 13.4%, while the average balance of subordinated debentures and notes increased $0.2 million, or 0.2%. The average balance of other borrowed funds, which includes repurchase agreements, increased $11.3 million, or 14.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, interest paid on borrowed funds decreased $6.5 million, or 26.2% year over year. The cost of borrowed funds decreased to 1.73% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 2.65% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest expense was driven by a decrease of $8.8 million due to borrowing rates, partially offset by an increase of $2.3 million due to volume. For the years ended December 31, 2020, there was purchase accounting
accretion of $54.0 thousand compared to accretion of $58.0 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019 . Purchase accounting accretion had no impact on the Company's net interest margin.
Provision for Credit Losses
The provisions for credit losses are set forth below:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the provision for credit losses increased $52.3 million, to $61.9 million from $9.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in the provision for credit losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by changes in macroeconomic forecasts surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic. The latest available economic forecasts were used in the loss models which reflected the immediate and longer term effects of the COVID-19 pandemic onto the Company's allowance for credit losses.
See management’s discussion of “Financial Condition - Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses” and Note 7, “Allowance for Credit Losses,” to the unaudited consolidated financial statements for a description of how management determined the allowance for loan and lease losses for each portfolio and class of loans.
Non-Interest Income
The following table sets forth the components of non-interest income:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, non-interest income decreased $5.1 million, or 17.3%, to $24.6 million as compared to $29.8 million for the same period in 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by decreases of $4.0 million in loan level derivative income, net, $1.6 million in deposit fees, $0.6 million in gain on sales of loans and leases, and $0.4 million in other income, partially offset by an increase of $1.5 million in gain on sales of investment securities.
Loan level derivative income decreased $4.0 million, or 48.3%, to $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $8.3 million for the same period in 2019, primarily driven by lower volume in loan level derivatives transactions completed in 2020.
Deposit fees decreased $1.6 million, or 14.8%, to $9.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $10.6 million for the same period in 2019, primarily driven by lower insufficient funds fees (NSF), account service fees, non-customer ATM income, debit card fees, as well as ATM fees.
Gain on sales of investment securities increased $1.5 million, or 287.8%, to $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $0.5 million for the same period in 2019, primarily driven by investment securities sold in 2020, partially offset by a change in market value on equity securities held for trading.
Gain on sales of loans and leases held-for-sale decreased $0.6 million, or 34.6%, to $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $1.7 million for the same period in 2019, primarily driven by a decrease in loan sale volume with servicing released and servicing retained.
Other income decreased $0.4 million, or 6.1%, to $6.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $6.6 million for the same period in 2019, primarily driven by lower gain on interest rate derivatives, other income, rental income and 1031 exchange income, offset by higher foreign exchange outgoing wire income.
Non-Interest Expense
The following table sets forth the components of non-interest expense:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, non-interest expense increased $3.4 million, or 2.1%, to $160.8 million as compared to $157.5 million for the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily driven by increases of $4.4 million in compensation and employee benefits expense and $2.8 million in FDIC insurance, partially offset by decreases of $1.6 million in other expenses, $1.3 million in equipment and data processing, and $1.1 million in merger and acquisition expense.
The efficiency ratio increased to 56.47% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 55.63% for the same period in 2019. The increase year over year was primarily driven by higher non- interest expense and net interest income, offset by lower non-interest income in 2020.
Compensation and employee benefits expense increased $4.4 million, or 4.6%, to $101.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $96.6 million for the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily driven by increases in employee headcount, annual merit increases and bonuses, and health care benefits.
FDIC insurance expense increased $2.8 million, or 192.7%, to $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $1.4 million for the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily driven by bank assessment fees from the FDIC.
Other expenses decreased $1.6 million, or 11.4%, to $12.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $13.9 million for the same period in 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by lower travel and accommodation expenses, other real estate owned (OREO) expenses, employee and business meal expenses, correspondent bank fees, entertainment expenses, and recording and filing fees, partially offset by higher customer losses and charge offs.
Equipment and data processing decreased $1.3 million, or 7.0%, to $17.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $18.7 million for the same period in 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by lower purchased software depreciation, data communication expenses, core processing, and ATM processing, partially offset by higher software licenses and subscriptions.
Merger and acquisition expense decreased $1.1 million, or 100.0%, to zero for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $1.1 million for the same period in 2019, due to the merger of First Ipswich Bank into Brookline Bank.
Provision for Income Taxes
The Company recorded income tax expense of $14.4 million for 2020, compared to $28.3 million for 2019. This represents an effective tax rate of 23.3% and 24.4% for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in the Company's income before provision for income taxes was primarily driven by impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018
Net Interest Income
Net interest income increased $5.6 million to $253.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from $247.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase year over year reflects a $35.1 million increase in interest income on loans and leases, partially offset by a $1.7 million decrease in interest income on debt securities and a $28.1 million increase in interest expense on deposit and borrowings, which is reflective of the various portfolios repricing and replacing balances into the current interest rate environment.
Net interest margin decreased by 10 basis points to 3.51% in 2019 from 3.61% in 2018. The Company's weighted average interest rate on loans (prior to purchase accounting adjustments) increased to 5.07% for the year ended December 31, 2019 from 4.84% for the year ended December 31, 2018. Interest amortization and accretion on acquired loans totaled $0.6 million and contributed 1 basis point to 2019 loan yields, compared to $0.7 million and 1 basis point in 2018. The decrease in net interest margin over the period is a result of most asset categories being fully repriced into the current rate environment, while deposit costs continue to rise due to market competition and shifting demand for non- maturity versus time deposits.
The yield on interest-earning assets increased to 4.81% for the year ended December 31, 2019 from 4.58% for the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase is the result of higher yields on loans and leases. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded $5.0 million in prepayment penalties and late charges, which contributed 7 basis points to yields on interest-earning assets in the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $3.5 million, or 5 basis points, for the year ended December 31, 2018.
The overall cost of funds (including non-interest-bearing demand checking accounts) increased 45 basis points to 1.71% for the year ended December 31, 2019 from 1.26% for the year ended December 31, 2018. Refer to "Financial Condition - Borrowed Funds" above for more details.
Management seeks to position the balance sheet to be neutral to asset sensitive to changes in interest rates. In general, the Company's balance sheet position should respond positively in a rising interest rate environment and when the rate curves are steepening which should result in a positive impact to net interest income, net interest spread, and the net interest margin. A declining interest rate or flattening yield curve environment is expected to have a negative impact on the Company's yields and net interest margin. Additional risk factors include, but are not limited to, ongoing pricing pressures in both the loan and deposit portfolios, the ability to increase the Company's core deposits, decrease its loan-to-deposit ratio, and decrease its reliance on FHLBB advances. Net interest income may also be negatively affected by changes in the amount of accretion on acquired loans and leases, deposits and borrowed funds, which are included in interest income and interest expense, respectively.
Interest Income-Loans and Leases
Interest income from loans and leases was $330.3 million for 2019, and represented a yield on total loans of 5.07%. This compares to $295.3 million of interest on loans and a yield of 4.84% for 2018. This $35.1 million increase in interest income from loans and leases was attributable to an increased in the origination volume of $21.2 million and an increase of $13.8 million due to the changes in interest rates.
Interest Income-Investments
Total investment income was $17.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $18.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. As of December 31, 2019, the yield on total investments was 2.45% as compared to 2.48% as of December 31, 2018. This year over year decrease in total investment income of $1.3 million, or 7.2%, was driven by a $0.1 million decrease due to rates and a $1.2 million decrease due to volume.
Interest Expense-Deposits and Borrowed Funds
Deposits
In 2019, interest paid on deposits increased $27.6 million, or 65.8%, as compared to 2018. Interest expense increased $19.1 million due to an increase in interest rates and $8.6 million due to the growth in deposits. Purchase accounting amortization on acquired deposits for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $0.4 million, compared to $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Purchase accounting amortization impacted the Company's net interest margin by 1 basis point in 2019, compared to 1 basis point in 2018.
Borrowed Funds
As of December 31, 2019, the Company's borrowed funds include: $758.5 million in FHLBB advances, $83.6 million in subordinated debentures and notes, and $60.7 million in other borrowed funds. In 2019, the average balance of FHLBB advances decreased $188.4 million, or 19.9%, while the average balance of subordinated debentures and notes increased $0.2 million, or 0.2%. Other borrowed funds, which include repurchase agreements, increased $33.2 million, or 72.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, interest paid on borrowed funds increased $0.5 million, or 2.0% year over year, primarily driven by an increase in other borrowed funds. The cost of borrowed funds was 2.65% for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to 2.22% for the year ended December 31, 2018. This change was driven by an increase of $4.2 million due to borrowing rates, partially offset by a decrease of $3.7 million in interest expense due to volume. For the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, the purchase accounting accretion on acquired borrowed funds was $0.1 million which had no impact on the Company's net interest margin.
Provision for Credit Losses
The provisions for credit losses are set forth below:
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the provision for credit losses increased $4.6 million, or 93.6%, to $9.6 million from $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in the provision for credit losses for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily driven by an increase in the net charge-offs in equipment financing loans and the increases in reserves for loan growth and acquired loans, partially offset by decreased reserves required due to changes in historical loss factors and the decrease in specific reserves. See management's discussion in "Allowances for Credit Losses-Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses" and Note 7, "Allowance for Credit Losses," to the consolidated financial statements for a description of how management determined the allowance for loan and lease losses for each portfolio and class of loans.
The liability for unfunded credit commitments, which is included in other liabilities, was $1.9 million as of December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018. No credit commitments were charged off against the Company's liability account for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
Non-Interest Income
The following table sets forth the components of non-interest income:
For the year ended December 31, 2019, non-interest income increased $4.6 million, or 18.1%, to $29.8 million as compared to $25.2 million the same period in 2018. This increase is primarily due to a $2.8 million increase in loan level derivative income, a $0.7 million increase in other income, and a $0.7 million increase in loan fees.
Other income increased $0.7 million, or 12.8%, to $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from $5.8 million for the same period of 2018, primarily driven by higher derivative activity.
Loan fees increased $0.7 million, or 47.0%, to $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from $1.4 million for the same period of 2018, primarily driven by miscellaneous fees.
Non-Interest Expense
The following table sets forth the components of non-interest expense:
For the year ended December 31, 2019, non-interest expense increased $2.2 million, or 1.4%, to $157.5 million as compared to $155.2 million for the same period in 2018. This increase is primarily due to a $5.0 million increase in compensation and employee benefits expense, partially offset by a decrease of $2.7 million in merger and acquisition expense, and a $1.3 million decrease in FDIC insurance expense.
The efficiency ratio decreased to 55.63% for the year ended December 31, 2019 from 56.88% for the same period in 2018. The decrease year over year was primarily driven by higher net interest income and non-interest income in 2019.
Compensation and employee benefits expense increased $5.0 million, or 5.5%, to $96.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from $91.5 million for the same period in 2018. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in employee headcount and annual salary increases.
Merger and acquisition expense decreased $2.7 million, or 70.3%, to $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from $3.8 million for the same period in 2018, due to the closing of the First Commons Bank acquisition in 2018.
FDIC insurance expense decreased $1.3 million, or 46.9%, to $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from $2.7 million for the same period in 2018. The decrease was primarily driven by bank assessment credits from the FDIC.
Provision for Income Taxes
The Company recorded income tax expense of $28.3 million for 2019, compared to $26.2 million for 2018. This represents an effective tax rate of 24.4% and 23.2% for 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in the Company's effective tax rate from 2018 was primarily driven by a $0.7 million adjustment as a result of the Tax Act. Due to the Tax Act, the Company took a one-time adjustment in 2018 that lowered the effective tax rate, which was not repeated in 2019. In addition, Brookline Bank completed the purchase of the remaining interest in Eastern Funding in 2019. Tax savings of approximately $0.9 million were recognized for this portion of Eastern Funding in 2018, but not in 2019.
The Tax Act represents the most comprehensive reform to the U.S. tax code in over thirty years. The majority of the provisions of the Tax Act took effect on January 1, 2018. The Tax Act lowered the Company’s federal tax rate from 35% in 2017 to 21% in 2018 and 2019. The Tax Act also contained other provisions that may affect the Company currently or in future years. Among these are changes to the deductibility of meals and entertainment, the deductibility of executive compensation,
accelerated expensing of depreciable property for assets placed in service after September 27, 2017 and before 2023, limited the deductibility of net interest expense, eliminated the corporate alternative minimum tax, limited net operating loss carryforwards to 80% of taxable income and a parking disallowance related to employee parking.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Liquidity is defined as the ability to meet current and future financial obligations of a short-term nature. The Company further defines liquidity as the ability to respond to the needs of depositors and borrowers, as well as to earnings enhancement opportunities, in a changing marketplace. Liquidity management is monitored by an Asset/Liability Committee ("ALCO"), consisting of members of management, which is responsible for establishing and monitoring liquidity targets as well as strategies and tactics to meet these targets.
The primary source of funds for the payment of dividends and expenses by the Company are dividends paid to it by the Banks and Brookline Securities Corp. The primary sources of liquidity for the Banks consist of deposit inflows, loan repayments, borrowed funds, and maturing investment securities.
Deposits, which are considered the most stable source of liquidity, totaled $6.9 billion as of December 31, 2020 and represented 89.4% of total funding (the sum of total deposits and total borrowings), compared to deposits of $5.8 billion, or 86.6% of total funding, as of December 31, 2019. Core deposits, which consist of demand checking, NOW, savings and money market accounts, totaled $4.8 billion as of December 31, 2020 and represented 69.8% of total deposits, compared to core deposits of $3.8 billion, or 65.3% of total deposits, as of December 31, 2019. Additionally, the Company had $693.9 million of brokered deposits as of December 31, 2020, which represented 10.0% of total deposits, compared to $349.9 million or 6.0% of total deposits, as of December 31, 2019. The Company offers attractive interest rates based on market conditions to increase deposits balances, while managing cost of funds.
Borrowings are used to diversify the Company's funding mix and to support asset growth. When profitable lending and investment opportunities exist, access to borrowings provides a means to grow the balance sheet. Borrowings totaled $820.2 million as of December 31, 2020, representing 10.6% of total funding, compared to $902.7 million, or 13.4% of total funding, as of December 31, 2019.
As members of the FHLBB, the Banks have access to both short- and long-term borrowings. As of December 31, 2020, the Company's total borrowing limit from the FHLBB for advances and repurchase agreements was $1.9 billion as compared to $2.1 billion as of December 31, 2019, based on the level of qualifying collateral available for these borrowings.
As of December 31, 2020, the Banks also have access to funding through certain uncommitted lines of credit of $746.0 million. The Company had a $12.0 million committed line of credit for contingent liquidity as of December 31, 2020.
The Company has access to the Federal Reserve Bank "discount window" to supplement its liquidity. The Company has $606.6 million of borrowing capacity at the Federal Reserve Bank as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the Company did not have any borrowings with the Federal Reserve Bank outstanding.
Additionally, the Banks have access to liquidity through repurchase agreements and brokered deposits.
In general, the Company seeks to maintain a high degree of liquidity and targets cash, cash equivalents and investment securities available-for-sale balances of between 10% and 15% of total assets. As of December 31, 2020, cash, cash equivalents and investment securities available-for-sale totaled $1.2 billion, or 13.2% of total assets. This compares to $576.8 million, or 7.3% of total assets as of December 31, 2019.
While management believes that the Company has adequate liquidity to meet its commitments, and to fund the Banks' lending and investment activities, the availabilities of these funding sources are subject to broad economic conditions and could be restricted in the future. Such restrictions would impact the Company's immediate liquidity and/or additional liquidity needs.
Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company and the Banks were under the primary regulation of and required to comply with the capital requirements of the FRB. At those dates, the Company and the Banks exceeded all regulatory capital requirements and the banks were considered "well-capitalized." See details in "Supervision and Regulation" in Item 1. Refer to Note 19, "Regulatory Capital Requirements", for the Company's and the Banks' actual and required capital amounts and ratios.
Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangements
The Company is party to off-balance sheet financial instruments in the normal course of business to meet the financing needs of its customers and to reduce its own exposure to fluctuations in interest rates. These financial instruments include loan commitments, standby and commercial letters of credit and loan level derivatives. According to GAAP, these financial instruments are not recorded in the financial statements until they are funded or related fees are incurred or received. The effect of such activity on the Company's financial condition and results of operations, such as recorded liability for unfunded credit commitment, is immaterial. See Note 13, "Commitments and Contingencies," to the consolidated financial statements for a description of off-balance-sheet financial instruments.
Contractual Obligations
A summary of contractual obligations by the expected payment period for the date indicated follows.
_______________________________________________________________________________
(1) These amounts represent commitments made by the Company to extend credit to borrowers as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses. Since some of the commitments are expected to expire without being drawn upon, the total commitment amount does not necessarily represent future cash requirements.
(2) The Company leases certain office space under various noncancellable operating leases. These leases have original terms ranging from 3 years to over 25 years. Certain leases contain renewal options and escalation clauses for real estate taxes and other expenditures which can increase rental expenses based principally on the consumer price index and fair market rental value provisions.
(3) Payments to service providers under most of the existing contracts are based on the volume of accounts served or transactions processed. Some contracts also call for higher required payments when there are increases in the Consumer Price Index. The expected payments shown in this table are based on an estimate of the number of accounts to be served or transactions to be processed, but do not include any projection of the effect of changes in the Consumer Price Index.
(4) These amounts represent commitments made by the Company for a Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan as part of the acquisition of BankRI and a Postretirement Benefits Plan, at Brookline Bank, that provides part of the annual expense of health insurance premiums for retired employees and their dependents.