ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the “Business” section, as well as the consolidated financial statements and related notes in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements and involves numerous risks and uncertainties, including those described under the heading “Risk Factors.” Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. You should read this discussion and analysis together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Report for the Company and Predecessor Company Group. In this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” references to the “Predecessor Company Group,” or the “Predecessor,” refers to the Predecessor Companies and the Predecessor Management Companies and their respective subsidiaries on a combined basis.
Broadmark Realty Capital Inc. (“Broadmark Realty” or the “Company”), a Maryland corporation, is an internally managed commercial real estate finance company that has elected to be taxed as a real estate investment trust (“REIT”) for U.S. federal income tax purposes. Based in Seattle, Washington, we specialize in underwriting, funding, servicing and managing a portfolio of short-term, first deed of trust loans to fund the construction and development of, or investment in, residential or commercial properties. We operate in select states that we believe to have favorable demographic trends and that provide more efficient and quicker access to collateral in the event of borrower default. In March 2020, we launched a private real estate investment trust (the “Private REIT”) offered to qualified purchasers that is managed by our subsidiary and that participates in our loan portfolio. As of December 31, 2020, our portfolio of 204 active loans had approximately $1.2 billion of total commitments and $860.1 million of principal outstanding across 145 borrowers in 12 states and the District of Columbia, of which $82.4 million and $37.7 million, respectively, were sold to the Private REIT. We refer to loans that have outstanding commitments or principal balances that have not been repaid or retired, including by foreclosure, as “active loans.” Total commitments refer to the aggregate sum of outstanding principal balances, construction holdbacks and committed amounts for future draws and interest reserves on our loans. To date our loan portfolio has been 100% equity funded, and as of December 31, 2020, we have no outstanding debt. As a public company, we plan to opportunistically raise capital in the public market from time to time based on market conditions and to execute on cash management tools to fund the business and produce attractive returns for our stockholders. On February 19, 2021, we closed on a $135.0 million revolving credit facility, which we expect will enable us to use a larger percentage of our cash balances for lending activities without planning to incur debt in the ordinary course of business.
Properties securing our loans are generally classified as residential properties, commercial properties or undeveloped land, and are typically not income producing. Each loan is secured by a first deed of trust lien on real estate. Our lending policy limits the committed amount of each loan to a maximum loan-to-value (“LTV”) ratio of up to 65% of the “as-complete” appraised value of the underlying collateral as determined by an independent appraiser at the time of the loan origination. Our lending policy also limits the initial outstanding principal balance of each loan to a maximum LTV of up to 65% of the “as-is” appraised value of the underlying collateral as determined by an independent appraiser at the time of the loan origination. At the time of origination, the difference between the initial outstanding principal and the total commitment is the amount held back for future release subject to property inspections, progress reports and other conditions in accordance with the loan documents. Unless otherwise indicated, LTV is measured by the total commitment amount of the loan at origination divided by the “as-complete” appraisal. LTVs do not reflect interim activity such as construction draws or interest payments capitalized to loans, or partial repayments of the loan. As of December 31, 2020, the weighted average LTV was 59.4% across our active loan portfolio based on the total commitment of the loan and “as-complete” appraisals. In addition, each loan is also personally guaranteed on a recourse basis by the principals of the borrower, and/or others at our discretion to provide further credit support for the loan. The personal guarantee may be collaterally secured by a pledge of the guarantor’s interest in the borrower or other real estate or assets owned by the guarantor.
Our loans typically range from $0.1 to $40 million in total commitment at origination, generally bear interest at a fixed annual rate of 10% to 13% and have initial terms typically ranging from five to 18 months in duration based on the size of the project and expected timeline for completion of construction, which we often elect to extend for several months based on our evaluation of the project. As of December 31, 2020, the average total commitment of our active loans was $6.1 million and the weighted average remaining term to contractual maturity of our active loans was approximately seven months. We usually receive loan origination fees, or “points,” typically ranging from 4% to 5% of the total commitment at origination, along with loan amendment and extension fees, each of which varies in amount based upon the term of the loan and the quality of the borrower and the underlying collateral. In addition, we charge fees on past due receivables and receive reimbursements from borrowers for costs associated with services provided by us, such as closing costs, collection costs on defaulted loans and construction draw inspection fees.
In addition to the natural seasonality inherent in our business whereby winter months are typically less favorable to construction, restrictions related to the Business Combination decreased the amount of our loan originations for the second half of 2019 and early 2020. The pending Business Combination required us to essentially pause our ability to raise capital and in turn originate new loans for most of the second half of 2019. In the first quarter of 2020, we focused on rebuilding our pipeline and began to strategically deploy the proceeds from the Business Combination; these rebuilding efforts began to slow in March due to the uncertainty associated with the impacts of COVID-19. In March 2020, we launched the Private REIT to provide access to an additional source of capital and fund participations in loans originated by Broadmark Realty. We believe the Private REIT enhances our ability to increase originations and grow our asset base, subject to market conditions. As of December 31, 2020, the Private REIT’s participation in the total principal balance funded and outstanding was approximately $37.7 million.
The COVID-19 pandemic is significantly affecting, and can be expected to continue to impact, the capital markets and the construction lending market, at least in the near term. While we have implemented a variety of business continuity initiatives, restrictions imposed in connection with COVID-19 or the impact on key employees, could create significant challenges for our operations. We have experienced an adverse impact on our loan portfolio primarily in the form of a significant increase in defaulted loans, a slow-down in construction progress and an expected reduction in demand for and the value of commercial and residential real estate properties. For example, delays in local government permitting and inspections arising from measures to limit the spread of COVID-19 have delayed some projects, adversely affecting the ability of borrowers to complete the projects in accordance with the terms of the loans. Similarly, the COVID-19 pandemic and containment measures have contributed to, among other things, adverse impacts on demand for and the value of commercial and residential real estate that our borrowers have developed that make it less likely that a borrower can sell or lease the property it is developing in an amount sufficient to repay the borrower’s loan, or that a developer, who would be our borrower, will elect to go forward with a new project. As a result, during the first half of 2020, we saw an increase in delinquencies and requests for extensions or forbearance, which declined during the second half of 2020. In addition, market conditions, and in some cases moratoriums on the foreclosure process have increased the timeline to resolve non-performing loans. Delays in repayment of our outstanding loans or sales of foreclosed properties reduce the capital available for future loan originations. If the pandemic is prolonged, it could increase the adverse impact on our business and results of operations.
Key Indicators of Financial Condition and Operating Performance
In assessing the performance of our business, we consider a variety of financial and operating metrics, which include both GAAP and non-GAAP metrics, including the following:
Interest income earned on our loans. A primary source of our revenue is interest income earned on our loan portfolio. Our loans typically bear interest at a fixed annual rate of 10% to 13%, paid monthly, primarily from interest reserves and, to a lesser extent, cash payments. As we have historically had no debt outstanding, we have had no borrowing costs and accordingly our gross interest income earned on our loans has been equivalent to net interest income.
Fees and other revenue recognized from originating and servicing our loans. Fee income is comprised of loan origination fees, loan renewal fees and inspection fees. The majority of fee income is comprised of loan origination fees, or “points,” which typically range from 4% to 5%, on an annualized basis, of the total commitment at origination. In addition to origination fees, we earn loan extension fees when maturing loans are renewed or extended and amendment fees when loan terms are modified, such as increases in interest reserves and construction holdbacks in line with our underwriting criteria or upon modification of a loan for the transition from horizontal development to vertical construction. Loans are generally only renewed or extended if the loan is not in default and satisfies our underwriting criteria, including our maximum LTV ratio of up to 65% of the appraised value as determined by an independent appraiser at the time of loan origination, or based on an updated appraisal if required.
Loan originations. Our operating performance is heavily dependent upon our ability to originate new loans to invest new capital and re-invest returning capital from the repayment of loans. The dollar amounts of loan originations reflect the total commitment at origination and loan repayments reflect the total commitment at payoff. Given the short-term nature of our loans, loan principal is generally repaid on a faster basis than to other types of lenders, making redeployment of capital through our originations process an important factor in our success.
The following tables contains the total amount of our loan originations and repayments for the periods indicated:
Credit quality of our loan portfolio. All of our loans are construction loans secured by residential or commercial real estate and, in assessing estimated credit losses, we evaluate various metrics, including, but not limited to, construction type, collateral type, LTV, market conditions of property location and borrower experience and financial strength.
The following tables allocate the carrying value of our loan portfolio based on our internal credit quality indicators used in assessing estimated credit losses and vintage of origination at the dates indicated:
(1) Represents the year of origination or amendment where the loan incurred a full re-underwriting.
(1) Represents the year of origination or amendment where the loan incurred a full re-underwriting.
(1) Represents the year of origination or amendment where the loan incurred a full re-underwriting.
(2) Represents LTV as of origination or latest amendment. LTVs above 65% generally represent loans in contractual default status where we have agreed to extend funds to the borrower above 65% in order to support timely successful completion of the construction and return of capital.
Dividends Declared. The following table summarizes the declared cash dividends per common share activity for the year ended December 31, 2020:
Earnings per Common Share. The following table summarizes the earnings (GAAP) and distributable earnings (non-GAAP) per common share activity for the year ended December 31, 2020:
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Distributable Earnings
Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020, and for all subsequent reporting periods ending on or after December 31, 2020, to more appropriately reflect the principal purpose of the measure, we have elected to present “distributable earnings”, a supplemental non-GAAP financial measure used by management to evaluate our operating performance. Distributable earnings replaces our prior presentation of “core earnings”. We define distributable earnings as net income attributable to common stockholders adjusted for: (i) impairment recorded on our investments; (ii) unrealized gains or losses on our investments (including provision for credit losses); (iii) non-capitalized transaction-related expenses and first year public company transition expenses; (iv) non-cash stock-based compensation; (v) depreciation and amortization of our intangible assets; and (vi) deferred taxes, which are subject to variability and generally not indicative of future economic performance or representative of current operations.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a $4.5 million increase in the CECL allowance through provision expense, which has been excluded from distributable earnings consistent with other unrealized gains (losses) pursuant to our policy for reporting core earnings. Unlike in our historic presentation of core earnings, we expect to recognize such potential credit losses in distributable earnings if and when such amounts are deemed nonrecoverable upon a realization event. This is generally upon charge-off of principal at the time of loan repayment or upon sale of real property owned by us and the amount of proceeds is less than the principal outstanding at the time of foreclosure.
Management believes that the adjustments to compute “distributable earnings” specified above allow investors and analysts to readily identify and track the operating performance of our assets, assist in comparing the operating results between periods, and enable investors to evaluate our current performance using the same measure that management uses to operate the business. Distributable earnings excludes certain recurring items, such as unrealized gains and losses (including provision for credit losses) and non-capitalized transaction-related expenses, because they are not considered by management to be part of our primary operations for the reasons described herein. As such, distributable earnings is not intended to reflect all of our activity and should be considered as only one of the factors used by management in assessing our performance, along with GAAP net income which is inclusive of all of our activities.
As a REIT, we are required to distribute at least 90% of our annual REIT taxable income and to pay tax at regular corporate rates to the extent that we annually distribute less than 100% of such taxable income. Given these requirements and our belief that dividends are generally one of the principal reasons that stockholders invest in our common stock, we generally intend to attempt to pay dividends to our stockholders in an amount equal to our net taxable income, if and to the extent authorized by our board of directors. Distributable earnings is one of many factors considered by our board of directors in declaring dividends and, while not a direct measure of taxable income, over time, the measure can be considered a useful indicator of our dividends.
Distributable earnings does not represent and should not be considered as a substitute for, or superior to, net income or as a substitute for, or superior to, cash flows from operating activities, each as determined in accordance with GAAP, and our calculation of this measure may not be comparable to similarly entitled measures reported by other companies.
The table below is a reconciliation of distributable earnings to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure:
(1) Expenses directly related to first year of public company reporting and compliance, primarily professional fees in connection with the design and implementation of internal controls and procedures under Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.
(2) Represents credit losses recorded in the provision for credit losses and recognized in distributable earnings upon charge-off of principal at the time of loan repayment or upon sale of real property where proceeds received are less than the principal outstanding. This item was not recognized in our historic presentation of core earnings.
Segment Reporting
We operate our business as one reportable segment.
Principal Factors Affecting the Comparability of our Results of Operations
As a commercial real estate finance company, our results are affected by factors such as changes in economic climate, demand for housing, population trends, construction costs and the availability of alternative real estate financing from other lenders. These factors may have an impact on our ability to originate new loans or the performance of our existing loan portfolio.
From November 15, 2019, our consolidated financial statements reflect BRELF II, one of the Predecessor Companies, as the accounting acquirer and Successor entity, acquiring the other three Predecessor Companies, the four Predecessor Management Companies, and Trinity in the Successor period. The Business Combination transaction reflects a change in accounting basis for the Predecessor Company Group (other than BRELF II). As Trinity was a special purpose acquisition company, its acquisition is reflected as the issuance of shares for cash. For periods prior to November 15, 2019, in lieu of presenting separate financial statements of each of the Predecessor Companies and Predecessor Management Companies, consolidated financial statements have been presented, as these entities were under common management. Broadmark Realty is the successor issuer to Trinity.
As a result of the Business Combination, beginning from November 15, 2019, our consolidated financial statements are presented on a new basis of accounting pursuant to ASC 805, Business Combinations to reflect BRELF II acquiring the other entities within the Predecessor Company Group and Trinity. For more information refer to “Note 3 - Business Combination” to the financial statements included in this Report.
Results from Operations
The period-to-period comparison of results is not necessarily indicative of results for future periods. The tables below set forth the results of our operations and the results of the operations of our Predecessor for the periods presented, both in dollars and as a percentage of revenue (amounts in thousands, except percentage data):
Comparison of Results of Operations
Unless otherwise stated, for purposes of this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, in the comparison of the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 and year ended December 31, 2019, the “2020 Successor Period” refers to the year ended December 31, 2020 and the “2019 Successor Period” refers to the period from November 15 through December 31, 2019, and the “2019 Predecessor Period” refer to the period from January 1 through November 14, 2019, and for the discussion of the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 and year ended December 31, 2018, the “2018 Predecessor Period” refers to the year ended December 31, 2018.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) Compared to Period from November 15, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and Period from January 1, 2019 through November 14, 2019 (Predecessor)
Revenue
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 (the “2020 Successor Period”) compared to the periods from November 15 through December 31, 2019 (the “2019 Successor Period”) and January 1 through November 14, 2019 (the “2019 Predecessor Period”) were $122.4 million and $131.0 million, respectively, a decrease of $8.6 million. The decrease relates to a decrease in interest and fee income relative to the 2019 Successor Period and 2019 Predecessor Period and is discussed below.
Expenses
Total expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the periods from November 15 through December 31, 2019 and January 1 through November 14, 2019 were $37.6 million and $50.8 million, respectively. The decrease relates to a decrease in transaction costs relative to the 2019 Successor Period and 2019 Predecessor Period, partially offset by an increase in provision for credit losses and compensation and employee benefits expense, which is discussed below.
Interest Income
Interest income decreased by $1.6 million or 1.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the periods from November 15 through December 31, 2019 and January 1 through November 14, 2019. The decrease resulted primarily from the increase in loans in contractual default and placed on non-accrual status primarily as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our borrowers’ ability to complete projects in the timeframe originally contemplated. The decreases in interest income were partially offset by increase in interest income resulting from a net increase in the average size of our loan portfolio of approximately 13.4% in the 2020 Successor Period compared to the 2019 Successor Period and 2019 Predecessor Period.
Fee Income
Fee income decreased by $7.1 million or 19.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the periods from November 15 through December 31, 2019 and January 1 through November 14, 2019 primarily attributable to a decrease in loan fee income relative to the 2019 Predecessor Period as a result of the Company beginning to defer and amortize loan origination and amendment fees on November 15, 2019 whereas in the past, the Predecessor’s accounting policy was to record the loan fees when billed.
Other Income (Expense)
The change in fair value of the optional subscription liability is an unrealized gain or loss based on the fair value of an optional subscription of up to $25 million of additional common stock issued as a part of the Business Combination (the “Optional Subscription Liability”). The Optional Subscription Liability warrants contained a cash settlement feature, which required accounting for the fair value of the liability at each reporting period. The Optional Subscription Liability was measured at a fair value of $5.5 million as of December 31, 2019 and other income of $5.5 million was recognized during the 2020 Successor Period resulting from the expiration of the unexercised optional subscription warrants in November 2020.
Provision for credit losses, net
The provision for credit losses increased $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the periods from November 15 through December 31, 2019 and January 1 through November 14, 2019. The increase resulted primarily from an increase in loans in contractual defaults associated with the current economic environment primarily related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and adoption of the CECL Standard.
Compensation and Employee Benefits
Compensation and employee benefits expense increased by $9.4 million or 116.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the periods from November 15 through December 31, 2019 and January 1 through November 14, 2019 primarily due to an increase of $6.4 million related to an increase in employee headcount and a change in the compensation structure for executives who were compensated previously as partners through distribution of earnings during the 2019 Predecessor Period and an increase of $3.0 million in stock-based compensation expense in the 2020 Successor Period compared to the 2019 Successor Period and 2019 Predecessor Period.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased by $0.1 million or 1.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the periods from November 15 through December 31, 2019 and January 1 through November 14, 2019. This increase is primarily a result of an increase in accounting and legal fees of $7.3 million associated with being a new public company, including certain non-recurring expenses, such as design and implementation of internal controls and procedures under Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. The increase was almost entirely offset by a decrease of $5.5 million of non-recurring broker commissions associated with growth in the loan portfolio during the 2019 Predecessor Period and a $1.7 million decrease in amortization expense that resulted from a reversal of amortization of $0.7 million during the 2020 Successor Period that was originally recognized in the 2019 Successor Period but was a measurement period adjustment when the preliminary valuation of intangible assets was decreased.
Transaction Costs
The $26.2 million of transaction costs for the periods from November 15 through December 31, 2019 and January 1 through November 14, 2019, include fees paid to investment banks, legal counsel and accounting firms as well as one-time payments associated with the Business Combination.
Period from November 15, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and Period from January 1, 2019 through November 14, 2019 (Predecessor) Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor)
A discussion regarding the results of operations for the period from November 15 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period from January 1, 2019 through November 14 2019 (Predecessor) compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 (Predecessor) can be found under Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our annual report on Form 10-K for fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on March 16, 2020, which is available on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary liquidity needs include ongoing commitments to fund our lending activities and future funding obligations for our existing loan portfolio, paying dividends and funding other general business needs. Our primary sources of liquidity and capital resources to date have been derived from the capital contributions from members of the Predecessor Companies, cash flow from operations and payoffs of loans in our existing portfolio. Neither the Successor nor the Predecessor, has utilized any borrowings since inception. As of December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents totaled $223.4 million.
We seek to meet our long-term liquidity requirements, such as real estate lending needs, including future construction draw commitments through our existing cash resources and return of capital from investments, including loan repayments. Additionally, going forward, we intend to fund our growth through the issuance of common stock, the sale of participation interests in loans we originate to the Private REIT, fee income from the Private REIT, and the use of our revolving credit facility as a cash management tool. As of December 31, 2020, we had $1.2 billion of total commitments outstanding, of which our portion and the Private REIT’s portion of the total principal balance funded and outstanding were $822.4 million and $37.7 million, respectively.
On February 19, 2021, we entered into a credit agreement with a syndicate of lenders and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent for the lenders, providing for a $135.0 million revolving credit facility. By providing backup liquidity for future draws, we expect the availability of the revolving credit facility will enable us to use a larger percentage of our cash balances for lending activities without planning to incur debt in the ordinary course of business.
Our obligations under the revolving credit facility are secured by substantially all of our Company’s assets. The revolving credit facility contains covenants customary for financings of this type, including limitations on the incurrence of indebtedness, liens, asset dispositions, acquisitions, mergers and consolidations, certain dividends, distributions and other payments, advances and investments, payments to affiliates, optional prepayments and other modifications of certain other indebtedness, and amendments, terminations and waivers of certain material agreements, as well as a minimum tangible net worth and a total debt to equity ratio requirement. Among other things, the credit agreement provides that we may not pay cash dividends that would result in non-compliance with the financial covenants under the credit agreement or during an event of default under the credit agreement, except in the case of defaults other than payment defaults, for dividends in the amounts necessary to maintain our REIT status. The revolving credit facility contains events of default customary for financings of this type, including failure to pay principal, interest and other amounts, materially incorrect representations or warranties, failure to observe covenants and other terms of the revolving credit facility, cross-defaults to other indebtedness, bankruptcy, insolvency, material judgments, certain ERISA violations, changes in control and failure to maintain REIT status, in some cases subject to customary grace periods.
We believe our existing sources of liquidity are sufficient to fund our existing commitments. However, we are continuing to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on us, our borrowers and the economy as a whole. Because the magnitude, duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic and its economic consequences are uncertain, rapidly changing and difficult to predict, the pandemic’s impact on our operations and liquidity remains uncertain and difficult to predict. We anticipate the pandemic may continue to slow the pace of repayments of our outstanding loans, which would reduce the capital available to fund new loans. As a result, we seek to fund new loans in the near term through the sale of participation interests in new mortgage loans to the Private REIT, which will depend on the ability of the Private REIT to raise capital. To the extent funds available for new loans are limited, we will manage our capital deployment based on the receipt of payoffs. In the longer term, we plan to raise equity capital from time to time as a key component of our growth strategy, subject to market conditions.
As a REIT, we are required to distribute at least 90% of our annual REIT taxable income to our stockholders, including taxable income where Broadmark Realty does not receive corresponding cash. We intend to distribute all or substantially all of our REIT taxable income in order to comply with the REIT distribution requirements of the Code and to avoid U.S. federal income tax and the non-deductible excise tax.
Sources and Uses of Cash
The following table sets forth changes in cash and cash equivalents for year ended December 31, 2020, periods ended December 31, 2019 and November 14, 2019, and the year ended December 31, 2018:
Comparison of Results of Cash Flows for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) and the Period from November 15, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and Period from January 1, 2019 through November 14, 2019 (Predecessor)
Net cash provided by operating activities was $61.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $5.6 million for the period from November 15 through December 31, 2019 and $91.5 million for the period from January 1 through November 14, 2019 for a combined total of $97.1 million. The $35.8 million decrease partially resulted from the subtraction of $23.1 million of accretion of deferred origination and amendment fees within the adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities for the 2020 Successor Period with no corresponding amount for the 2019 Successor and 2019 Predecessor Periods. We began to defer and amortize loan origination and amendment fees on November 15, 2019 upon consummation of the Business Combination for our consolidated financial reporting. Under the business model used by the Predecessor entities (whose financial results were not consolidated but are being presented on a combined basis for the period from January 1 through November 14, 2019), 80% of the loan origination and amendment fees were paid to the Predecessor management entities. The Predecessor management entities classified the management fees received as cash provided by operating activities. The 20% of loan origination and amendment fees retained by the Predecessor lending entities were included in the total for cash flows provided by operating activities instead of being included in cash flows from investing activities, but the impact to the statement of cash flows of this treatment is immaterial to the statement of cash flows for the 2019 Successor and Predecessor Periods. The decrease in cash flow from operations partially resulted from a $8.5 million change in the amount of increases in operating assets related to receivables and other assets, $12.5 million decreases in operating liabilities and the $5.5 million of noncash other income for the change in the fair value of optional subscription liabilities in the 2020 Successor Period with $4.9 million of non-cash other expense related to the increase in the fair value of optional subscription liabilities in the 2019 Successor Period. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in net income of $15.0 million, $3.0 million increase in stock-based compensation and $3.4 million increase in the provision for credit losses, which are discussed above in Comparison of Results of Operations - Year Ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) Compared to Period from November 15, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and Period from January 1, 2019 through November 14, 2019 (Predecessor).
Net cash provided by investing activities was $34.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and net cash used in investing activities of $25.9 million for the period from November 15 through December 31, 2019 and $216.4 million for the period from January 1 through November 14, 2019 for a combined total of $242.3 million. The increase in cash provided by investing activities was primarily due to a small decrease in the size of our loan portfolio from December 31, 2019 through December 31, 2020 compared to a much larger increase in the loan portfolio experienced in the 2019 Successor Period and Predecessor Period. The increase in size of the loan portfolio in the Predecessor Period was due in part from capital available for making loans from the $101.2 million of net contributions received from members in the 2019 Predecessor Period.
Net cash used in financing activities was $111.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and net cash provided by financing activities of $258.4 million for the period from November 15 through December 31, 2019 and $101.2 million for the period from January 1 through November 14, 2019 for a combined total of $359.6 million. Dividend paid are entirely the cash used in financing during the 2020 Successor Period. The increases in the 2019 Successor and 2019 Predecessor Periods were primarily due to the proceeds from the capitalization with Trinity Merger Sub I, Inc. of $327.1 million partially offset by the consent fee paid to holders of publicly held warrants of $66.7 million and $101.2 million related to member contributions net of distributions and redemptions.
Contractual Obligations
The following table illustrates our contractual obligations by due date as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Includes construction holdbacks of $40.4 million on participating interests sold to the Private REIT as of December 31, 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. Finally, we have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets as of December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Use of Estimates in the Preparation of Financial Statements
The most significant accounting estimates involve a high degree of judgment or complexity. Management believes the estimates and judgments most critical to the preparation of our consolidated financial statements and to the understanding of our reported financial results include those made in connection with loan impairment and valuation of investments in real estate and taxable income. Management evaluates our policies and assumptions on an ongoing basis.
For a description of our significant accounting policies related to these accounts in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements, see “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of our consolidated financial statements included in this Report.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of our adoption of new accounting pronouncements and the impact thereof on our business, see "Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" of our consolidated financial statements included in this Report.