ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with Item 6. Selected Financial Data and our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth in Item 1A. Risk Factors and included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The following discussion contains references to periods prior to the Initial Public Offering, including the period from January 1, 2019 through October 27, 2019. The financial information of BRP Group has been combined with that of BRP as of the earliest period presented.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY OF 2020 FINANCIAL RESULTS
We are a rapidly growing independent insurance distribution firm delivering solutions that give our Clients the peace of mind to pursue their purpose, passion and dreams.
The following is a summary of our 2020 financial results:
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $240.9 million, an increase of $103.1 million, or 75%, as compared to the same period of 2019. This increase was related to amounts attributable to Partners acquired during 2019 and 2020 prior to their having reached the twelve-month owned mark (such amounts, the “Partnership Contribution”) and organic growth. The Partnership Contribution accounted for $81.3 million of the increase to revenues and organic growth accounted for $21.8 million.
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $262.9 million, an increase of $119.9 million, or 84%, as compared to the same period of 2019. The increase in operating expenses was primarily attributable to the Partnership Contribution, which comprised $69.3 million of operating expenses excluding fair value adjustments, an increase in the fair value of contingent consideration of $9.7 million, increased compensation for sales and support, including investments in new product development, and continued investments in Growth Services to support our growth.
Interest expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $7.9 million, a decrease of $2.8 million, or 26%, as compared to the same period of 2019. Interest expense, net decreased as a result of a significantly lower interest rate and lower average borrowings under the Revolving Credit Commitment in effect during the first nine months of 2020 compared to credit facilities in place during 2019. This was offset in part by $400.0 million in term loan borrowings at a 4.75% interest rate in the fourth quarter of 2020 under the New JPM Credit Agreement.
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $29.9 million, an increase of $7.4 million as compared to net loss of $22.5 million in the same period of 2019.
Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $44.0 million, an increase of $15.4 million as compared to the same period of 2019. Adjusted EBITDA Margin was 18% for 2020 and 21% for 2019.
Organic Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $159.7 million as compared to $87.7 million for the same period of 2019. Organic Revenue Growth was $21.8 million, or 16%, for 2020 and $7.8 million, or 10%, for 2019. Refer to the Non-GAAP Financial Measures section below for reconciliations of Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin, Organic Revenue and Organic Revenue Growth to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
PARTNERSHIPS
We completed 16 Partnerships for an aggregate purchase price of $1.0 billion during 2020 and six Partnerships for an aggregate purchase price of $174.1 million during 2019. Partnerships completed during 2020 added $89.9 million of premiums, commissions and fees receivable, $480.0 million of intangible assets and $487.0 million of goodwill to the consolidated balance sheet. We borrowed $400.0 million under the Term Loan B and completed two follow-on public offerings for aggregate primary net proceeds of $449.7 million to assist with funding acquisitions during 2020.
Refer to Note 4 to BRP’s consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on the Partnerships that we have completed during 2020.
NOVEL CORONAVIRUS (COVID-19)
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared a novel strain of the coronavirus, COVID-19, a pandemic. This COVID-19 outbreak has become increasingly widespread and severely restricted the level of economic activity around the world. In response to this outbreak, the governments of many countries, states, cities and other geographic regions, including in the United States, have taken preventive or protective actions, such as imposing restrictions on travel and business operations and advising or requiring individuals to limit or forgo their time outside of their homes. In the United States, temporary closures of businesses have been ordered and numerous other businesses have temporarily closed voluntarily. These government actions could severely damage our Clients' businesses.
Our Clients and Colleagues are our first priority and we have taken steps to ensure their safety by implementing a remote work environment for the majority of our Colleagues without disruption to Client service. We have funded the BRP True North Colleague Fund to assist with relief for COVID-19 and other qualifying disasters for our Colleagues experiencing extraordinary hardship and are currently matching Colleague donations dollar-for dollar.
We intend to continue to execute on our strategic plans and operational initiatives during the pandemic. However, given the uncertainty regarding the spread and severity of COVID-19, the duration and scope of the government shutdowns, the nature of societal responses and the adverse effects on the national and global economy, the related financial impact on our business cannot be accurately predicted at this time. The national and global economies have rapidly contracted as a result of COVID-19. The decreased level of economic activity is leading to, and is likely to continue to lead to, a decline in exposure units and rising unemployment. In addition, the uncertainties associated with the protective and preventive measures being put in place or recommended by both governmental entities and other businesses, among other uncertainties, may result in delays or modifications to our plans and initiatives. See Item 1A. “Risk Factors - Risks Relating to our Business - The ongoing novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic could result in declines in business and increases in claims that could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS FOR THE YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 AND 2019
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results and timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under Item 1A. Risk Factors.
The following is a discussion of our consolidated results of operations for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Seasonality
The insurance brokerage market is seasonal and our results of operations are somewhat affected by seasonal trends. Our Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margins are typically highest in the first quarter and lowest in the fourth quarter. This variation is primarily due to fluctuations in our revenues, while overhead remains consistent throughout the year. Our revenues are generally highest in the first quarter due to the impact of contingent payments received in the first quarter from Insurance Company Partners that we cannot readily estimate before receipt without the risk of significant reversal and a higher degree of first quarter policy commencements and renewals in Medicare and certain Middle Market lines of business such as employee benefits and commercial. In addition, a higher proportion of our first quarter revenue is derived from our highest margin businesses. As discussed further below, the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic may skew these general trends due to reduced amounts of new business and reductions in business from existing Clients related to the pandemic.
Partnerships can significantly impact Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margins in a given year and may increase the amount of seasonality within the business, especially results attributable to Partnerships that have not been fully integrated into our business or owned by us for a full year.
Commissions and Fees
We earn commissions and fees by facilitating the arrangement between Insurance Company Partners and individuals or businesses for the carrier to provide insurance to the insured party. Our commissions and fees are usually a percentage of the premium paid by the insured and generally depends on the type of insurance, the particular Insurance Company Partner and the nature of the services provided. Under certain arrangements with Clients, we earn pre-negotiated service fees in lieu of commissions. Additionally, we may also receive from Insurance Company Partners a profit-sharing commission, or straight override, which represent forms of variable consideration associated with the placement of coverage and are based primarily on underwriting results, but may also contain considerations for volume, growth or retention.
Commissions and fees increased by $103.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2019. This increase was related to amounts attributable to Partners acquired during 2019 and 2020 prior to their having reached the twelve-month owned mark (such amounts, the “Partnership Contribution”) and organic growth. The Partnership Contribution accounted for $81.3 million of the increase to revenues and organic growth accounted for $21.8 million.
Major Sources of Commissions and Fees
The following table sets forth our commissions and fees by major source by amount for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Direct bill revenue represents commission revenue earned by providing insurance placement services to Clients, primarily for private risk management, commercial risk management, employee benefits and Medicare insurance types. Direct bill revenue increased by $34.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2019. The Partnership Contribution accounted for $32.7 million of the increase to direct bill revenue and organic growth for direct bill revenue was $1.3 million.
Agency bill revenue primarily represents commission revenue earned by providing insurance placement services to Clients wherein we act as an agent on behalf of the Client. Agency bill revenue increased by $48.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2019. The Partnership Contribution accounted for $34.7 million of the increase to agency bill revenue and organic growth for agency bill revenue was $13.3 million.
Profit-sharing revenue represents bonus-type revenue that is earned by us as a sales incentive provided by certain Insurance Company Partners. Profit-sharing revenue increased by $6.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2019. The Partnership Contribution accounted for $5.3 million of the increase to profit-sharing revenue and organic growth for profit-sharing revenue was $1.5 million.
Policy fee and installment fee revenue represents revenue earned for acting in the capacity of an MGA and providing payment processing and services and other administrative functions on behalf of Insurance Company Partners. Policy fee and installment fee revenue increased by $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2019 from our “MGA of the Future” business, which was acquired April 1, 2019 and resides in our Specialty Operating Group.
Other income consists of Medicare marketing income that is based on agreed-upon cost reimbursement for fulfilling specific targeted marketing campaigns in addition to other fee income and premium financing income generated across all Operating Groups. Other income increased by $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2019. The Partnership Contribution accounted for $5.2 million of the increase to other income and organic growth for other income was $1.1 million.
Commissions, Employee Compensation and Benefits
Commissions, employee compensation and benefits is our largest expense. It consists of (a) base compensation comprising salary, bonuses and benefits paid and payable to Colleagues, commissions paid to Colleagues and outside commissions paid to others; and (b) equity-based compensation associated with the grants of restricted interest awards to senior management, Risk Advisors and executives. We expect to continue to experience a general rise in commissions, employee compensation and benefits expense commensurate with expected growth in our sales and headcount and as a result of increasing employee compensation related to ongoing public company costs. We operate in competitive markets for human capital and need to maintain competitive compensation levels as we expand geographically and create new products and services.
Our compensation arrangements with our employees contain significant bonus or commission components driven by the results of our operations. Therefore, as we grow commissions and fees, we expect compensation costs to rise.
Commissions, employee compensation and benefits expenses increased by $77.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2019. The Partnership Contribution accounted for $52.9 million of the increase to commissions, employee compensation and benefits. In addition, we had higher share-based compensation expense of $3.2 million and higher base compensation of $6.2 million as a result of hiring to support our growth and fill requisite roles as a public company.
Other Operating Expenses
Other operating expenses include travel, accounting, legal and other professional fees, placement fees, rent, office expenses and other costs associated with our operations. Our other operating expenses have increased in absolute terms as a result of ongoing public company costs, including those associated with compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and other regulations governing public companies, increased costs of directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, and increased professional services expenses, particularly associated with the adoption of new accounting standards and integration of acquired businesses. Our occupancy-related costs and professional services expenses, in particular, generally increase or decrease in relative proportion to the number of our employees and the overall size and scale of our business operations. In addition, we have invested in the expansion of our Tampa offices to accommodate our growth plans, which has resulted in an increase to rent expense beginning in April 2020. Certain corporate expenses are allocated to the Operating Groups.
Other operating expenses increased by $23.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2019, which was primarily attributable to increases in professional fees of $10.1 million related to Partnership transactions and public company costs, rent expense of $3.4 million related to expansion of our Tampa offices and through Partnerships, dues and subscriptions of $2.9 million related to investing in technology to support our growth, insurance expense of $1.9 million related to public company costs and our growth, and bank charges of $1.1 million resulting from growth of our renter's insurance business.
Amortization Expense
Amortization expense increased by $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2019. This increase was driven by the capitalization of intangible assets related to Partners acquired during 2019 and 2020.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
Change in fair value of contingent consideration was $20.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $10.8 million for the same period of 2019. The change in fair value of contingent consideration results from fluctuations in the value of the relevant measurement basis, normally revenue or EBITDA, of our Partners.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net decreased by $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2019 resulting from a significantly lower interest rate and lower average borrowings under the Revolving Credit Commitment in effect during the first nine months of 2020 compared to credit facilities in place during 2019. This was offset in part by $400.0 million in term loan borrowings at a 4.75% interest rate in the fourth quarter of 2020 under the New JPM Credit Agreement, which is discussed under the Liquidity and Capital Resources section below.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt was $6.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, of which $6.2 million related to our repayment in full of the outstanding indebtedness under the Villages Credit Agreement in connection with the Initial Public Offering. The remaining loss related to refinancing the Old JPMorgan Credit Agreement on several occasions during 2019.
FINANCIAL CONDITION - COMPARISON OF CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL CONDITION AT DECEMBER 31, 2020 TO DECEMBER 31, 2019.
Our total assets and total liabilities increased $1.1 billion and $598.5 million, respectively, at December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019. The most significant changes in assets and liabilities are described below.
Cash and cash equivalents increased $40.8 million as a result of increased operations related to our 2020 Partners, borrowings under our credit facilities and proceeds from our public offerings, offset by cash consideration paid to acquire our 2020 Partners.
Restricted cash increased $30.2 million as a result of restricted trust accounts related to our 2020 Partnerships.
Premiums, commissions and fees receivable, net increased $96.7 million as a result of our 2020 Partnerships and revenue growth.
Intangible assets, net increased $461.9 million as a result of our 2020 Partnerships, which contributed $480.0 million to gross intangible assets during 2020, offset in part by $19.0 million of amortization during the year.
Goodwill increased $487.0 million as a result of our 2020 Partnerships.
Premiums payable to insurance companies increased $85.0 million as a result of our 2020 Partnerships and revenue growth.
Accrued expenses and other current liabilities increased $35.2 million as a result of higher contract liabilities relating to our revenue growth and new Partners, higher accrued expenses relating to costs associated with being a public company and new Partners, and higher accrued compensation and benefits from 2020 bonus accruals relating to an increase in the number of executives and other Colleagues in 2020 and new Partner costs.
Revolving lines of credit decreased $40.4 million due to the paydown of our revolving credit agreement in connection with our Term Loan B financing.
Long-term debt increased $385.4 million related to our Term Loan B financing.
Contingent earnout liabilities increased $116.1 million primarily as a result of our 2020 Partnerships, which contributed $98.5 million to this obligation, and $20.5 million in fair value adjustments.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin, Organic Revenue, Organic Revenue Growth, Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Diluted Earnings Per Share (“EPS”), are not measures of financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered substitutes for GAAP measures, including commissions and fees (for Organic Revenue and Organic Revenue Growth), net income (loss) (for Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin) net income (loss) attributable to BRP Group, Inc. (for Adjusted Net Income) or diluted earnings (loss) per share ("EPS") (for Adjusted Diluted EPS), which we consider to be the most directly comparable GAAP measures. These non-GAAP financial measures have limitations as analytical tools, and when assessing our operating performance, you should not consider these non-GAAP financial measures in isolation or as substitutes for commissions and fees, net income (loss), net income (loss) attributable to BRP Group, Inc. or other consolidated income statement data prepared in accordance with GAAP. Other companies in our industry may define or calculate these non-GAAP financial measures differently than we do, and accordingly these measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
Adjusted EBITDA eliminates the effects of financing, depreciation, amortization, fair value adjustments, and other noncash items and non-recurring costs. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, change in fair value of contingent consideration and certain items of income and expense, including share-based compensation expense, transaction-related expenses related to Partnerships including severance, and certain non-recurring costs, including those related to raising capital. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is an appropriate measure of operating performance because it eliminates the impact of expenses that do not relate to business performance, and that the presentation of this measure enhances an investor’s understanding of our financial performance.
Adjusted EBITDA Margin is Adjusted EBITDA divided by commissions and fees. Adjusted EBITDA Margin is a key metric used by management and our board of directors to assess our financial performance. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA Margin is an appropriate measure of operating performance because it eliminates the impact of expenses that do not relate to business performance, and that the presentation of this measure enhances an investor’s understanding of our financial performance. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA Margin is helpful in measuring profitability of operations on a consolidated level.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin have important limitations as analytical tools. For example, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin:
•do not reflect any cash capital expenditure requirements for the assets being depreciated and amortized that may have to be replaced in the future;
•do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•do not reflect the impact of certain cash charges resulting from matters we consider not to be indicative of our ongoing operations;
•do not reflect the interest expense or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt;
•do not reflect share-based compensation expense and other non-cash charges; and
•exclude certain tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us.
We calculate Organic Revenue Growth based on commissions and fees for the relevant period by excluding the first twelve months of commissions and fees generated from new Partners. Organic Revenue Growth is the change in Organic Revenue period-to-period, with prior period results adjusted for Organic Revenues that were excluded in the prior period because the relevant Partners had not yet reached the twelve-month owned mark, but which have reached the twelve-month owned mark in the current period. For example, revenues from a Partner acquired on June 1, 2019 are excluded from Organic Revenue for 2019. However, after June 1, 2020, results from June 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 for such Partners are compared to results from June 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020 for purposes of calculating Organic Revenue Growth in 2020. Organic Revenue Growth is a key metric used by management and our board of directors to assess our financial performance. We believe that Organic Revenue and Organic Revenue Growth are appropriate measures of operating performance as they allow investors to measure, analyze and compare growth in a meaningful and consistent manner.
Adjusted Net Income is presented for the purpose of calculating Adjusted Diluted EPS. We define Adjusted Net Income as net income (loss) attributable to BRP Group, Inc. adjusted for amortization, change in fair value of contingent consideration and certain items of income and expense, including share-based compensation expense, transaction-related expenses related to Partnerships including severance, and certain non-recurring costs that, in the opinion of management, significantly affect the period-over-period assessment of operating results, and the related tax effect of those adjustments.
Adjusted Diluted EPS measures our per share earnings excluding certain expenses as discussed above and assuming all shares of Class B common stock were exchanged for Class A common stock. Adjusted Diluted EPS is calculated as Adjusted Net Income divided by adjusted dilutive weighted-average shares outstanding. We believe Adjusted Diluted EPS is useful to investors because it enables them to better evaluate per share operating performance across reporting periods.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
The following table reconciles Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin to net loss, which we consider to be the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure to Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin:
Organic Revenue and Organic Revenue Growth
The following table reconciles Organic Revenue to commissions and fees, which we consider to be the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure to Organic Revenue:
__________
(1) Includes the first twelve months of such commissions and fees generated from newly acquired Partners.
(2) Organic Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 used to calculate Organic Revenue Growth for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $137.9 million, which is adjusted to reflect revenues from Partnerships that reached the twelve-month owned mark during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Diluted EPS
The following table reconciles Adjusted Net Income to net loss attributable to BRP Group, Inc. and reconciles Adjusted Diluted EPS to diluted net loss per share attributable to BRP Group, Inc. Class A common stock:
___________
(1) Represents corporate income taxes at assumed effective tax rate of 9.9% applied to adjusted pre-tax income.
(2) Assumes the full exchange of Class B shares for Class A common stock pursuant to the Amended LLC Agreement.
OPERATING GROUP RESULTS
Commissions and Fees
In the Middle Market, MainStreet and Specialty Operating Groups, the Company generates commissions and fees from insurance placement under both agency bill and direct bill arrangements. In addition, BRP generates profit sharing income in each of those segments based on either the underlying book of business or performance, such as loss ratios. In the Middle Market Operating Group only, the Company generates fees from service fee and consulting arrangements. Service fee arrangements are in place with certain customers in lieu of commission arrangements.
In the Medicare Operating Group, BRP generates commissions and fees in the form of direct bill insurance placement and marketing income. Marketing income is earned through co-branded marketing campaigns with the Company’s Insurance Company Partners.
The following table sets forth our commissions and fees by Operating Group by amount and as a percentage of our commissions and fees:
Commissions and fees increased across all Operating Groups for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2019. The Partnership Contribution accounted for $43.6 million, $26.8 million, $3.4 million and $7.5 million to the Middle Market, Specialty, MainStreet and Medicare Operating Groups, respectively, during 2020. The remaining variances across the Operating Groups are attributable to organic growth. Early indicators show that continued COVID-19 protocols, which have reduced our Medicare agents' abilities to meet person-to-person in our normal venues, have reduced our lead flow and impacted our ability to sell new business during the 2021 Annual Enrollment Period.
The Middle Market and MainStreet Operating Groups had poor loss trends in our Florida-based personal lines businesses and private risk business in the first half of 2020 in addition to decreased underwriting in the Florida market by our Insurance Company Partners. We expect rate pressure in the Florida market to increase base commissions and fees in 2021 for those Operating Groups; however, rate pressure may also negatively impact Client retention in that period.
Revenue reported for Corporate and Other relates to the elimination of intercompany revenue. The Middle Market Operating Group recorded intercompany commissions and fees from activity with the Specialty Operating Group of $507,000; the MainStreet Operating Group recorded intercompany commissions and fees from activity with the Middle Market Operating Group of $200,000; and the Medicare Operating Group recorded intercompany commissions and fees from activity within the Medicare Operating Group of $324,000. These amounts were eliminated through Corporate and Other.
Policies in force for the MSI Partnership grew by 149,779, or 40%, to 524,370 at December 31, 2020 from 374,591 at December 31, 2019. Since the MSI Partnership was not completed until April 2019, the 40% policies in force growth was calculated including periods during which MSI was not owned by the Company.
Commissions, Employee Compensation and Benefits
The following table sets forth our commissions, employee compensation and benefits by Operating Group by amount and as a percentage of our commissions, employee compensation and benefits:
Commissions, employee compensation and benefits expenses increased across all Operating Groups for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2019. The Partnership Contribution accounted for $25.7 million, $20.0 million, $1.8 million and $5.5 million to the Middle Market, Specialty, MainStreet and Medicare Operating Groups, respectively. Commissions, employee compensation and benefits expenses also increased in the Middle Market, Specialty and MainStreet Operating Groups as a result of continued investments in Growth Services to support our growth, which costs are primarily allocated among the Operating Groups, and continued investment in sales and service talent.
Commissions, employee compensation and benefits expenses for Corporate and Other increased as a result of hiring new roles necessary as a public company and due to $3.2 million of additional share-based compensation expense incurred during 2020.
Other Operating Expenses
The following table sets forth our other operating expenses by Operating Group by amount and as a percentage of our operating expenses:
Other operating expenses increased across all Operating Groups for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2019. Middle Market increases were driven by higher costs for professional fees of $3.6 million, rent expense of $1.4 million, and dues and subscriptions of $1.1 million. Specialty increases were driven by higher costs for bank charges of $1.0 million, licensing and miscellaneous taxes of $296,000, consulting of $295,000, rent expense of $289,000, and dues and subscriptions of $197,000. MainStreet increases were driven by higher costs for dues and subscriptions of $351,000 and rent expense of $213,000. Medicare increases were driven by higher costs for rent expense of $420,000, professional fees of $320,000, advertising and marketing of $268,000 and licensing and miscellaneous taxes of $133,000.
Other operating expenses in Corporate and Other increased due to higher costs for professional fees of $6.3 million, insurance expense of $1.6 million, dues and subscriptions of $1.1 million and rent expense of $1.0 million, primarily as a result of being a public company and an increased level of partnership activity during 2020.
Amortization Expense
The following table sets forth our amortization by Operating Group by amount and as a percentage of our amortization:
Amortization expense increased across all Operating Groups for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2018. These increases were driven by amortization related to $459.1 million, $7.4 million and $13.5 million of intangible assets capitalized in connection with Middle Market, Specialty and Medicare Partnerships, respectively, during 2020.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
The following table sets forth our change in fair value of contingent consideration by Operating Group by amount and as a percentage of our change in fair value of contingent consideration:
__________
n/m not meaningful
The change in fair value of contingent consideration results from fluctuations in the value of the relevant measurement basis, normally revenue or EBITDA of our Partners. The Specialty Operating Group recorded a loss of $16.8 million during 2020 as a result of a higher estimate for the contingent consideration liability of the MSI Partnership related to growth in MSI's business.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our primary liquidity needs for the foreseeable future will include cash to (i) provide capital to facilitate the organic growth of our business and to fund future Partnerships, (ii) pay operating expenses, including cash compensation to our employees and expenses related to being a public company, (iii) make payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement, (iv) pay interest and principal due on borrowings under the New JPM Credit Agreement, (v) pay contingent earnout liabilities, and (vi) pay income taxes. We have historically financed our operations and funded our debt service through the sale of our insurance products and services. In addition, we financed significant cash needs to fund growth through the acquisition of Partners through debt and equity financing.
On June 29, 2020, we completed a public offering of 13,225,000 shares of our Class A common stock, including 1,725,000 shares sold pursuant to the underwriters’ over-allotment option. The shares were sold at an offering price of $13.25 per share for net proceeds of $166.5 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $7.9 million and offering expenses of $798,000. We purchased 2,475,000 LLC Units from certain of our founders in connection with the offering.
On December 11, 2020, we completed a public offering of 10,062,500 shares of our Class A common stock, including 1,312,500 shares sold pursuant to the underwriters’ over-allotment option. The shares were sold at an offering price of $29.50 per share for net proceeds of $283.2 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $12.6 million and offering expenses of $1.1 million. We purchased 1,616,667 LLC Units from certain of our founders, executive officers and their affiliated entities in connection with the offering.
As of December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents were $108.5 million. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents, cash flow from operations and available borrowings under the New JPM Credit Agreement will be sufficient to fund our working capital and meet our commitments for the foreseeable future. However, we expect that we will require additional funding to continue to execute on our Partnership strategy. Such funding could include the incurrence of additional debt or the issuance of equity. Additional funds may not be available on a timely basis, on favorable terms, or at all, and such funds, if raised, may not be sufficient to enable us to continue to implement our long-term Partnership strategy. If we are not able to raise funds when needed, we could be forced to delay or reduce the number of Partnerships that we complete.
See Item 1A. “Risk Factors - Risks Relating to our Business - We may not be able to successfully identify and acquire Partners or integrate Partners into our company, and we may become subject to certain liabilities assumed or incurred in connection with our Partnerships that could harm our business, results of operations and financial condition.”
New JPM Credit Agreement
On October 14, 2020, we entered into the New JPM Credit Agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., to provide new senior secured credit facilities in an aggregate principal amount of $800.0 million. The amount consists of (i) a new term loan facility in the principal amount of $400.0 million maturing in 2027 (the “Term Loan B”) and (ii) a new revolving credit facility with commitments in an aggregate principal amount of $400.0 million maturing in 2025 (the “Revolving Facility”). We utilized a portion of the proceeds from the Term Loan B to repay in full our obligations under the Old JPMorgan Credit Agreement and concurrently terminated the existing agreement. The Revolving Facility and the remaining proceeds of the Term Loan B are available to finance working capital needs and for other general corporate purposes of BRP and certain of its subsidiaries (including acquisitions and other investments permitted under the New JPM Credit Agreement.
Interest rates under the Revolving Facility has borrowings accruing interest on amounts drawn at LIBOR plus 200 basis points (“bps”) to LIBOR plus 300 bps based on total net leverage ratio. The Term Loan B bears interest at LIBOR plus 400 bps with a floor of 4.75%. The applicable interest rate on the Term Loan B at December 31, 2020 was 4.75%. BRP will pay a letter of credit fee equal to the margin then in effect with respect to LIBOR loans under the Revolving Facility multiplied by the daily amount available to be drawn under any letter of credit, a fronting fee and any customary documentary and processing charges for any letter of credit issued under the New JPM Credit Agreement.
The outstanding principal balance of the Term Loan B is required to be repaid in equal quarterly installments equal to 0.25% of the original principal amount of the Term Loan B beginning with the fiscal quarter ending December 31, 2020, the balance of which is due at maturity. The Revolving Facility is not subject to amortization.
The Revolving Facility and the Term Loan B are collateralized by a first priority lien on substantially all the assets of BRP, including a pledge of all equity securities of certain of its subsidiaries. The New JPM Credit Agreement contains covenants that, among other things, restrict our ability to make certain restricted payments, incur additional debt, engage in certain asset sales, mergers, acquisitions or similar transactions, create liens on assets, engage in certain transactions with affiliates, change our business, make certain investments or restrict BRP’s ability to make dividends or other distributions to BRP Group. In addition, the New JPM Credit Agreement contains financial covenants requiring us to maintain our Total First Lien Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the New JPM Credit Agreement) at or below 5.00 to 1.00 and Debt Service Coverage Ratio (as defined in the New JPM Credit Agreement) at or above 2.25 to 1.00.
Source and Uses of Cash
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
The primary sources and uses of cash for operating activities are net income adjusted for non-cash items and changes in assets and liabilities, or operating working capital. Net cash provided by operating activities increased $24.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2019 driven by higher accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities balances and a net increase in net loss adjusted for noncash items.
Investing Activities
The primary sources and uses of cash for investing activities relate to cash consideration paid for business combinations and asset acquisitions, as well as capital expenditures. Net cash used in investing activities increased $576.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2019. Cash consideration paid for business combinations and asset acquisitions increased $572.0 million primarily as a result of the 16 Partnerships completed during 2020.
Financing Activities
The primary sources and uses of cash for financing activities relate to the issuance of our Class A common stock, borrowings from and repayment to our credit agreements, payment of debt issuance costs, payment of contingent earnout consideration, and other equity transactions. Net cash provided by financing activities increased $559.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2019. Proceeds from our public offerings netted us an additional $205.4 million during 2020. We used an additional $46.9 million of these proceeds to purchase LLC Units from our shareholders. Net cash received in relation to our credit agreements increased $377.3 million primarily as a result of proceeds from the Term Loan B of $286.3 million. In addition, we had cash payments of $12.5 million related to the repurchase of membership interests from members in 2019.
Contractual Obligations
The following table represents our contractual obligations, aggregated by type, at December 31, 2020:
__________
(1) The Company leases facilities and equipment under non-cancelable operating leases. Rent expense was $7.6 million and $4.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(2) Represents scheduled debt obligation and interest payments.
(3) Includes $164.8 million of current and noncurrent estimated contingent earnout liabilities at December 31, 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not invest in any off-balance sheet vehicles that provide liquidity, capital resources, market or credit risk support, or engage in any activities that expose us to any liability that is not reflected in our consolidated financial statements except for those described under the Contractual Obligations section above.
Dividend Policy
Assuming BRP makes distributions to its members in any given year, the determination to pay dividends, if any, to our Class A common stockholders out of the portion, if any, of such distributions remaining after our payment of taxes, Tax Receivable Agreement payments and expenses (any such portion, an “excess distribution”) will be made at the sole discretion of our board of directors. Our board of directors may change our dividend policy at any time. See Item 5. “Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities - Dividend Policy.”
Tax Receivable Agreement
On October 28, 2019, BRP Group entered into the Tax Receivable Agreement with BRP’s LLC Members that provides for the payment by BRP Group to BRP’s LLC Members of 85% of the amount of cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax or franchise tax that BRP Group actually realizes as a result of (i) any increase in tax basis in BRP assets resulting from (a) acquisitions by BRP Group of BRP’s LLC Units from BRP’s LLC Members in connection with the Initial Public Offering, (b) the acquisition of LLC Units from BRP’s LLC Members using the net proceeds from any future offering, (c) redemptions or exchanges by BRP’s LLC Members of LLC Units and the corresponding number of shares of Class B common stock for shares of Class A common stock or cash or (d) payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement, and (ii) tax benefits related to imputed interest resulting from payments made under the Tax Receivable Agreement.
Holders of BRP’s LLC Units (other than BRP Group) may, subject to certain conditions and transfer restrictions described above, redeem or exchange their LLC Units for shares of Class A common stock of BRP Group on a one-for-one basis. BRP intends to make an election under Section 754 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and the regulations thereunder (the “Code”) effective for each taxable year in which a redemption or exchange of LLC Units for shares of Class A common stock occurs, which is expected to result in increases to the tax basis of the assets of BRP at the time of a redemption or exchange of LLC Units. The redemptions or exchanges are expected to result in increases in the tax basis of the tangible and intangible assets of BRP. These increases in tax basis may reduce the amount of tax that BRP Group would otherwise be required to pay in the future. We have entered into a Tax Receivable Agreement with the BRP’s LLC Members that provides for the payment by us to the BRP’s LLC Members of 85% of the amount of cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax or franchise tax that we actually realize as a result of (i) any increase in tax basis in BRP Group’s assets resulting from (a) the purchase of LLC Units from any of the BRP’s LLC Members using the net proceeds from any future offering, (b) redemptions or exchanges by the BRP’s LLC Members of LLC Units for shares of our Class A common stock or (c) payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement and (ii) tax benefits related to imputed interest deemed arising as a result of payments made under the Tax Receivable Agreement. This payment obligation is an obligation of BRP Group and not of BRP. For purposes of the Tax Receivable Agreement, the cash tax savings in income tax will be computed by comparing the actual income tax liability of BRP Group (calculated with certain assumptions) to the amount of such taxes that BRP Group would have been required to pay had there been no increase to the tax basis of the assets of BRP as a result of the redemptions or exchanges and had BRP Group not entered into the Tax Receivable Agreement. Estimating the amount of payments that may be made under the Tax Receivable Agreement is by its nature imprecise, insofar as the calculation of amounts payable depends on a variety of factors. While the actual increase in tax basis, as well as the amount and timing of any payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement, will vary depending upon a number of factors, including the timing of redemptions or exchanges, the price of shares of our Class A common stock at the time of the redemption or exchange, the extent to which such redemptions or exchanges are taxable, the amount and timing of our income, the tax rates then applicable and the portion of our payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement constituting imputed interest. We anticipate that we will account for the effects of these increases in tax basis and associated payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement arising from future redemptions or exchanges as follows:
•we will record an increase in deferred tax assets for the estimated income tax effects of the increases in tax basis based on enacted federal and state tax rates at the date of the redemption or exchange;
•to the extent we estimate that we will not realize the full benefit represented by the deferred tax asset, based on an analysis that will consider, among other things, our expectation of future earnings, we will reduce the deferred tax asset with a valuation allowance; and
•we will record 85% of the estimated realizable tax benefit (which is the recorded deferred tax asset less any recorded valuation allowance) as an increase to the liability due under the Tax Receivable Agreement and the remaining 15% of the estimated realizable tax benefit as an increase to additional paid-in capital.
All of the effects of changes in any of our estimates after the date of the redemption or exchange will be included in net income. Similarly, the effect of subsequent changes in the enacted tax rates will be included in net income.
Deferred Tax Assets
To determine the realizability of the Company’s deferred tax assets, the Company analyzed if it was in a cumulative pre-tax income or loss position over a three year period (2018, 2019, and 2020). Based on the analysis, the Company is in a pre-tax book loss position, and therefore has determined that its deferred tax assets are not more likely than not to be realized. As the Company emerges from its cumulative loss position, it will reassess the realizability of its deferred tax assets.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP, which requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of commissions and fees and expenses during the reporting period. Our estimates, judgments and assumptions are continually evaluated based on historical experience and factors we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. The results involve judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities not readily apparent from other sources and actual results could differ from those estimates. The areas that we believe are critical accounting estimates, as discussed below, affect the more significant estimates, judgments and assumptions used to prepare our consolidated financial statements. Different assumptions in the application of these policies could result in material changes in our consolidated financial position or consolidated results of operations.
Commissions and Fees Recognition
We earn commission revenue by acting as an agent or broker on behalf of our Clients and Insurance Company Partners to provide insurance placement services to Clients. Commission revenue is usually a percentage of the premium paid by Clients and generally depend upon the type of insurance, the particular insurance company and the nature of the services provided. Commission revenue is earned at a point in time upon the effective date of bound insurance coverage, as no performance obligation exists after coverage is bound. The Company makes its best estimate of direct bill commissions at the policy effective date, particularly in employee benefits within the Middle Market Operating Group, which is subject to change based on enrollment and other factors over the policy period. Commissions revenue is recorded net of an allowance for estimated policy cancellations, which is determined based on an evaluation of historical and current cancellation data. Given a hypothetical 1% increase in our policy cancellation rate, our annual allowance for estimated policy cancellations would have increased by $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
We earn consulting and service fee revenues by negotiating fees in lieu of a commission by providing specialty insurance consulting. Consulting and service fee revenue from certain agreements are recognized over time depending on when the services within the contract are satisfied and when the Company has transferred control of the related services to the customer.
We earn policy fee revenue for acting in the capacity of a managing general agent on behalf of the Insurance Company Partner and fulfilling certain services and administrative functions during the term of the insurance policy. Policy fee revenue is deferred and recognized over the life of the policy. We earn installment fee revenue related to policy premiums paid on an installment basis for payment processing services performed on behalf of the Insurance Company Partner. The Company recognizes installment fee revenue in the period the services are performed.
Profit-sharing commissions represent a form of variable consideration, which includes additional commissions over base commissions received from Insurance Company Partners. Profit-sharing commissions associated with relatively predictable measures are estimated with a constraint applied and recognized at a point in time. The profit-sharing commissions are recorded as the underlying policies that contribute to the achievement of the metric are placed with any adjustments recognized when payments are received or as additional information that affects the estimate becomes available. A constraint of variable consideration is necessary when commissions and fees are subject to significant reversal. Profit-sharing commissions associated with loss performance are uncertain, and therefore, are subject to significant reversal through catastrophic loss season and as loss data remains subject to material change. The constraint is relieved when management estimates commissions and fees that are not subject to significant reversal, which often coincides with the earlier of written notification from the Insurance Company Partner that the target has been achieved or cash collection. Year-end amounts incorporate estimates based on confirmation from Insurance Company Partners after calculation of potential loss ratios that are impacted by catastrophic losses. The consolidated financial statements include estimates that are not subject to significant reversal and incorporates information received from Insurance Company Partners, and where still subject to significant changes in estimates due to loss ratios and external factors that are outside of the Company’s control, a full constraint is applied.
We are entitled to commissions each year for multi-year Medicare contracts. We have applied a constraint to renewal commission that limits commissions and fees recognized on new policies to the policy year in effect, and revenue recognized on renewal policies to the receipt of periodic cash, when a risk of significant reversal exists based on (1) insufficient history; and (2) the influence of external factors outside of our control including policyholder discretion over plans and Insurance Company Partner relationships, political influence, and a contractual provision, which limits our right to receive renewal commissions to ongoing compliance and regulatory approval of the relevant Insurance Company Partner.
Costs to obtain contracts includes compensation in the form of producer commissions paid on new business. These incremental costs are capitalized as deferred commission expense and amortized over five years, which represents management’s estimate of the average period over which a Client maintains its initial coverage relationship with the original Insurance Company Partner. Given a hypothetical one-year increase in the amortization period for deferred commission expense, our annual expense related to deferred commissions would have decreased by $171,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Business Combinations and Purchase Price Allocation
We continue to acquire significant intangible assets through multiple business combinations. The determination of estimated useful lives of intangible assets, the allocation of purchase price to intangible assets and the determination of the fair value of contingent earnout liabilities require significant judgment and affects the amount of future amortization, potential impairment charges and net fair value gain or loss.
Business combination purchase prices are typically based upon a multiple of average adjusted EBITDA or commission and fees earned over a one to three-year period within a minimum and maximum price range. We perform a purchase price allocation in connection with our business combinations, in connection with which we record the fair value of the identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, including contingent consideration relating to potential earnout provisions. The excess of the purchase price of the business combination over the fair value of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
Intangible assets generally consist of purchased customer accounts, distributor relationships, carrier relationships, software and trade names. Purchased customer accounts include the records and files obtained from acquired businesses that contain information about insurance policies and the related insured parties that are essential to policy renewals. We assess the fair value of purchased customer accounts by comparison of a reasonable multiple applied to either the corresponding commissions and fees or EBITDA in addition to considering the estimated future cash flows expected to be received over the estimated future renewal periods of the insurance policies comprising those purchased customer accounts. The valuation of purchased customer accounts involves significant estimates and assumptions concerning matters such as cancellation frequency, expenses and discount rates. Any change in these assumptions could affect the carrying value of purchased customer accounts. Distributor relationships consist of relationships with distributors that were not previously established. Carrier relationships consist of relationships with Insurance Company Partners that were not previously established. Trade names consist of acquired business names with potential customer base recognition. Purchased customer accounts, distributor relationships, carrier relationships and trade names are amortized on a basis consistent with the underlying cash flows over the related estimated lives of between one and twenty years. Software is amortized on the straight-line basis over an estimated useful life of two to five years.
The fair value of contingent earnout liabilities and contingently returnable consideration is based upon estimated payments expected to be or paid to, or clawed back from, the sellers of the acquired businesses as measured by expected future cash flow projections under various scenarios. We use a probability weighted value analysis as a valuation technique to convert future estimated cash flows under various scenarios to a single present value amount. We assess the fair value of these liabilities and assets at each balance sheet date based on the expected performance of the associated business and any changes in fair value are recorded through change in fair value of contingent consideration in the consolidated statements of comprehensive loss.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets Including Goodwill
In applying the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations, the excess of the purchase price of an acquisition over the fair value of the identifiable tangible and intangible assets and liabilities acquired is assigned to goodwill. Intangible assets are initially valued at fair value using generally accepted valuation methods appropriate for the type of intangible asset. Definite-lived intangible assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives and evaluated for impairment whenever an event occurs that indicates the asset may be impaired.
Goodwill is not amortized but rather is evaluated for impairment at least annually or more frequently if indicators of impairment are present. Indicators of impairment include a reduction of expected future cash flows of our reporting units, a significant negative trend in the economy or insurance industry, and a sustained significant decrease in our market capitalization.
We test for goodwill impairment at the reporting unit level, which is an Operating Group or one level below an Operating Group. We have four reporting units, which are also our Operating Groups. We have the option of performing a qualitative assessment to determine whether a quantitative impairment test is necessary. If, after assessing qualitative factors, we determine it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than the carrying amount, then we proceed to the quantitative assessment.
The quantitative goodwill impairment test requires the fair value of each reporting unit to be compared to its book or carrying value. If the carrying value of a reporting unit is determined to be less than the fair value of the reporting unit, goodwill is deemed not to be impaired. If the carrying value of a reporting unit is greater than the fair value, an impairment charge is recorded for the amount that the carrying amount of the reporting unit, including goodwill, exceeds its fair value, limited to amount of goodwill of the reporting unit.
During 2020, we performed an impairment evaluation for each of our reporting units beginning with a qualitative assessment. The qualitative factors we considered included general economic conditions, limitations on accessing capital, industry and market considerations, cost factors such as commissions expense that could have a negative effect on future cash flows, overall financial performance including declining cash flows and a decline in actual or anticipated commissions and fees, earnings or key statistics, and other entity-specific events such as changes in management and loss of key personnel or customers. We determined that based on the overall results and outlook of our reporting units, company and industry, including consideration of the effect of our new Partnerships, there was no indication of goodwill impairment at December 31, 2020. As such, no further testing was required.
We review our definite-lived intangible assets and other long-lived assets for impairment whenever an event occurs that indicates the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. There were no indications that the carrying values of our definite-lived intangible assets or other long-lived assets were impaired at December 31, 2020. Any impairment charges that we may record in the future could materially impact our results of operations.
Tax Receivable Agreement Liability
On October 28, 2019, BRP Group entered into the Tax Receivable Agreement with BRP’s LLC Members that provides for the payment by BRP Group to BRP’s LLC Members of 85% of the amount of cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax or franchise tax that BRP Group actually realizes as a result of (i) any increase in tax basis in BRP assets resulting from (a) acquisitions by BRP Group of BRP’s LLC Units from BRP’s LLC Members in connection with the Initial Public Offering, (b) the acquisition of LLC Units from BRP’s LLC Members using the net proceeds from any future offering, (c) redemptions or exchanges by BRP’s LLC Members of LLC Units and the corresponding number of shares of Class B common stock for shares of Class A common stock or cash or (d) payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement, and (ii) tax benefits related to imputed interest resulting from payments made under the Tax Receivable Agreement.
The actual increase in tax basis, as well as the amount and timing of any payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement, will vary depending on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the timing of any future redemptions, exchanges or purchases of the LLC Units held by BRP’s LLC Members, the price of our Class A common stock at the time of the purchase, redemption or exchange, the extent to which redemptions or exchanges are taxable, the amount and timing of the taxable income that we generate in the future, the tax rates then applicable and the portion of our payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement constituting imputed interest.
Share-Based Compensation
Share-based compensation for periods subsequent to the Initial Public Offering includes restricted stock awards to Colleagues and Class A common stock awards to our board of directors. We measure share-based compensation expense at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and recognize compensation expense over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. We use the ratable method to recognize compensation expense for equity awards with service conditions and performance conditions.
Share-based compensation for periods prior to the Initial Public Offering includes Management Incentive Units awards. These awards vest according to time-based benchmarks or performance-based benchmarks that vary between issuance. The fair value of each time-based and performance-based Management Incentive Unit was estimated on the grant date using a Black-Scholes Model, which requires the input of highly complex and subjective variables, and includes assumptions for expected volatility, expected dividend yield, expected term and the risk-free interest rate. Expected volatility was based on the historical volatility of industry peers. The expected term was calculated by analyzing historical exercise data and obtaining the weighted average of the holding period for similar awards. The risk-free interest rate was based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of the grant.
Income Taxes
We record a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations. We compute the provision for income taxes using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using the currently enacted tax rates in each jurisdiction that applies to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled.
We are required to establish a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets and record a charge to income if it is determined, based on available evidence at the time the determination is made, that it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Deferred taxes in 2019 have been reduced by a full valuation allowance due to a determination that it is more likely than not that all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized based on the weight of all available evidence.
Our evaluation of the realizability of the deferred tax assets focuses on identifying significant, objective evidence that we will more likely than not be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future. We consider both positive and negative evidence when evaluating the need for a valuation allowance, which is highly judgmental and requires subjective weighting of such evidence.
EMERGING GROWTH COMPANY STATUS
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups (“JOBS”) Act, and we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period for the implementation of new or revised accounting standards. We have elected to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards and as a result of this election, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates. We have also elected to take advantage of some of the reduced regulatory and reporting requirements of emerging growth companies pursuant to the JOBS Act, including not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation and exemptions from the requirements of holding non-binding advisory votes on executive compensation and golden parachute payments, if applicable.
We may take advantage of these exemptions up until the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of our Initial Public Offering or such earlier time that we are no longer an emerging growth company. We would cease to be an emerging growth company if we have more than $1.07 billion in annual revenue, we have more than $700.0 million in market value of our stock held by non-affiliates (and we have been a public company for at least 12 months and have filed one annual report on Form 10-K) or we issue more than $1.0 billion of non-convertible debt securities over a three-year period.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Please refer to Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements that may impact us.