ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations of Brain Scientific Inc. together with our financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Risk Factors” section of this Report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Forward Looking Statements
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in this MD&A includes “forward-looking statements.” Statements which are not historical reflect our current expectations and projections about our future results, performance, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations, prospects and opportunities and are based upon information currently available to us and our management and their interpretation of what is believed to be significant factors affecting our existing and proposed business, including many assumptions regarding future events. Actual results, performance, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations, prospects and opportunities could differ materially and perhaps substantially from those expressed in, or implied by, these forward-looking statements as a result of various risks, uncertainties and other factors, including those risks described in detail in the section entitled “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Forward-looking statements, which involve assumptions and describe our future plans, strategies, and expectations, are generally identifiable by use of the words “may,” “should,” “would,” “will,” “could,” “scheduled,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “believe,” “intend,” “seek,” or “project” or the negative of these words or other variations on these words or comparable terminology.
In light of these risks and uncertainties, and especially given the nature of our existing and proposed business, there can be no assurance that the forward-looking statements contained in this section and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K will in fact occur. Potential investors should not place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements. Except as expressly required by the federal securities laws, there is no undertaking to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, changed circumstances or any other reason.
Overview
We are a neurodiagnostic and predictive technology platform company seeking to provide a centralized platform for data acquisition and analysis of EEG data that combines innovative medical device technologies with cloud-based telehealth services. Both our NeuroCap, a pre-gelled disposable EEG headset, and NeuroEEG, a 16 channel, portable, cloud-enabled data acquisition platform for EEG activity, received FDA clearance to market in 2018.
The Company is not currently offering any data analysis services. The Company is primarily focused on establishing diagnostic protocols to identify pathological risk factors involving the brain, and driving novel insights into cognitive health that support early treatment of neurological disorders.
In 2019, we commenced acting as a distributor of third-party medical devices in Russia (including those purchased from a company affiliated with one of our officers and directors), which resulted in primarily all of our revenue for 2019. Sales in Russia is also the majority of all revenue in 2020 (except for $7,498 that was from sales from the U.S. operating subsidiary). While we intend to continue the sale of third party medical devices, we do not intend for it to be our primary source of revenue in the long-term and expect to curtail or cease this line of operations as, if and when we commence generating material, recurring revenues from our products, of which we can give no assurance. We also can give no assurance that any revenue we generate from so acting as a distributor of third-party medical devices will continue, will continue to be material or will be sufficient to enable us to continue our operations. We have no supply or distribution agreements in place with respect to such business. In the event that we see an opportunity to sell such products, we procure them and then re-sell them.
We have very limited resources. To date, our primary activities have been limited to, and our limited resources have been dedicated to, performing business and financial planning, raising capital, recruiting personnel, negotiating with business partners and the licensors of our intellectual property and conducting development activities, although we have acted as a distributor of third-party medical devices in Russia (including those purchased from a company affiliated with one of our officers and directors) which has generated revenue for us. Our first products, the NeuroCap and NeuroEEG, are ready for commercialization and sale and we have commenced some non-recurring, initial sales. Our other products are still being tested or are still under development.
We have incurred losses since inception and had an accumulated deficit of $7,956,862 as of December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of expenses incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative expenses associated with our operations. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating and net losses for the foreseeable future.
Historically, our primary source of cash has been proceeds from the sale of convertible promissory notes. For the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we issued convertible promissory notes for aggregate gross proceeds of $897,700 and $630,000, respectively, to fund our operations. In addition, during the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we borrowed an aggregate of $0 and $273,084, respectively, from related parties.
We need to obtain substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations through public or private equity or debt financings or other sources, which may include collaborations with third parties. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds when needed on favorable terms or at all. Our failure to raise such capital as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to develop and commercialize our products and future products and our ability to pursue our business strategy. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources” below.
Financial Overview
Revenue
To date, we have generated approximately $1,100,000 of revenue, of which approximately $544,000 was generated in 2020 primarily through our acting as a distributor of third-party medical devices in Russia (including those purchased from a company affiliated with one of our officers and directors) while we continue to commercialize our Products. While we intend to continue generating revenues through the sale of third party medical devices, we do not intend for it to be our primary source of revenue in the long-term. We do not expect to generate recurring, material revenue from our Products unless or until we successfully commercialize our Products. If we fail to successfully commercialize our developed Products or fail to complete the development of any other product candidate we may pursue in the future, in a timely manner, or fail to obtain regulatory approval, we may not be able to solely rely on generating substantial and material revenue from the distribution of third-party medical devices.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs for personnel in functions not directly associated with research and development activities. Other significant costs include legal fees relating to corporate matters, intellectual property costs, professional fees for consultants assisting with regulatory, clinical, product development and financial matters, and product costs. We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will significantly increase in the future to support our continued research and development activities, commercialization of our Products, if approved, and the increased costs of operating as a public company. These increases will include increased costs related to the hiring of additional personnel and fees for legal and professional services, as well as other public company related costs.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist of expenses incurred in performing research and development activities in developing our Products. Research and development expenses include compensation and benefits for research and development employees, overhead expenses, cost of laboratory supplies, clinical trial and related clinical manufacturing expenses, costs related to regulatory operations, fees paid to consultants, and other outside expenses. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred and costs incurred by third parties are expensed as the contracted work is performed.
We expect our research and development expenses to significantly increase over the next several years as we develop our Products and conduct preclinical testing and clinical trials and will depend on the duration, costs and timing to complete our preclinical programs and clinical trials.
Interest Expense
Interest expense primarily consists of amortized note issuance costs and interest costs related to the convertible notes we issued in 2020 and 2019. The convertible notes bear interest at fixed rate ranging from 8%-12% per annum.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth the results of operations of the Company for the years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Revenues
Revenue for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 was $544,275 compared to $489,202 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019. In the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we generated primarily all of our revenue through acting as a distributor of third-party medical devices in Russia (including those purchased from a company affiliated with one of our offices and directors), and we did not have any sales of our Products. The increase in revenues in the current year resulted from increased sales of third-party medical devices in Russia.
Cost of goods sold
Cost of goods sold were $409,302 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $387,194 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase in sales of third-party medical devices in Russia.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses were $275,926 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $103,616 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase in product development activities.
Professional fees
Professional fees were $478,461 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $255,332 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019. In the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, professional fees were primarily related to approximately $238,000 in legal expenses and approximately $178,000 in accounting expenses. In the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, professional fees were primarily related to approximately $96,000 in legal expenses and approximately $108,000 in accounting expenses. The increase in professional fees in the current year was due primarily to increased fund-raising activities and agreements.
Sales and marketing expenses
Sales and marketing expenses were $244,774 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $95,165 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to a focus on increasing sales of the Company’s products, and the Company expects that marketing expenses will continue to increase through 2021.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses were $930,138 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $532,312 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019. In the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, general and administrative expenses were primarily related to approximately $379,000 in payroll related expenses, approximately $76,000 of stock-based compensation, approximately $66,000 in travel costs, approximately $192,000 in consulting fees and approximately $54,000 in insurance expense. In the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, general and administrative expenses were primarily related to approximately $274,000 in payroll related expenses, approximately $13,000 of stock-based compensation, approximately $48,000 in travel costs, approximately $45,000 in consulting fees and approximately $66,000 in insurance expense. The increase in spending in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to an increase in payroll related expenses and consulting costs.
Interest expense
Interest expense, for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 was $3,526,325, the majority of which related to the Company’s convertible and non-convertible promissory notes. Interest expense, for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 was $32,922, the majority of which related to the Company’s convertible promissory notes. The increase was due to the issuance of several convertible and non-convertible notes during the year ended December 31, 2020 and debt issuance costs related to those notes.
Other income
Other income for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 was $8,260 compared to $2,108 in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019. Other income in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 related primarily to a grant received from the Small Business Association. The company recorded $2,108 in other income related to the write of off a payable in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
While we have generated revenue in 2020, we anticipate that we will continue to incur losses for the foreseeable future. Furthermore, substantially all of such revenue was generated through acting as a distributor of third-party medical devices in Russia, and we did not have any sales of our Products. We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially as we develop our Products and pursue pre-clinical testing and clinical trials, seek any further regulatory approvals, contract to manufacture any products, establish our own sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure to commercialize our Products, hire additional staff, add operational, financial and management systems and operate as a public company.
Historically, our primary source of cash has been proceeds from the sale of convertible promissory notes and related party loans.
During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 we issued $1,072,180 of convertible promissory notes including $64,680 of amendments to a previous note and an additional $320,000 of non-convertible promissory notes. Net cash proceeds from those notes totaled $1,182,700. Several of the aforementioned notes were issued with attached warrants.
We have also from time to time issued shares of our common stock to individuals and entities as payment for services rendered to us in lieu of cash.
We have no current source of revenue to sustain our present activities other than as acting as a distributor of medical devices in Russia (including those purchased from a company affiliated with one of our offices and directors), which is not our primary business goal, and we do not expect to generate material revenue, from our Products until, and unless, the FDA or other regulatory authorities approve our Products under development and we successfully commercialize our Products. Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs through our distributorship revenue, a combination of equity (preferred stock or common stock) and debt financings as well as collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. We do not have any committed external source of funds. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a common stockholder. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third-party partners, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our Product development, future commercialization efforts, or grant rights to develop and market our cortical strip, grid electrode and depth electrode technology that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Our independent registered public accounting firm included an explanatory paragraph in its report on our financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, noting the existence of substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. This uncertainty arose from management’s review of our results of operations and financial condition and its conclusion that, based on our operating plans, we did not have sufficient existing working capital to sustain operations for a period of twelve months from the date of the issuance of these financial statements.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, without raising additional funds or generating revenues, will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses only to approximately May 2021.
During 2019, we raised $630,000 from issuances of convertible promissory notes. During 2020 we raised a total of $1,182,700 from issuances of convertible and non-convertible promissory notes. We recently launched a Regulation A+ offering pursuant to which the Company is offering up to a maximum of 1,111,111 units, with each unit consisting of five shares of common stock, par value $0.001, and a warrant to purchase one share of common stock, par value $0.001, at an offering price of $9.00 per unit or $1.80 per share of common stock, for a maximum aggregate offering of $10,000,000, the success of which cannot by assured by the Company. We may obtain additional financing in the future through the issuance of our common stock, through other equity or debt financings or through collaborations or partnerships with other companies. We may not be able to raise additional capital on terms acceptable to us, or at all, and any failure to raise capital as and when needed could compromise our ability to execute on our business plan.
The development of our Products is subject to numerous uncertainties, and we have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be substantially different than we currently anticipate and could use our cash resources sooner than we expect. Additionally, the process of developing medical devices is costly, and the timing of progress in pre-clinical tests and clinical trials is uncertain. Our ability to successfully transition to profitability will be dependent upon achieving a level of Product sales adequate to support our cost structure. We cannot assure you that we will ever be profitable or generate positive cash flow from operating activities.
Net cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $1,173,409 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $854,726 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This fluctuation is primarily due to an increase in net loss of $3,280,920, an increase in change in fair value of derivatives of $1,360,754 in fiscal 2020 partially offset by increases in amortization of debt discount and non-cash interest expense of $3,312,733 and accounts payable and accounts payable related party of approximately $556,863 in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net cash used in investing activities
There was no cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net cash used in investing activities was $1,005 for the year ended December 31, 2019 and consisted of the purchase of property and equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $1,189,367 for the year ended December 31, 2020, which consisted of the sale of the Company’s convertible promissory notes for aggregate gross proceeds of $897,700 proceeds from non-convertible notes in the amount of $285,000, and the proceeds of $6,667 from a Small Business Association loan.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $953,238 for the year ended December 31, 2019, which primarily consisted of the sale of the Company’s convertible promissory notes for aggregate gross proceeds of $630,000 and proceeds from related party loans in the amount of $273,084.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the dates of the balance sheets and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. In accordance with GAAP, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances at the time such estimates are made. Actual results may differ materially from our estimates and judgments under different assumptions or conditions. We periodically review our estimates in light of changes in circumstances, facts and experience. The effects of material revisions in estimates are reflected in our financial statements prospectively from the date of the change in estimate.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Report, we believe the following are the critical accounting policies used in the preparation of our financial statements that require significant estimates and judgments.
Use of Estimates: The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Significant estimates in the accompanying consolidated financial statements include the estimates of useful lives for depreciation and assumptions used in the valuation of options and warrants.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments: Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset, or paid to transfer a liability, in an orderly transaction between market participants. A fair value hierarchy has been established for valuation inputs that gives the highest priority to quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs. The fair value hierarchy is as follows:
● Level 1 Inputs - Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that the reporting entity has the ability to access at the measurement date.
● Level 2 Inputs - Inputs other than quoted prices included in Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly. These might include quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets, quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active, inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or liability (such as interest rates, volatilities, prepayment speeds, credit risks, etc.) or inputs that are derived principally from or corroborated by market data by correlation or other means.
● Level 3 Inputs - Unobservable inputs for determining the fair values of assets or liabilities that reflect an entity’s own assumptions about the assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the assets or liabilities.
Financial instruments consist of cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable and borrowings. The fair value of current financial assets and current financial liabilities approximates their carrying value because of the short-term maturity of these financial instruments.
Income Taxes. The Company accounts for income taxes under the asset and liability method, as required by the accounting standard for income taxes, ASC 740. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis, as well as net operating loss carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
Stock Based Compensation. The Company accounts for the grant of restricted stock awards in accordance with ASC 718, “Compensation-Stock Compensation.” ASC 718 requires companies to recognize in the statement of operations the grant-date fair value of equity based compensation. The expense is recognized over the period during which the employee is required to provide service in exchange for the compensation. Any remaining unrecognized balance will be recognized ratably over the life of the vesting period and is a reduction of stockholders’ equity.
The Company accounts for non-employee share-based awards in accordance with the measurement and recognition criteria of ASC 505-50 “Equity-Based Payments to Non-Employees.”
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-13, “Changes to Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurements,” which will improve the effectiveness of disclosure requirements for recurring and nonrecurring fair value measurements. The standard removes, modifies, and adds certain disclosure requirements and is effective for the Company beginning on January 1, 2020. This standard did not have a material impact on the Company’s condensed consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.