Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion of our results of operations and financial condition in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes, “Risk Factors,” “Selected Financial Data,” and “Business” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The forward-looking statements are not historical facts, but rather are based on current expectations, estimates, assumptions and projections about our industry, business and future financial results. Our actual results could differ materially from the results contemplated by these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K entitled “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements.”
Introduction
We are a commercial real estate (“CRE”) credit real estate investment trust (“REIT”) focused on originating, acquiring, financing and managing a diversified portfolio consisting primarily of CRE debt investments and net leased properties predominantly in the United States. CRE debt investments primarily consist of first mortgage loans, which we expect to be our primary investment strategy. Additionally, we may also selectively originate mezzanine loans and make preferred equity investments, which may include profit participations. The mezzanine loans and preferred equity investments may be in conjunction with our origination of corresponding first mortgages on the same properties. Net leased properties consist of CRE properties with long-term leases to tenants on a net-lease basis, where such tenants generally will be responsible for property operating expenses such as insurance, utilities, maintenance capital expenditures and real estate taxes. We will continue to target net leased equity investments on a selective basis. We also currently have investments in CRE debt securities primarily consisting of commercial mortgage-backed securities (“CMBS”) (including “B pieces” of a CMBS securitization pool) or CRE collateralized loan obligations (“CLOs”) (including the junior tranches collateralized by pools of CRE debt investments). However, we have continued to reduce our CMBS holdings since the second quarter of 2020, and have two available for sale CMBS securities in addition to our “B pieces” of a CMBS securitization pool at December 31, 2020. Additionally, we have fully repaid any remaining CMBS securities repurchase financing. Any future investments in more highly rated investment grade CRE debt securities would be selective and opportunistic.
We were organized in the state of Maryland on August 23, 2017. On January 31, 2018, we completed the Combination among the CLNY Contributed Portfolio, the RED REIT Contributed Entities, NorthStar I and NorthStar II, and the other related transactions, in an all-stock exchange. We elected to be taxed as a REIT under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, beginning with our taxable year ended December 31, 2018. We conduct all our activities and hold substantially all our assets and liabilities through our operating subsidiary, Credit RE Operating Company, LLC (the “OP”). At December 31, 2020, we owned 97.7% of the OP, as its sole managing member. The remaining 2.3% is owned primarily by our affiliate as noncontrolling interests.
We are externally managed by a subsidiary of Colony Capital, a New York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”)-listed global real estate and investment management firm. As of December 31, 2020, Colony Capital owned approximately 36.5% of our common equity on a fully diluted basis.
Our Business Segments
We present our business segments as follows:
•Core Portfolio, which consists of the following four segments:
◦Senior and Mezzanine Loans and Preferred Equity-CRE debt investments including senior mortgage loans, mezzanine loans, and preferred equity interests as well as participations in such loans. The segment also includes acquisition, development and construction (“ADC”) arrangements accounted for as equity method investments.
◦CRE Debt Securities- securities investments currently consisting of BBB and some BB rated CMBS (including Non-Investment Grade “B-pieces” of a CMBS securitization pool) or CRE CLOs (including the junior tranches thereof, collateralized by pools of CRE debt investments).
◦Net Leased Real Estate-direct investments in commercial real estate with long-term leases to tenants on a net lease basis, where such tenants generally will be responsible for property operating expenses such as insurance, utilities, maintenance, capital expenditures and real estate taxes.
◦Corporate-includes corporate-level asset management and other fees including expenses related to our secured revolving credit facility, related party and general and administrative expenses to the Core Portfolio only.
•Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio-segment consists of direct investments in operating real estate such as multi-tenant office. It also includes two portfolios of private equity funds (“PE Investments”) and certain retail and other legacy loans originated prior to the Combination. This segment also includes corporate-level asset management and other fees including expenses related to secured revolving credit facility, related party and general and administrative expenses related to the Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio only. Commencing with reporting in first quarter of 2021, we will no longer report this segment and the remaining Legacy, Non-Strategic assets will be reported within the Core Portfolio.
COVID-19 Initiatives
Throughout Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, we highlight significant actions we have taken to further protect the balance sheet from COVID-19 related risks. We have executed on certain liquidity generating measures that include the sale of select Core Portfolio assets. The Core Portfolio asset sales consist of loans, securities and equity investments. We have also completed a long-term asset level financing against select Core Portfolio and Legacy, Non-Strategic assets. To date, these initiatives have not only generated liquidity, but also reduced financing exposures. Additionally, Core Portfolio asset sales have resulted in a material impact to earnings and certain downward adjustments to stockholders’ equity. Any future Core Portfolio asset sales may have a similar impact.
For more information, refer to “Part I - Item 1A. Risk Factors” and “Significant Developments,” in “Core Portfolio” and “Potential Sources of Liquidity” in our “Liquidity and Capital Resources” sections below for further discussion regarding these action steps, the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our future operating results, liquidity and financial condition.
Significant Developments
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and through February 24, 2021, significant developments affecting our business and results of operations of our Core Portfolio and Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio, respectively, included the following:
Capital Resources
•As of the date of this report, we have approximately $689 million of liquidity, consisting of $588 million cash on hand and $101 million available on our Bank Credit Facility;
•Reduced borrowing under our Bank Credit Facility (as defined below) and continue to reduce borrowing on our master repurchase facilities as a result of COVID-19 uncertainties. We fully repaid all outstanding borrowings on our Bank Credit Facility in July 2020 and CMBS Credit Facilities in December 2020. The total combined reduction of debt on these facilities in 2020 through the date hereof is $387.5 million;
•Executed a $229 million asset level preferred financing on a portfolio of five of our investments generating $200 million of proceeds at closing with $29.0 million future funding. For further description refer to “Potential Sources of Liquidity” in our “Liquidity and Capital Resources”; and
•Declared a quarterly dividend of $0.10 per share on April 15, 2021 to stockholders of record as of March 31, 2021 and expect to continue quarterly dividends thereafter, subject to board approval, to ensure that the Company meets the minimum distribution requirements to maintain its status as a REIT for the annual period ending December 31, 2021.
Core Portfolio
•In the third and fourth quarters of 2020 and through the date of this report, originated 10 senior mortgage loans with a total commitment of $354.0 million;
•Sold two industrial portfolios, a preferred equity investment held in a joint venture and one loan that generated gross and net proceeds of $670.2 million and $277.8 million, respectively. We recognized a net gain of $14.6 million on the sales. “See Net Leased Real Estate” in “Core Portfolio” below;
•Sold 42 of our 43 CRE debt securities for a total gross sales price of $154.6 million, which generated net proceeds of $68.8 million and recognized a net loss of $42.1 million;
•Recorded a combined $62.5 million provision for loan losses and other write downs to fair value on four loans, all of which were resolved by December 31, 2020;
•Succeeded in the recapitalization of the Los Angeles Mixed-use project. In doing so we transferred our mezzanine loan and preferred equity interests in the project to a third-party mezzanine lender who provided $275.0 million in additional financing (the “Upsized Mezzanine Loan”). We retained a B-participation in the Upsized Mezzanine Loan at the same loan value. We placed the Los Angeles Mixed-use project on nonaccrual status at the beginning of the second quarter of 2020 and subsequently recorded our proportionate share of a fair value loss adjustment totaling $89.3 million. See “Los Angeles, California Mixed-Use Project - Third Party $275 Million Construction Mezzanine Loan Upsize and Retained B-Participation Investment” in “Core Portfolio” in Part II, Item 7. of this Form 10-K; and
•Placed Project Dockland on nonaccrual status in the beginning of the third quarter of 2020 and recorded our proportionate share of a fair value loss adjustment totaling $64.0 million during the fourth quarter. See “Dublin, Ireland Senior Predevelopment Loan” in “Core Portfolio” in Part II, Item 7. of this Form 10-K.
Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio
•Since October 1, 2019, the commencement of our portfolio bifurcation, we have resolved 56 investments. Our remaining Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio net asset value represents less than 1% of our total net book value;
•Sold 34 real estate properties investments for a total gross sales price of $344.6 million, generating net proceeds of $164.2 million and a net loss of $7.8 million;
•Recorded $42.8 million of impairment on real estate properties, all of which were sold during 2020;
•Sold eight loans and one loan held in a joint venture for total gross proceeds of $113.0 million, generating net proceeds of $96.1 million and a net gain of $10.1 million; and
•Commencing with reporting in first quarter of 2021, we will no longer report this segment and the remaining Legacy, Non-Strategic assets will be reported within the Core Portfolio.
Results of Operations
Core
•Generated U.S. GAAP net loss of $290.8 million, or $(2.26) per share and Distributable Earnings loss of $194.2 million, or $(1.48) per share during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio
•Generated U.S. GAAP net loss of $62.5 million, or $(0.49) per share, and Legacy, Non-Strategic Distributable Earnings loss of $10.8 million, or $(0.08) per share during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Factors Impacting Our Operating Results
Overview
Our results of operations are affected by a number of factors and depend primarily on, among other things, the ability of the borrowers of our assets to service our debt as it is due and payable, the ability of our tenants to pay rent and other amounts due under their leases, our ability to actively and effectively service any sub-performing and non-performing loans and other assets we may have from time to time in our portfolio, the market value of our assets and the supply of, and demand for, CRE senior mortgage loans, mezzanine loans, preferred equity, debt securities, net leased properties and our other assets, and the level of our net operating income. Our net interest income, which includes the amortization of purchase premiums and the accretion of purchase discounts, varies primarily as a result of changes in market interest rates, prepayment rates on our CRE loans, prepayment speeds and the ability of our borrowers to make scheduled interest payments. Interest rates and prepayment rates vary according to the type of investment, conditions in the financial markets, credit-worthiness of our borrowers, competition and other factors, none of which can be predicted with any certainty. Our operating results also may be impacted by credit losses in excess of initial anticipations or unanticipated credit events experienced by borrowers whose mortgage loans are held directly by us or that are included in our CMBS. Our net property operating income depends on our ability to maintain the historical occupancy rates of our real estate equity investments, lease currently available space and continue to attract new tenants.
Impact of COVID-19
Considerable uncertainty still surrounds COVID-19 and its potential effects, and the extent of and effectiveness of any responses taken on a national and local level.
Accordingly, the COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted CRE credit REITs across the industry, as well as other companies that own and operate commercial real estate investments, including our company. As we manage the impact and uncertainties of the COVID-19 pandemic, cash preservation, liquidity and investment and portfolio management are our key priorities.
We are working closely with our borrowers and tenants to address the impact of COVID-19 on their business. To the extent that certain borrowers are experiencing significant financial dislocation we have and may continue to consider the use of interest and other reserves and/or replenishment obligations of the borrower and/or guarantors to meet current interest payment obligations, for a limited period. Similarly, we have and may in the future evaluate converting certain current interest payment obligations to payment-in-kind as a potential bridge period solution. We have in limited cases allowed some portions of current interest to convert to payment-in-kind.
We have taken actions since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic to mitigate the impact on our financial condition while establishing a defensive posture through this period. As of the date of this report, we have liquidity of approximately $689 million, consisting of $588 million cash on hand and $101 million available on our Bank Credit Facility. We anticipate
liquidity to increase further as a result of proceeds from sales related to assets under contract. It is important to note that while the combined result of these activities and events is an increase in liquidity and a reduction in debt, these events will also reduce future period earnings.
The decisive steps taken to protect the balance sheet and generate liquidity, better position us to address further market and investment deterioration related to COVID-19. While asset and liability management and liquidity remain a priority, our focus has started to shift toward new investments, building earnings and further growth initiatives. New deployment will depend upon market pricing, opportunity and certainty of performance, each of which will be impacted by uncertainties relating to the impact of COVID-19. During the fourth quarter of 2020 through February 24, 2021 we originated nine senior mortgage loans with a total commitment of $334.5 million.
While we have generated liquidity and reduced our financing exposures, the Core Portfolio assets sold to date has had a material impact on earnings.
The COVID-19 pandemic has created uncertainties that have and will continue to negatively impact our future operating results, liquidity and financial condition. However, we believe there are too many uncertainties to predict and quantify the continuing impact. The potential concerns and risks include, but are not limited to, mortgage borrowers ability to make monthly payments, lessees’ capacity to pay their rent, and the resulting impact on us to meet our obligations. Therefore, there can be no assurances that we will not need to take impairment charges in future quarters or experience further declines in revenues and net income, which could be material. For more information, refer to “COVID-19 Update” in “Core Portfolio” and “Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio” sections below and “Part I - Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion regarding the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our future operating results, liquidity and financial condition.
Changes in fair value of our assets
It is our business strategy to hold our target assets as long-term investments. As a result, we do not expect that changes in the market value of the assets will normally impact our operating results. However, at least on a quarterly basis, we assess both our ability and intent to continue to hold such assets as long-term investments. As part of this process, we monitor our target assets for “other-than-temporary” impairment. A change in our ability and/or intent to continue to hold any of our assets could result in our recognizing an impairment charge or realizing losses upon the sale of such securities.
Changes in market interest rates
With respect to our proposed business operations, increases in interest rates, in general, may over time cause:
•the value of fixed-rate investments to decrease;
•prepayments on certain assets in our portfolio to slow, thereby slowing the amortization of our purchase premiums and the accretion of our purchase discounts;
•coupons on our floating and adjustable-rate mortgage loans and CMBS to reset, although on a delayed basis, to higher interest rates;
•to the extent we use leverage to finance our assets, the interest expense associated with our borrowings to increase; and
•to the extent we enter into interest rate swap agreements as part of our hedging strategy, the value of these agreements to increase.
Conversely, decreases in interest rates, in general, may over time cause:
•the value of the fixed-rate assets in our portfolio to increase;
•prepayments on certain assets in our portfolio to increase, thereby accelerating the amortization of our purchase premiums and the accretion of our purchase discounts;
•to the extent we enter into interest rate swap agreements as part of our hedging strategy, the value of these agreements to decrease;
•coupons on our floating and adjustable-rate mortgage loans and CMBS to reset, although on a delayed basis, to lower interest rates;
•to the extent we use leverage to finance our assets, the interest expense associated with our borrowings to decrease; and
•to the extent we enter into interest rate swap agreements as part of our hedging strategy, the value of these agreements to decrease.
Credit risk
One objective of our strategy is to minimize credit losses. However, we are subject to varying degrees of credit risk in connection with our target assets. Our Manager seeks to mitigate this risk by seeking to acquire high quality assets, at appropriate prices given anticipated and unanticipated losses and by deploying a comprehensive review and asset selection process and by careful ongoing monitoring of acquired assets. Nevertheless, unanticipated credit losses could occur, which could adversely impact our operating results.
Size of investment portfolio
The size of our portfolio, as measured by the aggregate principal balance of our commercial mortgage loans, other commercial real estate-related debt investments and the other assets we own, is also a key revenue driver. Generally, as the size of our portfolio grows, the amount of interest income we earn increases. However, a larger portfolio may result in increased expenses to the extent that we incur additional interest expense to finance our assets.
Market conditions
We believe that market conditions impact our operating results and will cause us to adjust our investment and financing strategies over time as new opportunities emerge and risk profiles of our business change. In addition, changes in government programs could impact our ability to acquire our target assets. Except as set forth above, we are not aware of any material trends or uncertainties, other than national economic conditions affecting mortgage loans, MBSs and real estate, generally, that may reasonably be expected to have a material impact, favorable or unfavorable, on revenues or income from the acquisition of real estate-related assets, other than those referred to in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations Summary
The following tables present our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (dollars in thousands):
See “Core Portfolio” and “Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio” sections for further discussion of our portfolio and results of operations.
Core Portfolio
As of December 31, 2020, our Core Portfolio, including our senior and mezzanine loans and preferred equity, CRE debt securities, net leased real estate and corporate segments, consisted of 63 investments representing approximately $3.2 billion in book value (excluding cash, cash equivalents and certain other assets). Our senior and mezzanine loans and preferred equity consisted of 48 senior mortgage loans, mezzanine loans, preferred equity investments and other loans and had a weighted average cash coupon of 5.0% and a weighted average all-in unlevered yield of 5.8%. Our net leased real estate consisted of approximately 9.2 million total square feet of space and total 2020 net operating income (“NOI”) of that portfolio was approximately $58.2 million.
As of December 31, 2020, our Core Portfolio consisted of the following investments (dollars in thousands):
________________________________________
(1)Count for net leased real estate represents number of investments.
(2)Book value at our share represents the proportionate book value based on ownership by asset as of December 31, 2020.
(3)Net book value represents book value less any associated financing as of December 31, 2020.
(4)Net book value at our share represents the proportionate book value based on asset ownership less any associated financing based on ownership as of December 31, 2020.
(5)Senior mortgage loans, mezzanine loans, and preferred equity include investments in joint ventures whose underlying interest is in a loan or preferred equity.
(6)Preferred equity balances include $17.1 million of book value at our share attributable to related equity participation interests.
The following charts illustrate the diversification of our Core Portfolio (not including CRE Debt Securities) based on investment type, underlying property type, and geography, as of December 31, 2020 (percentages based on book value at our share, which represents the proportionate book value based on our ownership by asset):
Investment Type Property Type
Geography
_________________________________________
(1)Senior mortgage loans include junior participations in our originated senior mortgage loans for which we have syndicated the senior participations to other investors and retained the junior participations for our portfolio and contiguous mezzanine loans where we own both the senior and junior loan positions. We believe these investments are more similar to the senior mortgage loans we originate than other loan types given their credit quality and risk profile.
(2)Mezzanine loans include other subordinated loans.
(3)Preferred equity balances include $17.1 million of book value at our share attributable to related equity participation interests.
(4)Other includes commercial and residential development and predevelopment assets.
Underwriting Process
We use an investment and underwriting process that has been developed and utilized by our Manager’s and its affiliates’ senior management teams leveraging their extensive commercial real estate expertise over many years and real estate cycles. The underwriting process focuses on some or all of the following factors designed to ensure each investment is evaluated appropriately: (i) macroeconomic conditions that may influence operating performance; (ii) fundamental analysis of underlying real estate, including tenant rosters, lease terms, zoning, necessary licensing, operating costs and the asset’s overall competitive position in its market; (iii) real estate market factors that may influence the economic performance of the investment, including leasing conditions and overall competition; (iv) the operating expertise and financial strength and reputation of a tenant, operator, partner or borrower; (v) the cash flow in place and projected to be in place over the term of the investment and potential return; (vi) the appropriateness of the business plan and estimated costs associated with tenant buildout, repositioning or capital improvements; (vii) an internal and third-party valuation of a property, investment basis relative to the competitive set and the ability to liquidate an investment through a sale or refinancing; (viii) review of third-party reports including appraisals, engineering and environmental reports; (ix) physical inspections of properties and markets; (x) the overall legal structure of the investment, contractual implications and the lenders’ rights; and (xi) the tax and accounting impact.
Loan Risk Rankings
In addition to reviewing loans and preferred equity held for investment for impairment quarterly, the Company evaluates loans and preferred equity held for investment to determine if an allowance for loan loss should be established. In conjunction with this review, the Company assesses the risk factors of each senior and mezzanine loans and preferred equity and assigns a risk ranking based on a variety of factors, including, without limitation, underlying real estate performance and asset value, values of comparable properties, durability and quality of property cash flows, sponsor experience and financial wherewithal, and the existence of a risk-mitigating loan structure. Additional key considerations include loan-to-value ratios, debt service coverage ratios, loan structure, real estate and credit market dynamics, and risk of default or principal loss. Based on a five-point scale, the Company’s loans and preferred equity held for investment are rated “1” through “5,” from less risk to greater risk. At the time of origination or purchase, loans and preferred equity held for investment are ranked as a “3” and will move accordingly going forward based on the ratings which are defined as follows
1.Very Low Risk-The loan is performing as agreed. The underlying property performance has exceeded underwritten expectations with very strong NOI, debt service coverage ratio, debt yield and occupancy metrics. Sponsor is investment grade, very well capitalized, and employs very experienced management team.
2.Low Risk-The loan is performing as agreed. The underlying property performance has met or exceeds underwritten expectations with high occupancy at market rents, resulting in consistent cash flow to service the debt. Strong sponsor that is well capitalized with experienced management team.
3.Average Risk-The loan is performing as agreed. The underlying property performance is consistent with underwriting expectations. The property generates adequate cash flow to service the debt, and/or there is enough reserve or loan structure to provide time for sponsor to execute the business plan. Sponsor has routinely met its obligations and has experience owning/operating similar real estate.
4.High Risk/Delinquent/Potential for Loss-The loan is in excess of 30 days delinquent and/or has a risk of a principal loss. The underlying property performance is behind underwritten expectations. Loan covenants may require occasional waivers/modifications. Sponsor has been unable to execute its business plan and local market fundamentals have deteriorated. Operating cash flow is not sufficient to service the debt and debt service payments may be coming from sponsor equity/loan reserves.
5.Impaired/Defaulted/Loss Likely-The loan is in default or a default is imminent, and has a high risk of a principal loss, or has incurred a principal loss. The underlying property performance is significantly worse than underwritten expectation and sponsor has failed to execute its business plan. The property has significant vacancy and current cash flow does not support debt service. Local market fundamentals have significantly deteriorated resulting in depressed comparable property valuations versus underwriting.
As mentioned above, management considers several risk factors when assigning our risk ranking each quarter. Throughout 2020, our average risk ranking was impacted by the current and potential future effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in a number of assets moving from average risk (3) to high risk (4).
For the quarter ended December 31, 2020, management believes the extended impact of the COVID-19 pandemic remains uncertain, and therefore continues to represent a significant risk to our portfolio. As such, the year-end average rating is 3.7, which is consistent throughout 2020.
Senior and Mezzanine Loans and Preferred Equity
Our senior and mezzanine loans and preferred equity consists of senior mortgage loans, mezzanine loans and preferred equity interests, some of which have equity participation interests.
The following table provides a summary of our senior and mezzanine loans and preferred equity in our Core Portfolio based on our internal risk rankings as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
_________________________________________
(1)Carrying value at our share represents the proportionate book value based on ownership by asset as of December 31, 2020.
(2)Count excludes one equity method participation held in a joint venture with a de minimis carry value (at CLNC share) which was not assigned a risk ranking.
(3)Includes one mezzanine loan totaling $27.8 million where we are also the senior lender.
The following table provides asset level detail for senior and mezzanine loans and preferred equity included in our Core Portfolio as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
_________________________________________
(1)Represents carrying values at our share as of December 31, 2020.
(2)Represents the stated coupon rate for loans; for floating rate loans, does not include USD 1-month London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) which was 0.14% as of December 31, 2020.
(3)In addition to the stated cash coupon rate, unlevered all-in yield includes non-cash payment in-kind interest income and the accrual of origination, extension and exit fees. Unlevered all-in yield for the loan portfolio assumes the applicable floating benchmark rate as of December 31, 2020 for weighted average calculations.
(4)Except for construction loans, senior loans reflect the initial loan amount divided by the as-is value as of the date the loan was originated, or the principal amount divided by the appraised value as of the date of the most recent as-is appraisal. Mezzanine loans include attachment loan-to-value and detachment loan-to-value, respectively. Attachment loan-to-value reflects initial funding of loans senior to our position divided by the as-is value as of the date the loan was originated, or the principal amount divided by the appraised value as of the date of the most recent appraisal. Detachment loan-to-value reflects the cumulative initial funding of our loan and the loans senior to our position divided by the as-is value as of the date the loan was originated, or the cumulative principal amount divided by the appraised value as of the date of the most recent appraisal.
(5)On a quarterly basis, the Company’s senior and mezzanine loans and preferred equity are rated “1” through “5,” from less risk to greater risk. Represents risk ranking as of December 31, 2020 and September 30, 2020, respectively.
(6)Construction senior loans’ loan-to-value reflect the total commitment amount of the loan divided by the as completed appraised value, or the total commitment amount of the loan divided by the projected total cost basis. Construction mezzanine loans include attachment loan-to-value and detachment loan-to-value, respectively. Attachment loan-to-value reflects the total commitment amount of loans senior to our position divided by as-completed appraised value, or the total commitment amount of loans senior to our position divided by projected total cost basis. Detachment loan-to-value reflect the cumulative commitment amount of our loan and the loans senior to our position divided by as-completed appraised value, or the cumulative commitment amount of our loan and loans senior to our position divided by projected total cost basis.
(7)Loans 26, 35 and 43 are on nonaccrual status as of December 31, 2020; as such, no income is being recognized.
(8)Represents equity participation interests related to senior loans, mezzanine loans and/or preferred equity investments.
(9)Weighted average calculation for preferred equity and other loans excludes equity participation interests.
The following table details the types of properties securing our senior and mezzanine loans and preferred equity included in our Core Portfolio and geographic distribution as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
_________________________________________
(1)Other includes commercial and residential development and predevelopment assets.
The following charts illustrate the diversification of our senior and mezzanine loans and preferred equity included in our Core Portfolio based on interest rate category, property type, and geography as of December 31, 2020 (percentages based on book value at our share, which represents the proportionate book value based on our ownership by asset):
Interest Rate Category Property Type
Geography
_________________________________________
(1)Other includes commercial and residential development and predevelopment assets.
COVID-19 Update
Since April 1, 2020, through February 24, 2021, we have collected 98% of our loan interest payments, excluding payment-in-kind loans. Most of our borrowers paid on time utilizing cash from operations, while some utilized interest and other reserves. Additionally, some loans required partial modification of their existing reserves to provide their loan interest payment.
We expect some borrowers may continue to experience difficulties making their loan payments over the next several quarters. We are particularly concerned with and focused on loans collateralized by hotels as well as mezzanine loans and preferred equity investments that are subordinate to senior loans provided by other lenders such as our Los Angeles Construction Loan and Preferred Equity Investment discussed below. Failure of our borrowers to meet their loan obligations will not only impact our financial results but may also trigger repayments under our master repurchase facilities. Our asset management team is having discussions with borrowers to remain informed on a reasonably current basis, seek to identify issues and address potential value preserving solutions, which may include a loan modification.
We have three loans on nonaccrual status in our Core Portfolio during the year ended December 31, 2020, of which we received cash interest payments from these loans of $1.4 million and applied the cash interest collected as a reduction to the loan’s carrying value.
At December 31, 2020 our current expected credit loss reserve (“CECL”) calculated by our probability of default (“PD”)/loss given default (“LGD”) model for our outstanding loans and future loan funding commitments is $38.5 million, or $0.29 per share, which is 1.6% of the aggregate commitment amount of our loan portfolio. This represents a slight decrease of $1.6 million from $40.2 million at September 30, 2020. The difference is primarily driven by an improved long-term macro economic outlook, which was offset by increased reserves on our Hospitality loans.
During the second quarter of 2020, we sold a preferred equity investment which included 35% of the preferred equity’s kicker feature for a total gross sales price and liquidity of $98.6 million while recognizing a net loss on the sale of $10.1 million. Refer to “Potential Sources of Liquidity” in “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for further discussion regarding the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our future operating results, liquidity and financial condition.
Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2020, the following four loans were resolved:
•The hotel property securing our Midwest Hospitality loan was sold and we received $24.5 million in gross proceeds and concurrently provided a bridge loan in the amount of $19.5 million to a new borrower secured by Midwest Hospitality. For the three months ended March 31, 2020 we recorded a specific provision for loan loss of $2.3 million and recognized an additional loan loss of $1.1 million upon repayment. This loan was placed on nonaccrual status during 2019.
•We received gross proceeds of $80.7 million in a discounted payoff of one loan secured by six suburban office buildings (“Northeast Office Portfolio”) which was equal to the carrying value of the loan, net of current provision for loan losses. A $20.9 million allowance for loan losses was recorded as of March 31, 2020, which included an $8.8 million allowance for loan losses resulting from CECL adoption and an additional $12.1 million provision for loan losses recognition during the three months ended March 31, 2020.
•We received $105.2 million in gross proceeds resulting from a sale of our loan secured by a hospitality asset in San Diego, California (“West Hospitality”) and concurrently repaid $56.8 million on our master repurchase facility. During the second quarter of 2020, we classified this loan as held for sale and recognized a net loss of $32.8 million to reflect the expected proceeds to be collected in a sale of the loan. We had recorded a $5.2 million allowance for loan losses as of March 31, 2020, which included a $2.6 million allowance for loan losses resulting from CECL adoption and an additional $2.6 million provision for loan losses recognized for West Hospitality during the three months ended March 31, 2020. In connection with transferring the loan to held for sale during the second quarter of 2020, we reversed out the $5.2 million from provision for loan losses line item and recorded $38.0 million in other loss, net.
•During the three months ended December 31, 2020 the Company received gross proceeds of $12.1 million on one loan secured by a borrowers limited partner interests in a fund (“Corporate Term loan”) in a discounted payoff which was equal to the carrying value of the loan, net of provision for loan losses of $3.2 million.
Los Angeles, California Mixed-Use Project-Third Party $275 Million Construction Mezzanine Loan Upsize and Retained B-Participation Investment
In July 2017, we originated a $189.0 million commitment to an approximately $574 million mezzanine loan and preferred equity investment in a development project in Los Angeles County, which includes a hospitality and retail renovation and a new condominium tower construction (the “Mixed-use Project”). Our investment interests are held through a joint venture (the “Colony Mezzanine Lender”) with affiliates of our Manager.
In April 2020, the senior mortgage lender notified the borrower developer that the Mixed-use Project loan funding was out of balance, due to cost overruns from certain hard and soft costs and senior loan interest reserve shortfalls projected through completion. To address the out of balance circumstance during the second quarter of 2020, the Colony Mezzanine Lender made two protective advances to the senior mortgage lender totaling $69.1 million, of which our share was $28.5 million. The Colony Mezzanine Lender placed this investment on nonaccrual status.
In June 2020, the senior mortgage lender funded a third protective advance of $15.5 million. Additionally, the loans held by the senior mortgage lender and Colony Mezzanine Lender, respectively, matured on July 9, 2020.
On September 1, 2020, in cooperation with the borrower and the EB-5 lender, the Colony Mezzanine Lender and senior mortgage lender secured $275 million of additional mezzanine financing from a third-party mezzanine lender (the “Senior Mezzanine Lender”). To consummate the new mezzanine financing, the Colony Mezzanine Lender simplified its investment interest by converting its existing preferred equity principal and accrued interest into the existing mezzanine loan, transferred the mezzanine loan to the Senior Mezzanine Lender, who subsequently increased the mezzanine loan amount by $275 million to an approximately $821 million total mezzanine loan (the “Upsized Mezzanine Loan”). The Senior Mezzanine Lender holds a $275 million A-participation and the Colony Mezzanine Lender (including our interest) continues to hold an approximately $546 million B-participation interest in the Upsized Mezzanine Loan at the Mixed-use Project. The Senior Mezzanine Lender is the sole administrative agent and Upsized Mezzanine Loan owner. The Upsized Mezzanine Loan closing and revised budget addressed certain amendments to maturity dates to complete and sell the hotel by July 2021 and modifications to certain borrower extension tests to facilitate completion of the Mixed-use Project. The Colony Mezzanine Lender’s B-participation investment continues to carry an interest rate of 12.90% per annum, consistent with our interest rate prior to this mezzanine refinancing event. The B-participation investment is a subordinate interest to the A-participation interest in respect to payments of principal and interest. The new $275 million financing commitment covers current capital requirements at the Mixed-use Project and includes both $65 million of interest reserves to cover A-participation interest payments and $100 million reserved for future funding obligations, in furtherance of a revised construction budget to be made by the Senior Mezzanine Lender and senior mortgage lender only. The Colony Mezzanine Lender is no longer subject to future funding commitments in accordance with the revised budget. As previously reported, the Colony Mezzanine Lender had a remaining unfunded commitment of $39.3 million, of which our share was $14.5 million.
During the three months ended June 30, 2020, we placed the mezzanine loans and preferred equity investment on nonaccrual status and recorded our proportionate share of a fair value loss adjustment totaling $89.3 million. Having recently completed the Upsized Mezzanine Loan refinancing, among other factors, for the three months ended September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020, we continue to maintain the nonaccrual status and fair value loss adjustment on our proportionate share of the Colony Mezzanine Lender’s B-participation investment.
The hotel portion of the development has been completed and the temporary certificate of occupancy was granted in October 2020. It is anticipated that the sales marketing of the hotel property itself will commence in the coming months. In December 2020, two hotel condo sales have closed, and subsequent to December 2020, two additional condo sales have closed resulting in an approximately $10 million and $6 million pay down of the senior mortgage construction loan, respectively.
Notwithstanding the Upsized Mezzanine Loan closing, including a revised budget, amendments to maturity dates and extension tests and reserves for future funding, and a potential targeted hotel sale by July 2021, it is possible that additional cost overruns, actual and potential construction delays, delays in the hotel opening, the provision of full services and/or diminished hotel and conference facility demand, delays in selling the hotel and/or slower pace of condominium sales, greater negative carry costs than currently projected or other factors, individually or together, may occur and be further impacted by COVID-19 and could negatively impact the overall value of the Mixed-use Project, including our continuing interest in the B-participation investment.
Dublin, Ireland Senior Predevelopment Loan
We hold a $189.6 million co-lender interest (61%) in a senior mortgage loan in the amount of $310.9 million. Our investment interests are held through a joint venture that includes private investment vehicles managed by Colony Capital (the “Colony Senior Lenders”). The senior mortgage is Euro-denominated and is for a fully entitled land acquisition for a mixed-use development project in Dublin, Ireland (Project Dockland).
The land has planning permission for 420 apartments and approximately 380,000 square feet of offices, but the project borrower has applied for planning permission to increase these numbers to approximately 1,000 total residential units across two towers of 40 and 44 stories and 540,000 square feet of offices. These applications are currently under review by the planning authorities. Pre-letting discussions are ongoing in respect to the office building.
While the Project Dockland schedule had been extended by approximately six to nine months, as previously disclosed, the majority of enabling works commenced in July 2020 and were on track to be completed in January 2021. The enabling works are currently on hold due to new restrictions (closure of construction sites) imposed by the Irish government in early January 2021 and such restrictions are expected to last through at least through February 2021. The aforementioned delay and/or further delays may limit the ability of the borrower to obtain a senior secured development construction facility within the expected timeline as initially underwritten. We and our senior mortgage co-lenders regularly engage in discussions with the borrower to address continuing developments at the project.
The combination of project delays, the permitting process and uncertain market conditions as a result of COVID-19 (including adverse impacts on demand for office and residential space), continue to negatively impact the Colony Senior Lenders’ investment interest and elevated concerns regarding the ability to secure an anchor tenant and realize the full amount of the existing senior mortgage loan. During the three months ended September 30, 2020, we placed the senior mortgage loan on nonaccrual status. During the three months ended December 31, 2020, we continue to maintain nonaccrual status and recorded our proportionate share of a fair value loss adjustment totaling $64.0 million, of which $57.7 million was allocated to our Company and $6.4 million was allocated to our partner in the “5-Investment Preferred Financing.” Refer to “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section for further discussion.
Project Dockland’s fair value was based on a weighted average probability analysis of potential resolutions based on a number of factors which included the inability to secure an anchor tenant in a timely manner or at all, the lack of clarity around the timing of entitlements and continuing uncertain market conditions as a result of COVID-19. The loan’s initial maturity date was December 31, 2020, and we have extended the loan to June 2021. We are working with the borrower and evaluating options, however uncertainties regarding development, permitting, leasing, and exit strategies may continue to impact our investment.
During the second quarter of 2020, we completed an asset level preferred financing on five assets which included Project Dockland. Refer to “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section for further discussion regarding the “5-Investment Preferred Financing.”
San Jose, California Hotel Senior Loan and Preferred Equity
We originated a $173.5 million senior loan for the sponsors purchase of a hotel located in San Jose, California (the “San Jose Hotel”). The loan included an initial funding of $166.6 million with an additional $6.9 million of future advances. At closing, the borrower contributed approximately $90.0 million of equity toward the acquisition. In January 2020, the loan was extended to January 2021. The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in the spring of 2020 has created challenges to the entire lodging industry, and group travel orientation has been negatively impacted at the San Jose Hotel. Occupancy has substantially declined leading to weaker financial performance. The loan was modified in April 2020 to allow the borrower to use the existing capital improvements reserve to pay the debt service. We again modified the loan in May 2020 to waive the escrow payments for taxes, insurance, and FF&E. The borrower has funded and contributed certain capital demands at the property to maintain hotel operations. We have been cooperating with the borrower who is engaged in a recapitalization initiative, during which we have funded limited preferred equity funds to partially support debt service and have extended the maturity date through the beginning of April 2021 in order to work together with the borrower to complete such efforts. The borrower has funded approximately $16 million out-of-pocket for operating expenses and debt service since April 2020. Notwithstanding these efforts, the impact of COVID-19 and/or other risks associated with the hospitality industry, and this asset may impact continuing cooperation with and/or funding by the borrower, the execution of a recapitalization, necessitate protective actions by the borrower and/or require foreclosure considerations, any of which may negatively impact the value of our investment interest.
Berkeley, California Hotel Senior Loan and Mezzanine Loan
We originated a $109.8 million senior loan in 2018 to replace the sponsors existing financing on a hotel located in Berkeley, California (the “Berkeley Hotel”). The hotel includes meeting space, full-service restaurants and tennis club facilities. The loan included an initial funding of $98.8 million with an additional $11.0 million of future advances. The sponsor purchased the Berkeley Hotel in 2014 for a purchase price of $89.5 and has spent a significant amount on capital improvements. In September 2019, we upsized the senior loan by $15.0 million to $120.0 million and funded a $28.3 million mezzanine loan to facilitate the sponsors acquisition of a third party’s equity interest in the property. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic the Berkeley Hotel was closed from April through July of 2020, during which time the loan stayed current through the combination of borrower reserves and lender advances from the mezzanine loan.
Subsequently, the hotel partially re-opened and began generating cash flow from operations, but cash flows are currently insufficient to fully cover the debt service payment. The borrower has supported debt service shortfalls out-of-pocket and in November 2020 also funded a one-month interest reserve. The December 2020 spike in COVID-19 cases in California has again impacted occupancy significantly, which may influence future borrower actions and support at the Berkeley Hotel and have a negative impact on performance of the asset and the value of our investment interest.
Long Island City, New York Office Senior Loans
We originated two senior mortgage loans on two transitional office properties to the same sponsorship group. However, the borrowing entities are not related and the loans are neither cross-collateralized nor cross defaulted.
The New York City metro office markets have experienced substantial increases in vacancy rates due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Long Island City market has experienced further increases in vacancy as newly developed or renovated properties have become available for leasing. This has had a negative impact on both the sponsor’s business plans and leasing
activity for these two properties. As such, the underlying individual property cash flows are insufficient to cover their respective debt service payments. We are in active discussions with the borrowers to seek a separate resolution for each asset. The loans are current through February 2021. However, it is possible that these uncertain market conditions and borrower actions may result in a future valuation impairment or investment loss.
Other Impairment of Loans and Preferred Equity Held in Joint Ventures
During the second quarter of 2020 we recognized our proportionate share of a fair value loss adjustment totaling $7.0 million reducing the carrying to $10.8 million from $17.8 million on one mezzanine loan secured by a mixed-use development project (“West Mixed-use”) of which we own 50.0% of the joint venture. The change in fair value was a result of revised sale expectations and its impact on repayment proceeds.
Payment-In-Kind (“PIK”) Interest Income
We have debt investments in our portfolio that contain a PIK provision. Contractual PIK interest, which represents contractually deferred interest added to the loan balance that is due at the end of the loan term, is generally recorded on an accrual basis to the extent such amounts are expected to be collected. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded total PIK interest of $26.6 million. We will generally cease accruing PIK interest if there is insufficient value to support the accrual or management does not expect the borrower to be able to pay all principal and interest due.
Refer to “COVID-19 Impact on Liquidity” in “Liquidity and Capital Resources” for further discussion regarding the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our future operating results, liquidity and financial condition.
CRE Debt Securities
The following table presents an overview of our CRE debt securities in our Core Portfolio as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
_________________________________________
(1)Weighted average metrics weighted by book value, except for cash coupon which is weighted by principal balance.
(2)As of December 31, 2020, all CRE debt securities consisted of CMBS.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold the following CMBS bonds (dollars in thousands):
_________________________________________
(1)As of December 31, 2020, we have fully repaid $85.5 million of debt on our CMBS Credit Facility.
(2)Net loss during the three months ended June 30, 2020 contained $36.4 million previously recorded as an unrealized loss in other comprehensive income at March 31, 2020.
(3)Subsequent to December 31, 2020, we sold one CRE security for $5.1 million in gross sales proceeds and will recognize a gain of approximately $0.1 million; and we have only one remaining CRE security with a carrying value of $5.3 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and through February 24, 2021, we sold 42 of our 43 CRE debt securities for a total gross sales price of $154.6 million, which generated net proceeds of $68.8 million and recognized a net loss of $42.1 million.
Consistent with the overall market, our CRE securities, which we mark to fair value, lost significant value since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we placed our CRE securities on cost recovery and as a result ceased accretion discounts to expected maturity and applied any cash interest received against the CRE securities carrying value. Additionally, we wrote down through earnings the amortized cost basis for securities in which the fair value dropped below the amortized cost basis, realizing a loss of $32.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
During the second quarter of 2020, we unwound our interest rate swaps and in connection realized a loss of $34.0 million. This resulted in the release of $32.0 million held in a margin account to unrestricted cash.
Refer to “Potential Sources of Liquidity” in “Liquidity and Capital Resources” for further discussion regarding the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our future operating results, liquidity and financial condition.
Net Leased Real Estate
Our net leased real estate investment strategy focuses on direct ownership in commercial real estate with an emphasis on properties with stable cash flow, which may be structurally senior to a third-party partner’s equity. In addition, we may own net leased real estate investments through joint ventures with one or more partners. As part of our net leased real estate strategy, we explore a variety of real estate investments including multi-tenant office, multifamily, student housing and industrial. These properties are typically well-located with strong operating partners and we believe offer both attractive cash flow and returns.
As of December 31, 2020, $0.8 billion, or 24.4% of our assets were invested in net leased real estate properties included in our Core Portfolio and these properties were 98.4% occupied. The following table presents our net leased real estate investments included in our Core Portfolio as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
________________________________________
(1)Represents carrying values at our share as of December 31, 2020; includes real estate tangible assets, deferred leasing costs and other intangible assets less intangible liabilities.
(2)Excludes NOI of $7.0 million that relates to properties that have been sold. Please refer to “Non-GAAP Supplemental Financial Measures” for further information on NOI.
The following table provides asset-level detail of our net leased real estate included in our Core Portfolio as of December 31, 2020:
_________________________________________
(1)Represents the percent leased as of December 31, 2020. Weighted average calculation based on carrying value at our share as of December 31, 2020.
(2)Based on in-place leases (defined as occupied and paying leases) as of December 31, 2020 and assumes that no renewal options are exercised. Weighted average calculation based on carrying value at our share as of December 31, 2020.
(3)In January 2021, we sold Net Lease 1 for total net proceeds of $81.8 million.
The following charts illustrate the concentration of our net leased real estate portfolio included in Core Portfolio based on property type and geography as of December 31, 2020 (percentages based on book value at our share, which represents the proportionate book value based on our ownership by asset):
Property Type Geography
COVID-19 Update
Since April 1, 2020 through February 24, 2021, we collected 97% of total rents from our net leased real estate portfolio. We believe these properties will continue to perform but caution that COVID-19 events could still result in lease modifications, impairment and the inability to make our mortgage payments, all which could result in defaults under our mortgage obligations or trigger repayments under our Bank Credit Facility.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and through February 24, 2021, we sold two industrial portfolios and received total gross proceeds of $466.4 million and net proceeds of $132.4 million.
Stavenger, Norway Office Net Lease
In July 2018, we acquired a class A office campus in Stavenger, Norway (the “Norway Net Lease”) for $320 million. The office campus consists of 26 buildings, which includes rentable square footage of 1.3 million feet. This property is 100% occupied by a single tenant that is rated investment grade AA-/Aa2 from S&P and Moody’s, respectively. The property serves as their global headquarters. The Norway Net Lease requires the tenant to pay for all real estate related expenses, including operational expenditures, capital expenditures and municipality taxes. The Net Lease has a weighted average remaining lease term of 9.7 years and the tenant has the option to extend for two 5-year periods at the same terms with rent adjusted to market rent. The Net Lease also has annual rent increases based on the Norwegian CPI Index. Our tenant has injected a significant amount of capital into improvements of the property over the past 10 years. Financing on the Norway Net Lease consists of a mortgage payable of $170.1 million with a fixed rate of 3.91%, which matures in June 2025. The tenant has made all rent payments and is current on all its financial obligations under the lease. Both the lease payments and mortgage debt service are NOK denominated currency.
In order to generate additional liquidity, brought on by COVID-19, in the first quarter of 2020 we unwound our NOK FX Future contracts related to the Norway Net Lease recognizing a gain of $8.6 million. During the third quarter of 2020, we purchased one year put options of NOK for the notional amount of $92 million at a cost of $1.9 million. We will consider adding further NOK currency hedges in the future.
Refer to “Potential Sources of Liquidity” in “Liquidity and Capital Resources” for further discussion regarding the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our future operating results, liquidity and financial condition.
Results of Operations - Core Portfolio
The following table summarizes our Core Portfolio results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (dollars in thousands):
Comparison of Core Portfolio for Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net Interest Income
Interest income
Interest income decreased by $3.0 million to $155.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to $41.4 million related to the repayment of loan investments and a decrease of $13.6 million related to sales and placement of the remaining CRE securities on cost recovery status during the second quarter of 2020. This was partially offset by an increase of $52.0 million related to loan originations in 2019 and 2020.
Interest expense
Interest expense decreased by $20.1 million to $60.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a $17.8 million reduction from the collapse of a securitization trust and repayment of loan investments and a $2.5 million decrease due to a lower borrowing base on the Bank Credit Facility.
Net interest income on mortgage loans and obligations held in securitization trusts, net
Net interest income on mortgage loans and obligations held in securitization trusts, net decreased by $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the sale and deconsolidation of a retained investment in the subordinate tranches of one securitization trust in the third quarter of 2019.
Property and other income
Property operating income
Property operating income decreased by $29.4 million to $85.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a $25.3 million reduction in operating income due to the sale of a hotel in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Other income
Other income decreased by $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily as a result of lower realized gains on derivatives of $0.3 million in 2020 related to an office building and a decrease of $0.4 million due to income in 2019 related to debt facility true ups not applicable to 2020.
Expenses
Management fee expense
Management fee expense decreased by $7.7 million to $26.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is due to the reduction in stockholders’ equity (as defined in the Management Agreement) as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019. The reduction in stockholders’ equity is primarily due to a fourth quarter 2019 amendment to our definition of core earnings in the Management Agreement.
Property operating expense
Property operating expense decreased by $20.3 million to $11.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease resulted from the sale of a hotel during the fourth quarter of 2019.
Transaction, investment and servicing expense
Transaction, investment and servicing expense increased by $3.5 million to $6.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a $1.7 million decrease in franchise tax refunds received and a $1.5 million increase in legal costs incurred associated with exploring the internalization of the management of the Company.
Interest expense on real estate
Interest expense on real estate decreased by $2.0 million to $32.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the sale of an industrial building in third quarter 2020.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased by $8.1 million to $40.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily due to a $1.8 million decrease resulting from the sale of a hotel during the fourth quarter of 2019 and a $6.2 million decrease resulting from the sale of an industrial building in the third quarter of 2020.
Provision for loan losses
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded provision for loan losses of $40.9 million which primarily relates to $20.6 million in specific loan impairments on three individual loans and $15.5 million in CECL reserves in accordance with ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses.
Impairment of operating real estate
Impairment of operating real estate decreased by $23.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. There were no impairments assessed during the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the impairment was attributable to an industrial real estate portfolio of properties, resulting from a reduction in the estimated holding period of the portfolio.
Administrative expense
Administrative expense increased by $1.9 million to $18.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to $1.8 million of higher corporate expenses allocated to our Core Portfolio following the sales and repayments in our Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio.
Other income (loss)
Unrealized gain (loss) on mortgage loans and obligations held in securitization trusts, net
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an unrealized loss of $50.5 million on mortgage loans and obligations held in securitization trusts, net which represents the change in fair value of the assets and liabilities of the securitization trusts consolidated as a result of our investment in the subordinate tranches of these securitization trusts.
Realized gain (loss) on mortgage loans and obligations held in securitization trusts, net
Realized gain (loss) on mortgage loans and obligations held in securitizations trusts, net decreased by $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the sale and deconsolidation of a retained investment in the subordinate tranches of one securitization trust in the third quarter of 2019.
Other loss, net
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded other loss, net of $128.5 million, which primarily represents an $82.3 million realized net loss on the sale of 41 CRE CMBS securities and the realization of the fair value marks on our CRE CMBS securities portfolio in addition to a $38.0 million provision for loan loss on one hospitality loan.
Equity in earnings (losses) of unconsolidated ventures
Equity in earnings of unconsolidated ventures decreased by $191.9 million to a loss of $135.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily due to the Company recording $162.0 million in fair value losses relating to three equity method investments that have been placed on nonaccrual status in 2020, partially offset by $8.4 million related to the sale and repayment of equity method investments.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense decreased by $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the sale of a hotel in December 2019 that was acquired through a legal foreclosure process in 2018, partially offset by a reduction of the deferred income tax benefit on one of our net lease portfolios acquired in 2018.
Comparison of Core Portfolio for Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Net Interest Income
Interest income
Interest income increased by $49.1 million to $158.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to a $48.6 million increase from originations, acquisitions and refinancings of loans and CMBS in 2018 and 2019 and a $41.4 million increase from recognizing a full year of interest income in 2019 on loans, preferred equity and CMBS originated or acquired in 2018 or acquired as part of the Combination in February 1, 2018. This was partially offset by a decrease of $30.3 million related to the repayment of loan investments, a decrease of $3.9 million related to the deconsolidation of certain investments entities as a result of the Combination and a decrease of $2.7 million related to the foreclosure of one loan investment.
Interest expense
Interest expense increased by $38.4 million to $80.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to a $25.1 million increase related to borrowings on our master repurchase and CMBS credit facilities, as well as securitization bonds, primarily associated with the originations and acquisitions of loans and CMBS in 2018 and 2019, and a $13.5 million increase from recognizing a full year of interest expense in 2019 on loans, preferred equity and CMBS originated or acquired in 2018 or acquired as part of the Combination in February 1, 2018.
Interest income on mortgage loans and obligations held in securitization trusts, net
Interest income on mortgage loans and obligations held in securitization trusts, net decreased by $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily due to the sale and deconsolidation of a retained investment in the subordinate tranches of one securitization trust in the third quarter of 2019.
Property and other income
Property operating income
Property operating income increased by $26.7 million to $115.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to a $21.3 million increase related to two net lease portfolios acquired in the third quarter of 2018, a $15.5 million increase related to a hotel acquired through legal foreclosure process in the third quarter of 2018 and a $3.8 million increase from recognizing a full year of property operating income on two industrial portfolios acquired as part of the Combination in February 1, 2018. This was partially offset by a $12.7 million decrease related to the October 2018 sale of a multi-tenant office portfolio.
Expenses
Management fee expense
Management fee expense decreased by $0.6 million to $33.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease is due to the reduction in stockholders’ equity (as defined in the Management Agreement) as of December 31, 2019 compared to December 31, 2018. The reduction in stockholders’ equity is primarily due to a fourth quarter 2019 amendment to our definition of core earnings in the Management Agreement, as well as distributions declared and paid.
Property operating expense
Property operating expense increased by $5.1 million to $31.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to a $10.4 million increase related to a hotel acquired through legal foreclosure process in the third quarter of 2018. This was offset by a $4.3 million decrease related to the October 2018 sale of a multi-tenant office portfolio.
Transaction, investment and servicing expense
Transaction, investment and servicing expense decreased by $32.7 million to $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily as a result of lower transaction costs incurred associated with the Combination of $31.5 million.
Interest expense on real estate
Interest expense on real estate increased by $9.1 million to $34.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to $9.4 million increase resulting from the acquisition of two net lease portfolios acquired in 2018.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense increased by $3.3 million to $49.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This was primarily due to a $10.5 million increase resulting from the acquisition of two net lease portfolios acquired in 2018, partially offset by a $7.8 million decrease related to the October 2018 sale of a multi-tenant office portfolio.
Impairment of operating real estate
Impairment of operating real estate of $23.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 is attributable to the reduction in the estimated holding period of an industrial real estate portfolio of properties. Impairment of operating real estate of $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 is related to the multi-tenant office portfolio sold in October 2018.
Administrative expense
Administrative expense increased by $2.5 million to $16.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This was primarily due to an increase in equity-based compensation expense due to awards granted in March 2019 under the 2018 Equity Incentive Plan (the “2018 Plan”), partially offset by lower professional fees.
Other income (loss)
Unrealized gain on mortgage loans and obligations held in securitization trusts, net
During the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, we recorded an unrealized gain of $4.1 million and $5.0 million, respectively, on mortgage loans and obligations held in securitization trusts, net which represents the change in fair value of the assets and liabilities of the securitization trusts consolidated as a result of our investment in the subordinate tranches of these securitization trusts acquired in the Combination.
Realized gain (loss) on mortgage loans and obligations held in securitization trusts, net
During the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, we recorded a realized gain of $2.8 million and realized loss of $3.4 million, respectively, on mortgage loans and obligations held in securitization trusts, net. The increase was primarily due to the realized gain upon sale of the retained interest of a securitization trust in the third quarter of 2019.
Other loss, net
Other loss, net decreased by $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease was primarily due to a $4.9 million unrealized loss on non-designated interest rate swap contracts entered into in 2018 and a $1.5 million unrealized loss on non-designated foreign exchange contracts entered into during 2018, partially offset by a $1.1 million gain on the sale of the hotel in December 2019 previously acquired through legal foreclosure process in the third quarter of 2018.
Equity in earnings of unconsolidated ventures
Equity in earnings of unconsolidated ventures increased by $13.8 million to $56.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This was primarily due to an increase of $21.9 million related to the full year impact of investments in unconsolidated joint ventures entered into in 2018, an increase of $9.5 million related to our increased commitment in June 2018 and July 2019 to one of our joint ventures which holds a mezzanine loan and a preferred equity investment and an increase of $5.2 million on one of our equity method investments in which the underlying investment was not operational until March 2018. This was partially offset by an impairment of $17.6 million on an equity participation interest in a joint venture and a $7.1 million decrease related to repayments of investments held in joint ventures.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense decreased by $0.4 million to $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily due to a deferred income tax benefit of $3.0 million on one of our net lease portfolios acquired in 2018, partially offset by a $2.2 million income tax provision on the hotel acquired through the legal foreclosure process in the third quarter of 2018, and subsequently sold in December 2019.
Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio
As of December 31, 2020, our Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio consisted of 14 investments representing approximately $318.5 million in book value (excluding cash, cash equivalents and certain other assets). Our loan portfolio consisted of one mezzanine loan and one preferred equity investment, both of which are on nonaccrual status as of December 31, 2020. Our owned real estate portfolio (including net leased and other real estate) consisted of approximately 1.9 million total square feet of space and the total NOI of that portfolio was approximately $22.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (based on leases in place as of December 31, 2020). We intend to eliminate separate reporting on the Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio in 2021 given the substantial resolution and reduction of assets in this portfolio segment.
As of December 31, 2020, our Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio consisted of the following investments (dollars in thousands):
_________________________________________
(1)Count for net leased and other real estate represents number of investments.
(2)Book value at our share represents the proportionate book value based on ownership by asset as of December 31, 2020.
(3)Net book value represents book value less any associated financing as of December 31, 2020.
(4)Net book value at our share represents the proportionate book value based on asset ownership less any associated financing based on ownership as of December 31, 2020.
(5)Mezzanine loans and preferred equity include investments in joint ventures whose underlying interest is in a loan or preferred equity.
Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio: Senior and Mezzanine Loans and Preferred Equity
Our Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio includes one mezzanine loan and one preferred equity interest, related to a residential development project in Rolling Hills, California. As of December 31, 2020, our at CLNC share book value of the mezzanine loan and preferred equity interest is $11.5 million and $0.1 million, respectively. These investments are included in the 5-Investment Preferred Financing with Goldman Sachs.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 the following loans within our Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio were resolved:
•In March 2018, the borrower on our four NY hospitality loans in our Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio failed to make all required interest payments and the loans were placed on nonaccrual status. These four loans are secured by the same collateral. During 2018, we recorded $53.8 million of provision for loan losses to reflect the estimated value to be recovered from the borrower following a sale. During 2019, we recorded an additional provision for loan loss of $154.3 million based on significant deterioration in the NY hospitality market, feedback from the sales process and the estimated value to be recovered from the borrower following a potential sale. During the three months ended March 31, 2020 the significant detrimental impact of COVID-19 on the U.S. hospitality industry further contributed to the deterioration of our four NY hospitality loans and as such we recorded an additional provision for loan losses of $36.8 million. During the three months ended June 30, 2020 we completed a discounted payoff of the NY hospitality loans and related investment interests.
•We placed one loan secured by a regional mall (“Midwest Regional Mall”) on nonaccrual status during 2019 as collectability of the principal was uncertain; as such, interest collected is recognized using the cost recovery method by applying interest collected as a reduction to loan carrying value. We recorded $10.6 million of impairment related to Midwest Regional Mall and transferred the loan to held for sale during 2019. During the three months ended June 30, 2020 the Midwest Regional Mall was sold. We received $8.3 million in gross proceeds and recognized a gain of $3.7 million.
•During 2018, we recorded $8.8 million of provision for loan losses on one loan secured by a regional mall (“Northeast Regional Mall B”) to reflect the estimated fair value of the collateral. During 2019, we recognized additional provision for loan losses of $10.5 million on Northeast Regional Mall B. The additional provisions were based on then-current and prospective leasing activity to reflect the estimated fair value of the collateral. During the three months ended March 31, 2020, the Northeast Regional Mall was sold. We received $9.2 million in gross proceeds and recognized a gain of $1.8 million.
•During 2019, we separately recognized provision for loan losses of $18.5 million on two loans secured by one regional mall (“West Regional Mall”) to reflect the estimated fair value of the collateral. During the three months ended June 30, 2020, the West Regional Mall loan was sold. We received $23.5 million in gross proceeds and recognized a gain of $6.5 million.
•Also, during 2019, we recognized a $26.7 million provision for loan losses on three loans to two separate borrowers (“South Regional Mall A” and “South Regional Mall B”) to reflect the estimated fair value of the collateral. During the three months ended March 31, 2020, we accepted a discounted payoff of South Regional Mall A. We received $22.0
million in gross proceeds and recognized a loss of $1.6 million. Additionally, during the three months ended March 31, 2020 South Regional Mall B was sold. We received $13.5 million in gross proceeds and recognized a gain of $8.7 million.
Impairment of Loans and Preferred Equity Held in Joint Ventures
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized our proportionate share of a fair value loss adjustment totaling $14.7 million on one senior loan secured by a regional mall (“Southeast Regional Mall”) of which we owned 50.0% of the joint venture. Southeast Regional Mall was included in our Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio prior to its sale during the three months ended June 30, 2020. We received $13.4 million in gross sales proceeds and recognized a gain of $1.6 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we classified one investment in an unconsolidated venture secured by a land development loan (“West Land Development Loan”) in our Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio with a carrying value of $11.0 million as held for sale. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we accepted a discounted payoff and recognized a $2.6 million realized loss.
COVID-19 Update
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold nine loans generating gross proceeds of $113.0 million. Our two remaining loans are on nonaccrual status. We have reviewed the two remaining loans in our Legacy, Non-Strategic portfolio and believe that it is too early to predict and quantify the full impact of principal loss. However, further losses or permanent impairment in future quarters are possible.
Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio: Owned Real Estate
Our owned real estate includes direct ownership in commercial real estate with an emphasis on properties with stable cash flow, which may be structurally senior to a third-party partner’s equity. In addition, we own operating real estate investments through joint ventures with one or more partners. These properties are typically well-located with strong operating partners.
As of December 31, 2020, $240.1 million, or 92.9%, of our Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio was invested in owned real estate and was 100.0% occupied. The following table provides a summary of net leased and other real estate included in our Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
_________________________________________
(1)Represents carrying values at our share as of December 31, 2020; includes real estate tangible assets, deferred leasing costs and other intangible assets less intangible liabilities.
(2)Excludes NOI of $9.8 million that relates to properties that have been sold. Please refer to “Non-GAAP Supplemental Financial Measures” for further information on NOI.
The following table provides asset-level details of our net leased and other real estate included in our Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio as of December 31, 2020:
_________________________________________
(1)Represents the percent leased as of December 31, 2020. Weighted average calculation based on carrying value at our share as of December 31, 2020.
(2)Based on in-place leases (defined as occupied and paying leases) as of December 31, 2020 and assumes that no renewal options are exercised. Weighted average calculation based on carrying value at our share as of December 31, 2020.
COVID-19 Update
Since April 1, 2020 through February 24, 2021, we collected 88.4% of total rents across our Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio.
We reviewed our Legacy, Non-Strategic owned real estate portfolio and our asset management team is in active discussions with all lessees. See table below (dollars in thousands):
We met all our mortgage obligations securing the properties within our Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio. We caution that known and unknown COVID-19 events could result in lease modifications, impairment and the inability to make our mortgage payments, all which could result in default under our mortgage obligations.
As we executed sales of owned real estate in our Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio we recorded impairment on held for sale operating real estate properties of $42.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 resulting from bids received and updated brokers’ opinions of value (BOVs).
Since October 1, 2019, when we realigned the business and our reportable segments to reflect management’s focus on the resolution of certain Legacy, Non-Strategic investments, we have completed the following sales (dollars in thousands):
As of December 31, 2020 we continue to hold Legacy, Non-Strategic Owned Real Estate gross assets of $254.2 million which represents 4.1% of the company’s total assets.
Refer to “Potential Sources of Liquidity” in “Liquidity and Capital Resources,” respectively, for further discussion regarding the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our future operating results, liquidity and financial condition.
Results of Operations - Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio
The following table summarizes our Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (dollars in thousands):
Comparison of Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio for Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net Interest Income
Interest income
Interest income decreased by $15.3 million to $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to $13.1 million related to the sale and repayment of loan investments and $1.3 million related to one foreclosed loan investment.
Interest expense
Interest expense decreased by $4.6 million to $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily due to a lower allocation of interest expense on our Bank Credit Facility to the Legacy Non-Strategic Portfolio for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Property and other income
Property operating income
Property operating income decreased by $49.5 million to $89.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The lower income was primarily due to a $26.8 million decrease related to 34 real estate properties sold during 2020 and a $12.3 million decrease in hotel revenue due to COVID-19.
Other income
Other income increased by $0.7 million to $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This is primarily due to tax refunds received during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Expenses
Management fee expense
Management fee expense decreased by $4.9 million to $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is due to the reduction in stockholders’ equity (as defined in the Management Agreement) as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019. The reduction in stockholders’ equity is primarily due to a fourth quarter 2019 amendment to our definition of core earnings in the Management Agreement.
Property operating expense
Property operating expense decreased by $27.5 million to $53.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The lower expense was primarily due to a $14.2 million decrease related to 34 real estate properties sold during 2020 and a $7.3 million decrease in hotel operating expenses related to COVID-19.
Transaction, investment and servicing expense
Transaction, investment and servicing expense decreased by $0.7 million to $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, as a result of lower costs associated with the sale of investments.
Interest expense on real estate
Interest expense on real estate decreased by $4.5 million to $16.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease resulted from real estate properties sold within the past twelve months.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased by $35.4 million to $18.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The lower expense was primarily due to a $22.1 million decrease related to 34 real estate properties sold during 2020 and $3.4 million related to properties sold during 2019.
Provision for loan losses
Provision for loan losses of $37.6 million was recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020, which is primarily attributable to the Company recording an additional provision of $36.8 million for our four NY hospitality loans due to the detrimental impact of COVID-19 on the hospitality industry.
Impairment of operating real estate
Impairment of operating real estate held for sale of $42.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily resulting from feedback received during the sales process.
Administrative expense
Administrative expense decreased by $7.3 million to $7.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to lower stock compensation expense allocated to the Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio and a lower allocation of indirect costs which are reimbursable to our Manager.
Other income
Other gain, net
Other gain, net increased by $2.2 million to $9.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to gains recognized on asset sales during 2020.
Equity in earnings (loss) of unconsolidated ventures
Equity in earnings (loss) of unconsolidated ventures decreased by $19.7 million to a gain of $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily due to recording $25.0 million in impairments on three of our equity method investments in 2019, partially offset by us recording a $2.6 million realized loss on the discounted payoff of one equity method investment during 2020.
Income tax benefit (expense)
Income tax expense decreased by $13.6 million to an income tax benefit of $11.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily due to the Company finalizing its 2019 federal tax return and determining it would be able to carryback certain tax capital losses to prior years resulting in a refund of $11.3 million.
Comparison of Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio for Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Net Interest Income
Interest income
Interest income decreased by $25.6 million to $17.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This decrease was primarily due to $15.4 million related to the foreclosure of seven loan investments, $5.1 million related to the repayment of loan investments, $3.8 million due to placing the four NY hospitality loans on nonaccrual status and $0.9 million related to the deconsolidation of certain investments entities.
Interest expense
Interest expense increased by $2.3 million to $6.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to a $2.8 million increase related to borrowings on the revolving credit facility and a $1.6 million increase related to financing obtained from our master repurchase facilities on two loan investments, partially offset by a decrease of $2.1 million related to paydowns on our master repurchase facilities following the repayment of loan investments.
Property and other income
Property operating income
Property operating income increased by $48.9 million to $138.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to a $42.7 million increase related to the 30 real estate properties acquired through foreclosure in 2018 and 2019.
Expenses
Management fee expense
Management fee expense decreased by $0.2 million to $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease is due to the reduction in stockholders’ equity (as defined in the Management
Agreement) as of December 31, 2019 compared to December 31, 2018. The reduction in stockholders’ equity is primarily due to a fourth quarter 2019 amendment to our definition of core earnings in the Management Agreement, as well as distributions declared and paid.
Property operating expense
Property operating expense increased by $34.1 million to $81.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to a $32.0 million increase related to the 30 real estate properties acquired through foreclosure in 2018 and 2019.
Transaction, investment and servicing expense
Transaction, investment and servicing expense increased by $3.1 million to $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily as a result of $2.1 million of legal costs associated with the foreclosure of 29 properties throughout 2019.
Interest expense on real estate
Interest expense on real estate increased by $2.9 million to $21.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to a $1.9 million increase due to recognizing a full year of interest expense on real estate in 2019 on operating real estate properties acquired in the Combination and a $1.1 million increase related to the financing obtained in March 2019 for a hotel foreclosed on in 2018.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense increased by $9.0 million to $54.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This was primarily due to a $18.2 million increase related to 30 real estate properties acquired through foreclosure in the third quarter of 2018 and during 2019. The increase was partially offset by a $8.2 million decrease in amortization expense primarily as a result of short-term in-place lease value intangible assets on our multifamily properties that were fully amortized in 2018.
Provision for loan losses
Provision for loan losses of $220.6 million was recorded for the year ended December 31, 2019, which is attributable to our four NY hospitality loans of $154.3 million and seven loans collateralized by retail properties of $66.3 million. Provision for loan losses of $114.4 million was recorded for the year ended December 31, 2018, which is attributable to our four NY hospitality loans of $53.8 million, four loans collateralized with 28 office, retail, multifamily and industrial properties of $36.8 million and three loans collateralized by retail properties of $23.8 million.
Impairment of operating real estate
Impairment of operating real estate of $258.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 is resulting from a reduction in the estimated holding period of certain properties. Impairment of operating real estate of $29.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 is attributable to certain retail and student housing properties.
Administrative expense
Administrative expense increased by $2.8 million to $15.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This was primarily due to higher expenses related to equity-based compensation due to awards granted in March 2019 under the 2018 Plan, reimbursable expenses allocated to us by our Manager.
Other income
Other gain, net
Other gain, net increased by $6.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to $8.8 million related to the gain on sale of three real estate properties, offset by a decrease of $1.3 million related to professional fees associated with the sale of our PE Investments.
Equity in earnings (loss) of unconsolidated ventures
Equity in losses of unconsolidated ventures increased by $0.6 million to $19.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This was primarily due to an impairment of $30.8 million on five senior and mezzanine loans held in joint ventures and $3.8 million related to placing two mezzanine loans and one preferred equity investment on nonaccrual status. This was offset by an increase of $33.2 million related to our PE Investments in which we recorded no equity in earnings for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense decreased by $33.5 million to $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily due to a $34.9 million tax valuation adjustment recorded in 2018 following an analysis that determined it is more likely than not that some portion of the deferred tax asset related to its PE Investments will not be realized.
Non-GAAP Supplemental Financial Measures
Distributable Earnings/Legacy, Non-Strategic Distributable Earnings
We present Distributable Earnings/Legacy, Non-Strategic Distributable Earnings, which is a non-GAAP supplemental financial measure of our performance. Our Distributable Earnings are generated by the Core Portfolio and Legacy, Non-Strategic Distributable Earnings are generated by the Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio. We believe that Distributable Earnings/Legacy, Non-Strategic Distributable Earnings provides meaningful information to consider in addition to our net income and cash flow from operating activities determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, and this metric is a useful indicator for investors in evaluating and comparing our operating performance to our peers and our ability to pay dividends. We elected to be taxed as a REIT under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, beginning with our taxable year ended December 31, 2018. As a REIT, we are required to distribute substantially all of our taxable income and we believe that dividends are one of the principal reasons investors invest in credit or commercial mortgage REITs such as our company. Over time, Distributable Earnings has been a useful indicator of our dividends per share and we consider that measure in determining the dividend, if any, to be paid. This supplemental financial measure also helps us to evaluate our performance excluding the effects of certain transactions and U.S. GAAP adjustments that we believe are not necessarily indicative of our current portfolio and operations. For information on the fees we pay our Manager, see Note 10, “Related Party Arrangements” to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules of this Form 10-K.
We define Distributable Earnings/Legacy, Non-Strategic Distributable Earnings as U.S. GAAP net income (loss) attributable to our common stockholders (or, without duplication, the owners of the common equity of our direct subsidiaries, such as our OP) and excluding (i) non-cash equity compensation expense, (ii) the expenses incurred in connection with our formation or other strategic transactions, (iii) the incentive fee, (iv) acquisition costs from successful acquisitions, (v) gains or losses from sales of real estate property and impairment write-downs of depreciable real estate, including unconsolidated joint ventures and preferred equity investments, (vi) CECL reserves determined by probability of default/loss given default (“PD/LGD”) model, (vii) depreciation and amortization, (viii) any unrealized gains or losses or other similar non-cash items that are included in net income for the current quarter, regardless of whether such items are included in other comprehensive income or loss, or in net income, (ix) one-time events pursuant to changes in U.S. GAAP and (x) certain material non-cash income or expense items that in the judgment of management should not be included in Distributable Earnings/Legacy, Non-Strategic Distributable Earnings. For clauses (ix) and (x), such exclusions shall only be applied after discussions between our Manager and our independent directors and after approval by a majority of our independent directors. Distributable Earnings/Legacy, Non-Strategic Distributable Earnings include provision for loan losses when realized. Loan losses are realized when such amounts are deemed nonrecoverable at the time the loan is repaid, or if the underlying asset is sold following foreclosure, or if we determine that it is probable that all amounts due will not be collected; realized loan losses to be included in Distributable Earnings is the difference between the cash received, or expected to be received, and the book value of the asset.
Distributable Earnings/Legacy, Non-Strategic Distributable Earnings does not represent net income or cash generated from operating activities and should not be considered as an alternative to U.S. GAAP net income or an indication of our cash flows from operating activities determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, a measure of our liquidity, or an indication of funds available to fund our cash needs. In addition, our methodology for calculating Distributable Earnings/Legacy, Non-Strategic Distributable Earnings may differ from methodologies employed by other companies to calculate the same or similar non-GAAP supplemental financial measures, and accordingly, our reported Distributable Earnings may not be comparable to the Distributable Earnings reported by other companies.
The following tables present a reconciliation of net income (loss) attributable to our common stockholders to Distributable Earnings/Legacy, Non-Strategic Distributable Earnings attributable to our common stockholders and noncontrolling interest of the Operating Partnership (dollars and share amounts in thousands, except per share data) for the year ended December 31, 2020:
_________________________________________
(1)We calculate Distributable Earnings/Legacy, Non-Strategic Distributable Earnings (Loss) per share, a non-GAAP financial measure, based on a weighted-average number of common shares and OP units (held by members other than us or our subsidiaries). For the year ended December 31, 2020, weighted average number of common shares includes 3.1 million OP units.
NOI
We believe NOI to be a useful measure of operating performance of our net leased and other real estate portfolios as they are more closely linked to the direct results of operations at the property level. NOI excludes historical cost depreciation and amortization, which are based on different useful life estimates depending on the age of the properties, as well as adjusts for the effects of real estate impairment and gains or losses on sales of depreciated properties, which eliminate differences arising from investment and disposition decisions. Additionally, by excluding corporate level expenses or benefits such as interest expense, any gain or loss on early extinguishment of debt and income taxes, which are incurred by the parent entity and are not directly linked to the operating performance of the Company’s properties, NOI provides a measure of operating performance independent of the Company’s capital structure and indebtedness. However, the exclusion of these items as well as others, such as capital expenditures and leasing costs, which are necessary to maintain the operating performance of the Company’s properties, and transaction costs and administrative costs, may limit the usefulness of NOI. NOI may fail to capture significant trends in these components of U.S. GAAP net income (loss) which further limits its usefulness.
NOI should not be considered as an alternative to net income (loss), determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, as an indicator of operating performance. In addition, our methodology for calculating NOI involves subjective judgment and discretion and may differ from the methodologies used by other companies, when calculating the same or similar supplemental financial measures and may not be comparable with other companies.
The following tables present a reconciliation of net income (loss) on our net leased and other real estate portfolios attributable to our common stockholders to NOI attributable to our common stockholders (dollars in thousands) for the year ended December 31, 2020:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary liquidity needs include commitments to repay borrowings, finance our assets and operations, meet future funding obligations, make distributions to our stockholders and fund other general business needs. We use significant cash to make additional investments, meet commitments to existing investments, repay the principal of and interest on our borrowings and pay other financing costs, make distributions to our stockholders and fund our operations, which includes making payments to our Manager in accordance with the management agreement.
Our primary sources of liquidity include cash on hand, cash generated from our operating activities and cash generated from asset sales and investment maturities. However, subject to maintaining our qualification as a REIT and our Investment Company Act exclusion, we may use several sources to finance our business, including bank credit facilities (including term loans and revolving facilities), master repurchase facilities and securitizations, as described below. In addition to our current sources of liquidity, there may be opportunities from time to time to access liquidity through public offerings of debt and equity securities. We also invested in a number of our assets through co-investments with other investment vehicles managed by affiliates of our Manager and/or other third parties, which has and may allow us to pool capital to access larger transactions and diversify investment exposure.
Financing Strategy
We have a multi-pronged financing strategy that includes an up to $450 million secured revolving credit facility, up to approximately $2.1 billion in secured revolving repurchase facilities, $840 million in non-recourse securitization financing, $1.0 billion in commercial mortgages and $75 million in other asset-level financing structures. In addition, we may use other forms of financing, including additional warehouse facilities, public and private secured and unsecured debt issuances and equity or equity-related securities issuances by us or our subsidiaries. We may also finance a portion of our investments through the syndication of one or more interests in a whole loan. We will seek to match the nature and duration of the financing with the underlying asset’s cash flow, including using hedges, as appropriate.
Debt-to-Equity Ratio
The following table presents our debt-to-equity ratio:
_________________________________________
(1)Represents (i) total outstanding secured debt less cash and cash equivalents of $474.8 million and $462.0 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively to (ii) total equity, in each case, at period end.
Potential Sources of Liquidity
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a significant impact on our business, and during 2020 we acted to protect our liquidity. The pandemic’s impact on the financial condition of our borrowers and their ability to make their monthly mortgage payments and remain in compliance with loan covenants and terms has been notable, as the failure of our borrowers to meet their loan obligations may trigger repayments to our Bank Credit Facility and Master Repurchase Facilities. During 2020, we experienced declines in the value of our target assets, and received margin calls, default notices and deficiency letters from certain of our financing counterparties.
Additionally, if our operating real estate lessees are unable to make monthly rent payments, we would be unable to make our monthly mortgage payments which could result in defaults under these obligations or trigger repayments under our Bank Credit Facility. If these events were to occur, we may not have sufficient available cash to repay amounts due.
Bank Credit Facilities
We use bank credit facilities (including term loans and revolving facilities) to finance our business. These financings may be collateralized or non-collateralized and may involve one or more lenders. Credit facilities typically have maturities ranging from two to five years and may accrue interest at either fixed or floating rates.
On February 1, 2018, the OP (together with certain subsidiaries of the OP from time to time party thereto as borrowers, collectively, the “Borrowers”) entered into a credit agreement (the “Bank Credit Facility”) with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent, and the several lenders from time to time party thereto (the “Lenders”), pursuant to which the Lenders agreed to provide a revolving credit facility in the aggregate principal amount of up to $400.0 million. On December 17, 2018, the aggregate amount of revolving commitments was increased to $525.0 million and on February 4, 2019, the aggregate amount of revolving commitments was increased to $560.0 million.
Given the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic to the underlying value of our investments, and related uncertainty in our ability to meet certain financial covenants, during the second quarter we amended our Bank Credit Facility to: (i) reduce the minimum tangible net worth covenant requirement from $2.1 billion to $1.5 billion, providing portfolio management flexibilities as a result of any disruptions in investments caused by COVID-19 or other factors; (ii) reduce the facility size from $560.0 million to $450.0 million; (iii) limit dividends to an amount required to retain REIT status or to avoid income tax and restrict stock repurchases, each for liquidity preservation purpose; and (iv) focus new investments on senior mortgages.
Advances under the Bank Credit Facility accrue interest at a per annum rate equal to, at the applicable Borrower’s election, either a LIBOR rate plus a margin of 2.25%, or a base rate determined according to a prime rate or federal funds rate plus a margin of 1.25%. An unused commitment fee at a rate of 0.25% or 0.35%, per annum, depending on the amount of facility utilization, applies to un-utilized borrowing capacity under the Bank Credit Facility. Amounts owing under the Bank Credit Facility may be prepaid at any time without premium or penalty, subject to customary breakage costs in the case of borrowings with respect to which a LIBOR rate election is in effect.
The maximum amount available for borrowing at any time under the Bank Credit Facility is limited to a borrowing base valuation of certain investment assets, with the valuation of such investment assets generally determined according to a percentage of adjusted net book value. As of the date hereof, the borrowing base valuation is sufficient to support the outstanding borrowings. The Bank Credit Facility will mature on February 1, 2022, unless the OP elects to exercise the extension options for up to two additional terms of six months each, subject to the terms and conditions in the Bank Credit Facility, resulting in a latest maturity date of February 1, 2023.
The obligations of the Borrowers under the Bank Credit Facility are guaranteed by substantially all material wholly owned subsidiaries of the OP pursuant to a Guarantee and Collateral Agreement with the OP and certain subsidiaries of the OP in favor of JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent (the “Guarantee and Collateral Agreement”) and, subject to certain exceptions, secured by a pledge of substantially all equity interests owned by the Borrowers and the guarantors, as well as by a security interest in deposit accounts of the Borrowers and the Guarantors (as such terms are defined in the Guarantee and Collateral Agreement) in which the proceeds of investment asset distributions are maintained.
The Bank Credit Facility contains various affirmative and negative covenants, including, among other things, the obligation of the Company to maintain REIT status and be listed on the NYSE, and limitations on debt, liens and restricted payments. In addition, the Bank Credit Facility includes the following financial covenants applicable to the OP and its consolidated subsidiaries: (a) consolidated tangible net worth of the OP must be greater than or equal to the sum of (i) $1.5 billion and (ii) 75% of the proceeds received by the OP from any offering of its common equity and of the proceeds from any offering by the Company of its common equity to the extent such proceeds are contributed to the OP, excluding any such proceeds that are contributed to the OP within ninety (90) days of receipt and applied to acquire capital stock of the OP; (b) the OP’s earnings before interest, income tax, depreciation, and amortization plus lease expenses to fixed charges for any period of four
(4) consecutive fiscal quarters must be not less than 1.50 to 1.00; (c) the OP’s interest coverage ratio must be not less than 3.00 to 1.00; and (d) the OP’s ratio of consolidated total debt to consolidated total assets must be not more than 0.70 to 1.00. The Bank Credit Facility also includes customary events of default, including, among other things, failure to make payments when due, breach of covenants or representations, cross default to material indebtedness or material judgment defaults, bankruptcy matters involving any Borrower or any Guarantor and certain change of control events. Further, we may not make distributions in excess of amounts required to maintain REIT status and may not repurchase shares, among other provisions. The occurrence of an event of default will limit the ability of the OP and its subsidiaries to make distributions and may result in the termination of the credit facility, acceleration of repayment obligations and the exercise of remedies by the Lenders with respect to the collateral.
During the three months ended March 31, 2020, concurrent with the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we drew $226.5 million on our Bank Credit Facility and ended such quarter with $340.0 million outstanding and $29.0 million of availability and reported $255 million cash on hand as of May 7, 2020. During the three months ended September 30, 2020, we fully paid down our Bank Credit Facility.
As of February 24, 2021, we have approximately $689 million of liquidity, consisting of $588 million cash on hand and $101 million of availability under our Bank Credit Facility.
Master Repurchase Facilities and CMBS Credit Facilities
Currently, our primary source of financing is our Master Repurchase Facilities, which we use to finance the origination of senior loans, and CMBS Credit Facilities, which we use to finance the purchase of securities. Repurchase agreements effectively allow us to borrow against loans, participations and securities that we own in an amount generally equal to (i) the market value of such loans, participations and/or securities multiplied by (ii) the applicable advance rate. Under these agreements, we sell our loans, participations and securities to a counterparty and agree to repurchase the same loans and securities from the counterparty at a price equal to the original sales price plus an interest factor. During the term of a repurchase agreement, we receive the principal and interest on the related loans, participations and securities and pay interest to the lender under the master repurchase agreement. We intend to maintain formal relationships with multiple counterparties to obtain master repurchase financing on favorable terms.
Master Repurchase Facilities
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the following actions were taken with regard to our Master Repurchase Facilities:
•During 2020, we amended the minimum tangible net worth covenant under all six of our Master Repurchase Facilities consistent with the Bank Credit Facility. During the first quarter of 2020, we received and timely paid a margin call on a hospitality loan and made voluntarily paydowns on two other hospitality and one retail loan. The lender granted us a holiday from future margin calls for four months, and we obtained broader discretion to enter in to permitted modifications with the borrowers on these three specific loans, if necessary.
•In May 2020, we entered into agreements to modify two of our master repurchase facilities pursuant to which we reduced facility advances corresponding to ten senior mortgage loans financed under such facilities. We and our lender counterparties agreed to temporary modifications providing for margin holidays from future margin calls or buffers before further margin calls are possible, as well as providing additional protections before certain repurchase obligations may be triggered. We were also provided broader discretion to negotiate with our borrowers to implement certain modifications to the underlying loans during such period. These holiday periods expired in the fourth quarter of 2020. Additionally, during the third quarter of 2020, we made voluntarily paydowns on a hospitality loan and a self-storage loan. In exchange for the paydown on the self-storage loan, the lender granted us a holiday from future margin calls for four months, and we obtained broader approval to enter into a permitted modification with the borrower.
•In October 2020, we exercised a one-year extension option on the Bank 2 facility, extending the maturity to October 2021. We additionally reduced the capacity from $200.0 million to $21.4 million.
Subsequent to December 31, 2020, we completed an amendment of the Bank 7 facility, extending the initial maturity to April 2024. Additionally, we completed an amendment to the Bank 3 facility which provides for two, one-year extension options.
While we continue to engage in discussions with our Master Repurchase Facility lenders, it is uncertain whether we will reach any future agreement due to the limited and temporary holiday and permitted modification periods described above, and the continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. As such, we may receive additional margin calls, experience additional pressures or events of default under our financing agreements that will negatively impact our liquidity position.
CMBS Credit Facilities
During the first quarter of 2020, we received and paid margin calls on our CMBS Credit Facilities of $48.9 million. During the second quarter of 2020, we consolidated our CMBS Credit Facilities borrowings with one existing counterparty bank. In connection with the consolidation, we paid down the CMBS Credit Facilities borrowing advance rate to a blended borrowing advance rate of 62% and extended the repurchase date on all such borrowings, first to June 30, 2020 and then to December 31, 2020. This $73.9 million paydown allowed for a 15% additional loss on a bond specific basis before further margin calls. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we repaid all borrowings under the CMBS Credit Facilities ($18.2 million was outstanding prior to repayment). As of February 24, 2021, we have zero dollars outstanding under our CMBS Credit Facilities.
The following table presents a summary of our Master Repurchase, CMBS and Bank Credit Facilities as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
_________________________________________
(1)Amounts can be drawn under the Bank 1, Bank 3, Bank 4, Bank 5 and Bank 6 CMBS Credit Facilities, but we are not utilizing them. The maturity dates on CMBS Credit Facilities are dependent upon asset type.
Securitizations
We may seek to utilize non-recourse long-term securitizations of our investments in mortgage loans, especially loan originations, to the extent consistent with the maintenance of our REIT qualification and exclusion from the Investment Company Act in order to generate cash for funding new investments. This would involve conveying a pool of assets to a special purpose vehicle (or the issuing entity), which would issue one or more classes of non-recourse notes pursuant to the terms of an indenture. The notes would be secured by the pool of assets. In exchange for the transfer of assets to the issuing entity, we would receive the cash proceeds on the sale of non-recourse notes and a 100% interest in the equity of the issuing entity. The securitization of our portfolio investments might magnify our exposure to losses on those portfolio investments because any equity interest we retain in the issuing entity would be subordinate to the notes issued to investors and we would, therefore, absorb all of the losses sustained with respect to a securitized pool of assets before the owners of the notes experience any losses.
In October 2019, we executed a securitization transaction through our subsidiaries, CLNC 2019-FL1, which resulted in the sale of $840 million of investment grade notes. The securitization reflects an advance rate of 83.5% at a weighted average cost of funds of LIBOR plus 1.59%, and is collateralized by a pool of 21 senior loans, which we originated.
CLNC 2019-FL1 includes a two-year reinvestment feature that allows us to contribute existing or newly originated loan investments in exchange for proceeds from repayments or repurchases of loans held in CLNC 2019-FL1, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions set forth in the indenture. In addition to existing eligible loans available for reinvestment, the continued origination of securitization eligible loans is required to ensure that we reinvest the available proceeds within CLNC 2019-FL1. During the year ended December 31, 2020 and through February 24, 2021, eight loans held in CLNC 2019-FL1
were either fully or partially repaid, totaling $244.3 million. We replaced the repaid loans by contributing existing loan investments of equal value.
Additionally, CLNC 2019-FL1 contains note protection tests that can be triggered as a result of contributed loan defaults, losses, and certain other events outlined in the indenture, beyond established thresholds. A note protection test failure that is not remedied can result in the redirection of interest proceeds from the below investment grade tranches to amortize the most senior outstanding tranche. While we continue to closely monitor all loan investments contributed to CLNC 2019-FL1, a deterioration in the performance of an underlying loan could negatively impact our liquidity position.
5-Investment Preferred Financing
On June 5, 2020, we entered into a preferred financing arrangement (on a portfolio of five of our underlying investment interests) (the “5-Investment Preferred Financing”) from investment vehicles managed by Goldman Sachs (“GS”). The preferred financing provided $200 million of proceeds at closing.
The preferred financing is limited to (i) our interests in four co-investments, three of which are in our Core Portfolio and one which is in the Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio, alongside investment funds managed by affiliates of our manager, each of which are financings on underlying development projects (including residential, office and/or mixed-use components), and (ii) a wholly-owned triple-net industrial distribution center investment leased to a national grocery chain, which is included in our Core Portfolio. The preferred financing provides GS a 10% preferred return and certain other minimum returns, as well as a minority interest in future cash flows.
The transaction resulted in net liquidity to us of approximately $170 million, net of approximately $30 million in paydowns under the Company’s corporate credit facility. The preferred financing provides the ability to draw down up to an additional $29 million of commitments from GS for future advances to the portfolio, if any, at our same advance rate.
The following table presents a summary of the five assets included in the portfolio financing as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
_________________________________________
(1)For further details on each asset included in the portfolio financing please refer to “Core Portfolio” and “Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolio” in the section titled “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
(2)Rolling Hills, CA is the only Legacy, Non-Strategic asset included in the 5-Investment Preferred Financing.
We and our affiliates control the continuing investment and portfolio management of such investments and are consolidated on our consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2020. The preferred financing provides for a disproportionate allocation of profits and losses and the share of income or loss is determined using a balance sheet approach known as the hypothetical liquidation at book value (“HLBV”) method. Under the HLBV method, earnings and losses are recognized based on how an entity would allocate and distribute its cash if it were to sell all of its assets and settle its liabilities for their carrying amounts and liquidate at the reporting date. Under the HLBV method, we could record, in any period, more or less income than may be generated in the case of an actual liquidation. The preferred financing resulted in a reallocation of a portion of stockholders equity to noncontrolling interest, resulting in a $69 million day one reduction in stockholders equity. The noncontrolling interest in investment entities on our consolidated balance sheet includes $259.5 million representing GS’s investment at December 31, 2020 under the HLBV method.
The following table presents a summary of the members capital from inception through the year ended December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
_________________________________________
(1)Future advances on Loan 41 and Loan 47. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, GS and CLNC contributed $0.8 million and $0.7 million, respectively on Loan 41 and Loan 47.
(2)Distribution from Net Lease 3. Subsequent to December 31, 2020 CLNC distributed $8.0 million to GS pertaining to our mezzanine loan.
(3)Losses during the period were driven by the $64.1 million fair value adjustment, of which $57.7 million was allocated to CLNC and $6.4 million was allocated to GS, on our Dublin, Ireland mixed use Loan 26. These losses were offset by other profits across the portfolio financing.
Investment Sales
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and through February 24, 2021, we sold or received a discounted payoff for 15 loans, sold 36 owned real estate assets and sold 42 CRE debt securities generating net proceeds of $459.1 million and $271.8 million from our Core and Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolios, respectively.
We classified two owned real estate properties as held for sale with a total net carrying value of $323.0 million at December 31, 2020, one of which was sold in January 2021. While we have agreements to sell or are proceeding with active marketing, the ongoing uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic may result in us being unable to sell or complete the sale of these properties in the near to medium-term. Further, any completed sales may result in an investment loss.
Additionally, we continue to evaluate asset sales from our Core and Legacy, Non-Strategic Portfolios. While these sales are expected to generate liquidity, completion of these sales is uncertain and may result in lower than expected proceeds or an investment loss.
Other potential sources of financing
In the future, we may also use other sources of financing to fund the acquisition of our target assets, including secured and unsecured forms of borrowing and selective wind-down and dispositions of assets. We may also seek to raise equity capital or issue debt securities in order to fund our future investments.
Dividend
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused extraordinary volatility and unprecedented market conditions, including actual and unanticipated consequences to us and certain of our investments, which may continue. Having paid monthly dividend payments with respect to our common stock through March 31, 2020, we and the Board of Directors determined it was prudent and in our best interests to conserve available liquidity and suspend our monthly dividend beginning with the monthly period ended April 30, 2020. We and the Board of Directors monitored our taxable income to ensure that we met the minimum distribution requirements to maintain our status as a REIT for our taxable year ended December 31, 2020.
With the steps we have taken to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on our liquidity and financial condition, and our focus shifting toward new investments, building earnings and further growth initiatives, the Board of Directors approved a quarterly dividend of $0.10 per share of Class A common stock for the quarter ending March 31, 2021, and we expect to continue quarterly cash dividends thereafter, subject to board approval, to ensure that the Company meets the minimum distributions requirements to maintain its status as a REIT for the annual period ending December 31, 2021.
Cash Flows
The following presents a summary of our consolidated statements of cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (dollars in thousands):
Operating Activities
Cash inflows from operating activities are generated primarily through interest received from loans receivable and securities, property operating income from our real estate portfolio, and distributions of earnings received from unconsolidated ventures. This is partially offset by payment of interest expenses for credit facilities and mortgages payable, and operating expenses supporting our various lines of business, including property management and operations, loan servicing and workout of loans in default, investment transaction costs, as well as general administrative costs.
Our operating activities generated net cash inflows of $96.4 million, $137.2 million and $100.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $40.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to lower property operating income earned resulting from sales of real estate properties during the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash provided by operating activities increased $36.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily due to higher transaction fees paid associated with the Combination during the year ended December 31, 2018.
We believe cash flows from operations, available cash balances and our ability to generate cash through short- and long-term borrowings are sufficient to fund our operating liquidity needs.
Investing Activities
Investing activities include cash outlays for acquisition of real estate, disbursements on new and/or existing loans, and contributions to unconsolidated ventures, which are partially offset by repayments and sales of loan receivables, distributions of capital received from unconsolidated ventures, proceeds from sale of real estate, as well as proceeds from maturity or sale of securities.
Investing activities generated net cash inflows of $1.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash provided by investing activities in 2020 resulted primarily from proceeds from repayments on loan and preferred equity held for investment of $434.7 million, sales of real estate of $454.6 million, proceeds from sales of loans held for sale of $137.1 million, proceeds from sale of real estate securities, available for sale of $149.6 million and proceeds from sale of investments in unconsolidated ventures of $108.4 million partially offset by originations and future advances on our loans and preferred equity held for investment, net of $297.0 million, and contributions to investments in unconsolidated ventures of $48.9 million.
Investing activities in 2019 used net cash outflows of $416.0 million, resulting from acquisition, origination and funding of loans and preferred equity held for investment, net of $1.4 billion, partially offset by repayment on loan and preferred equity held for investment of $465.6 million, distributions in excess of cumulative earnings from unconsolidated ventures of $212.6 million, proceeds from sale of investments in unconsolidated ventures of $115.3 million, proceeds from sale of real estate of $85.4 million, repayment of principal in mortgage loans held in securitization trusts of $47.5 million, proceeds from sale of mortgage loans held in securitization trusts of $39.8 million and net receipts on settlement of derivative instruments of $28.9 million.
Investing activities in 2018 used net cash outflow of $467.7 million, resulting from acquisition, origination and funding of loans and preferred equity held for investment, net of $919.5 million, acquisition of and additions to real estate, related intangibles and leasing commissions of $415.1 million, investment in unconsolidated ventures of $239.7 million, acquisition of real estate securities, available for sale of $58.7 million, and deposit on investments of $29.4 million, partially offset by repayment on loans and preferred equity held for investment of $626.6 million, cash received in the Combination of $328.5 million, proceeds from sale of real estate of $167.9 million, and distributions in excess of cumulative earnings from unconsolidated ventures of $98.5 million.
Financing Activities
We finance our investing activities largely through borrowings secured by our investments along with capital from third party or affiliated co-investors. We also have the ability to raise capital in the public markets through issuances of common stock, as well as draw upon our corporate credit facility, to finance our investing and operating activities. Accordingly, we incur cash outlays for payments on third party debt, dividends to our common stockholders as well as distributions to our noncontrolling interests.
Financing activities used net cash of $754.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash used in financing activities in 2020 resulted primarily from repayment of credit facilities of $862.6 million, repayment of mortgage notes of $240.1 million, distributions paid on common stock and noncontrolling interests of $52.6 million and distributions to noncontrolling interests in the amount of $31.3 million. This was partially offset by of borrowings from credit facilities in the amount of $298.6 million, contributions to the 5-Investment Preferred Financing of $200.0 million, and borrowings from mortgage notes in the amount of $18.6 million.
Our financing activities provided net cash inflow of $286.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash provided by financing activities in 2019 resulted primarily from borrowings from credit facilities in the amount of $1.8 billion and borrowings from mortgage notes in the amount of $85.7 million, partially offset by repayment of credit facilities in the amount of $1.3 billion, distributions paid on common stock and noncontrolling interests of $171.5 million and repayment of securitization bonds of $81.4 million.
Financing activities in 2018 generated net cash inflow of $487.5 million, resulting from borrowings from credit facilities in the amount of $1.7 billion and borrowings from mortgage notes in the amount of $246.4 million, partially offset by repayment of credit facilities in the amount of $999.3 million, distributions paid on common stock and noncontrolling interests in the amount of $189.8 million, repayment of securitization bonds in the amount of $108.2 million, and repayment of mortgage notes in the amount of $141.8 million.
Contractual Obligations, Commitments and Contingencies of the Company
The following table sets forth the known contractual obligations of the Company on an undiscounted basis. This table excludes obligations of the Company that are not fixed and determinable, including the Management Agreement (dollars in thousands):
_________________________________________
(1)Future interest payments were estimated based on the applicable index at December 31, 2020 and unused commitment fee of 0.35% per annum, assuming principal is repaid on the current maturity date of February 2022.
(2)Amounts include minimum principal and interest obligations through the initial maturity date of the collateral assets. Interest on floating rate debt was determined based on the applicable index at December 31, 2020.
(3)The timing of future principal payments was estimated based on expected future cash flows of underlying collateral loans. Repayments are estimated to be earlier than contractual maturity only if proceeds from underlying loans are repaid by the borrowers.
(4)The Company assumed noncancelable operating ground leases as lessee or sublessee in connection with net lease properties acquired through the CLNY Contributions. The amounts represent minimum future base rent commitments through initial expiration dates of the respective leases, excluding any contingent rent payments. Rents paid underground leases are recoverable from tenants.
(5)Future lending commitments may be subject to certain conditions that borrowers must meet to qualify for such fundings. Commitment amount assumes future fundings meet the terms to qualify for such fundings.
Guarantees and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we were not dependent on the use of any off-balance sheet financing arrangements for liquidity. We have made investments in unconsolidated ventures. Our investments in unconsolidated joint ventures consisted of investments in PE Investments, senior loans, mezzanine loans and preferred equity held in joint ventures, as well as acquisition, development and construction arrangements accounted for as equity method investments. In each case, our exposure to loss is limited to the carrying value of our investment.
Underwriting, Asset and Risk Management
Our Manager closely monitors our portfolio and actively manages risks associated with, among other things, our assets and interest rates. Prior to investing in any particular asset, our Manager’s underwriting team, in conjunction with third party providers, undertakes a rigorous asset-level due diligence process, involving intensive data collection and analysis, to ensure that we understand fully the state of the market and the risk-reward profile of the asset. Beginning in 2021, our investment and portfolio management and risk assessment practices diligence the environmental, social and governance ("ESG") standards of our business counterparties, including borrowers, sponsors, partners and service providers, and that of our investment assets and underlying collateral, which may include sustainability initiatives, recycling, energy efficiency and water management, volunteer and charitable efforts, anti-money laundering and know-your-client policies, and diversity, equity and inclusion practices in workforce leadership, composition and hiring practices. Prior to making a final investment decision, our Manager focuses on portfolio diversification to determine whether a target asset will cause our portfolio to be too heavily concentrated with, or cause too much risk exposure to, any one borrower, real estate sector, geographic region, source of cash flow for payment or other geopolitical issues. If our Manager determines that a proposed acquisition presents excessive concentration risk, it may determine not to acquire an otherwise attractive asset.
For each asset that we acquire, our Manager’s asset management team engages in active management of the asset, the intensity of which depends on the attendant risks. The asset manager works collaboratively with the underwriting team to formulate a strategic plan for the particular asset, which includes evaluating the underlying collateral and updating valuation assumptions to reflect changes in the real estate market and the general economy. This plan also generally outlines several strategies for the asset to extract the maximum amount of value from each asset under a variety of market conditions. Such strategies may vary depending on the type of asset, the availability of refinancing options, recourse and maturity, but may include, among others, the restructuring of non-performing or sub-performing loans, the negotiation of discounted pay-offs or other modification of the terms governing a loan, and the foreclosure and management of assets underlying non-performing loans in order to reposition them for profitable disposition. Our Manager and its affiliates will continuously track the progress of an asset against the original business plan to ensure that the attendant risks of continuing to own the asset do not outweigh the associated rewards. Under these circumstances, certain assets will require intensified asset management in order to achieve optimal value realization.
Our Manager’s asset management team engages in a proactive and comprehensive on-going review of the credit quality of each asset it manages. In particular, for debt investments on at least an annual basis, the asset management team will evaluate the financial wherewithal of individual borrowers to meet contractual obligations as well as review the financial stability of the assets securing such debt investments. Further, there is ongoing review of borrower covenant compliance including the ability of borrowers to meet certain negotiated debt service coverage ratios and debt yield tests. For equity investments, the asset management team, with the assistance of third-party property managers, monitors and reviews key metrics such as occupancy, same store sales, tenant payment rates, property budgets and capital expenditures. If through this analysis of credit quality, the asset management team encounters declines in credit not in accord with the original business plan, the team evaluates the risks and determine what changes, if any, are required to the business plan to ensure that the attendant risks of continuing to hold the investment do not outweigh the associated rewards.
In addition, the audit committee of our Board of Directors, in consultation with management, periodically reviews our policies with respect to risk assessment and risk management, including key risks to which we are subject, including credit risk, liquidity risk and market risk, and the steps that management has taken to monitor and control such risks.
Inflation
Virtually all of our assets and liabilities are interest rate sensitive in nature. As a result, interest rates and other factors influence our performance significantly more than inflation does. A change in interest rates may correlate with the inflation rate. Substantially all of the leases at our multifamily properties allow for monthly or annual rent increases which provide us with the opportunity to achieve increases, where justified by the market, as each lease matures. Such types of leases generally minimize the risks of inflation on our multifamily properties.
Refer to Item 7A, “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk” for additional details.
Critical Accounting Policies
Preparation of financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires the use of estimates and assumptions that involve the exercise of judgment and that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
Certain accounting policies are considered to be critical accounting policies. Critical accounting policies are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require subjective and complex judgments, and for which the impact of changes in estimates and assumptions could have a material effect on our financial statements.
Principles of Consolidation
We consolidate entities in which we have a controlling financial interest by first considering if an entity meets the definition of a variable interest entity (“VIE”) for which we are deemed to be the primary beneficiary, or if we have the power to control an entity through a majority of voting interest or through other arrangements.
Variable Interest Entities-A VIE is an entity that either (i) lacks sufficient equity to finance its activities without additional subordinated financial support from other parties; (ii) whose equity holders lack the characteristics of a controlling financial interest; or (iii) is established with non-substantive voting rights. A VIE is consolidated by its primary beneficiary, which is defined as the party who has a controlling financial interest in the VIE through (a) power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly affect the VIE’s economic performance, and (b) obligation to absorb losses or right to receive benefits of the VIE that could be significant to the VIE. We also consider interests held by our related parties, including de facto agents. We assess whether we are members of a related party group that collectively meets the power and benefits criteria and, if so, whether we are most closely associated with the VIE. In performing the related party analysis, we consider both qualitative and quantitative factors, including, but not limited to: the amount and characteristics of their investment relative to the related party; our ability and the related party’s ability to control or significantly influence key decisions of the VIE including consideration of involvement by de facto agents; the obligation or likelihood for us or the related party to fund operating losses of the VIE; and the similarity and significance of the VIE’s business to our activities and to those of the related party. The determination of whether an entity is a VIE, and whether we are the primary beneficiary, may involve significant judgment, including the determination of which activities most significantly affect the entities’ performance, and estimates about the current and future fair values and performance of assets held by the VIE.
Voting Interest Entities-Unlike VIEs, voting interest entities have sufficient equity to finance their activities and equity investors exhibit the characteristics of a controlling financial interest through their voting rights. We consolidate such entities when we have the power to control these entities through ownership of a majority of the entities’ voting interests or through other arrangements.
At each reporting period, we reassess whether changes in facts and circumstances cause a change in the status of an entity as a VIE or voting interest entity, and/or a change in our consolidation assessment. Changes in consolidation status are applied prospectively. An entity may be consolidated as a result of this reassessment, in which case, the assets, liabilities and noncontrolling interest in the entity are recorded at fair value upon initial consolidation. Any existing equity interest we hold in the entity prior to us obtaining control will be remeasured at fair value, which may result in a gain or loss recognized upon initial consolidation. However, if the consolidation represents an asset acquisition of a voting interest entity, our existing interest in the acquired assets, if any, is not remeasured to fair value but continues to be carried at historical cost. We may also deconsolidate a subsidiary as a result of this reassessment, which may result in a gain or loss recognized upon deconsolidation depending on the carrying values of deconsolidated assets and liabilities compared to the fair value of any interests retained.
Fair Value Measurement
Fair value is based on an exit price, defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants. Where appropriate, we make adjustments to estimated fair values to appropriately reflect counterparty credit risk as well as our own credit-worthiness.
The estimated fair value of financial assets and financial liabilities are categorized into a three-tier hierarchy, prioritized based on the level of transparency in inputs used in the valuation techniques, as follows:
Level 1-Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2-Observable inputs other than Level 1 prices, such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities, quoted prices in non-active markets, or valuation techniques utilizing inputs that are derived principally from or corroborated by observable data directly or indirectly for substantially the full term of the financial instrument.
Level 3-At least one assumption or input is unobservable and it is significant to the fair value measurement, requiring significant management judgment or estimate.
Where the inputs used to measure the fair value of a financial instrument fall into different levels of the fair value hierarchy, the financial instrument is categorized within the hierarchy based on the lowest level of input that is significant to its fair value measurement.
Business Combinations
Definition of a Business-We evaluate each purchase transaction to determine whether the acquired assets meet the definition of a business. If substantially all of the fair value of gross assets acquired is concentrated in a single identifiable asset or a group of similar identifiable assets, then the set of transferred assets and activities is not a business. If not, for an acquisition to be considered a business, it would have to include an input and a substantive process that together significantly contribute to the ability to create outputs (i.e., there is a continuation of revenue before and after the transaction). A substantive process is not ancillary or minor, cannot be replaced without significant costs, effort or delay or is otherwise considered unique or scarce. To qualify as a business without outputs, the acquired assets would require an organized workforce with the necessary skills, knowledge and experience that performs a substantive process.
Asset Acquisitions-For acquisitions that are not deemed to be businesses, the assets acquired are recognized based on their cost to us as the acquirer, and no gain or loss is recognized. The cost of assets acquired in a group is allocated to individual assets within the group based on their relative fair values and does not give rise to goodwill.
Transaction costs related to acquisition of assets are included in the cost basis of the assets acquired.
Business Combinations- We account for acquisitions that qualify as business combinations by applying the acquisition method. Transaction costs related to the acquisition of a business are expensed as incurred and excluded from the fair value of consideration transferred. The identifiable assets acquired, liabilities assumed and noncontrolling interests in an acquired entity are recognized and measured at their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of consideration transferred over the fair values of identifiable assets acquired, liabilities assumed and noncontrolling interests in an acquired entity, net of fair value of any previously held interest in the acquired entity, is recorded as goodwill. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions.
Loans and Preferred Equity Held for Investment
We originate and purchase loans and preferred equity held for investment. The accounting framework for loans and referred equity held for investment depends on our strategy whether to hold or sell the loan, whether the loan was credit-impaired at the time of acquisition, or if the lending arrangement is an ADC loan.
Loans and Preferred Equity Held for Investment
Loans and preferred equity that we have the intent and ability to hold for the foreseeable future are classified as held for investment. Originated loans and preferred equity are recorded at amortized cost, or outstanding unpaid principal balance plus exit fees less net deferred loan fees. Net deferred loan fees include unamortized origination and other fees charged to the borrower less direct incremental loan origination costs incurred by us. Purchased loans and preferred equity are recorded at amortized cost, or unpaid principal balance plus purchase premium or less unamortized discount. Costs to purchase loans and preferred equity are expensed as incurred.
Interest Income-Interest income is recognized based upon contractual interest rate and unpaid principal balance of the loans and preferred equity investments. Net deferred loan fees on originated loans and preferred equity investments are deferred and amortized as adjustments to interest income over the expected life of the loans and preferred equity investments using the effective yield method. Premium or discount on purchased loans and preferred equity investments are amortized as adjustments to interest income over the expected life of the loans and preferred equity investments using the effective yield method. When a loan or preferred equity investment is prepaid, prepayment fees and any excess of proceeds over the carrying amount of the loan or preferred equity investment is recognized as additional interest income.
We have debt investments in our portfolio that contain a payment-in-kind (“PIK”) provision. Contractual PIK interest, which represents contractually deferred interest added to the loan balance that is due at the end of the loan term, is generally recorded on an accrual basis to the extent such amounts are expected to be collected. We will generally cease accruing PIK interest if there is insufficient value to support the accrual or management does not expect the borrower to be able to pay all principal and interest due.
Nonaccrual-Accrual of interest income is suspended on nonaccrual loans and preferred equity investments. Loans and preferred equity investments that are past due 90 days or more as to principal or interest, or where reasonable doubt exists as to timely collection, are generally considered nonperforming and placed on nonaccrual status. Interest receivable is reversed against interest income when loans and preferred equity investments are placed on nonaccrual status. Interest collected is recognized on a cash basis by crediting income when received; or if ultimate collectability of loan and preferred equity principal is uncertain, interest collected is recognized using a cost recovery method by applying interest collected as a reduction to loan and preferred equity carrying value. Loans and preferred equity investments may be restored to accrual status when all principal and interest are current and full repayment of the remaining contractual principal and interest are reasonably assured.
Loans Held for Sale
Loans that we intend to sell or liquidate in the foreseeable future are classified as held for sale. Loans held for sale are carried at the lower of amortized cost or fair value less disposal cost, with valuation changes recognized as impairment loss. Loans held for sale are not subject to allowance for loan losses. Net deferred loan origination fees and loan purchase premiums or discounts are deferred and capitalized as part of the carrying value of the held for sale loan until the loan is sold and are therefore included in the periodic valuation adjustments based on lower of cost or fair value less disposal cost.
ADC Arrangements
We provide loans to third party developers for the acquisition, development and construction of real estate. Under an ADC arrangement, we participate in the expected residual profits of the project through the sale, refinancing or other use of the property. We evaluate the characteristics of each ADC arrangement, including its risks and rewards, to determine whether they are more similar to those associated with a loan or an investment in real estate. ADC arrangements with characteristics implying loan classification are presented as loans held for investment and result in the recognition of interest income. ADC arrangements with characteristics implying real estate joint ventures are presented as investments in unconsolidated joint ventures and are accounted for using the equity method. The classification of each ADC arrangement as either loan receivable or real estate joint venture involves significant judgment and relies on various factors, including market conditions, amount and timing of expected residual profits, credit enhancements in the form of guaranties, estimated fair value of the collateral, and significance of borrower equity in the project, among others. The classification of ADC arrangements is performed at inception, and periodically reassessed when significant changes occur in the circumstances or conditions described above.
Credit Losses
The current expected credit loss (“CECL”) reserve for our financial instruments carried at amortized cost and off-balance sheet credit exposures, such as loans, loan commitments and trade receivables represents a lifetime estimate of expected credit losses. Factors considered by us when determining the CECL reserve include loan-specific characteristics such as loan-to-value (“LTV”) ratio, vintage year, loan term, property type, occupancy and geographic location, financial performance of the borrower, expected payments of principal and interest, current and stabilized property value, stabilized net operating income, as well as internal or external information relating to past events, current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts.
The CECL reserve is measured on a collective (pool) basis when similar risk characteristics exist for multiple financial instruments. If similar risk characteristics do not exist, we measure the CECL reserve on an individual instrument basis. The determination of whether a particular financial instrument should be included in a pool can change over time. If a financial asset’s risk characteristics change, we evaluate whether it is appropriate to continue to keep the financial instrument in its existing pool or evaluate it individually.
In measuring the CECL reserve for financial instruments that share similar risk characteristics, we primarily apply a probability of default (“PD”)/loss given default (“LGD”) model for instruments that are collectively assessed, whereby the CECL reserve is calculated as the product of PD, LGD and exposure at default (“EAD”). Our model principally utilizes historical loss rates derived from a commercial mortgage backed securities database with historical losses from 1998 through December 2020 provided by a third party, Trepp LLC, forecasting the loss parameters using a scenario-based statistical approach over a reasonable and supportable forecast period of twelve months, followed by a straight-line reversion period of twelve-months back to average historical losses.
For financial instruments assessed outside of the PD/LGD model on an individual basis, including when it is probable that we will be unable to collect the full payment of principal and interest on the instrument, we apply a discounted cash flow (“DCF”) methodology. For financial instruments where the borrower is experiencing financial difficulty based on our assessment at the reporting date and the repayment is expected to be provided substantially through the operation or sale of the collateral, we may elect to use as a practical expedient the fair value of the collateral at the reporting date when determining the provision for loan losses.
In developing the CECL reserve for its loans and preferred equity held for investment, we consider the risk ranking of each loan and preferred equity as a key credit quality indicator. The risk rankings are based on a variety of factors, including, without limitation, underlying real estate performance and asset value, values of comparable properties, durability and quality of property cash flows, sponsor experience and financial wherewithal, and the existence of a risk-mitigating loan structure. Additional key considerations include loan-to-value ratios, debt service coverage ratios, loan structure, real estate and credit market dynamics, and risk of default or principal loss. Based on a five-point scale, our loans and preferred equity held for investment are rated “1” through “5,” from less risk to greater risk, and the ratings are updated quarterly. At the time of origination or purchase, loans and preferred equity held for investment are ranked as a “3” and will move accordingly going forward based on the ratings which are defined as follows:
1.Very Low Risk-The loan is performing as agreed. The underlying property performance has exceeded underwritten expectations with very strong net operating income (”NOI”), debt service coverage ratio, debt yield and occupancy metrics. Sponsor is investment grade, very well capitalized, and employs very experienced management team.
2.Low Risk-The loan is performing as agreed. The underlying property performance has met or exceeds underwritten expectations with high occupancy at market rents, resulting in consistent cash flow to service the debt. Strong sponsor that is well capitalized with experienced management team.
3.Average Risk-The loan is performing as agreed. The underlying property performance is consistent with underwriting expectations. The property generates adequate cash flow to service the debt, and/or there is enough reserve or loan structure to provide time for sponsor to execute the business plan. Sponsor has routinely met its obligations and has experience owning/operating similar real estate.
4.High Risk/Delinquent/Potential for Loss-The loan is in excess of 30 days delinquent and/or has a risk of a principal loss. The underlying property performance is behind underwritten expectations. Loan covenants may require occasional waivers/modifications. Sponsor has been unable to execute its business plan and local market fundamentals have deteriorated. Operating cash flow is not sufficient to service the debt and debt service payments may be coming from sponsor equity/loan reserves.
5.Impaired/Defaulted/Loss Likely-The loan is in default or a default is imminent, and has a high risk of a principal loss, or has incurred a principal loss. The underlying property performance is significantly worse than underwritten expectation and sponsor has failed to execute its business plan. The property has significant vacancy and current cash flow does not support debt service. Local market fundamentals have significantly deteriorated resulting in depressed comparable property valuations versus underwriting.
We also consider qualitative and environmental factors, including, but not limited to, economic and business conditions, nature and volume of the loan portfolio, lending terms, volume and severity of past due loans, concentration of credit and changes in the level of such concentrations in its determination of the CECL reserve.
We have elected to not measure a CECL reserve for accrued interest receivable as it is reversed against interest income when a loan or preferred equity investment is placed on nonaccrual status. Loans and preferred equity investments are charged off against the provision for loan losses when all or a portion of the principal amount is determined to be uncollectible.
Changes in the CECL reserve for our financial instruments are recorded in provision for loan losses on the consolidated statements of operations with a corresponding offset to the loans and preferred equity held for investment or as a component of other liabilities for future loan fundings recorded on our consolidated balance sheets.
Troubled Debt Restructuring (“TDR”)-We classify an individual financial instrument as a TDR when it has a reasonable expectation that the financial instrument’s contractual terms will be modified in a manner that grants concession to the borrower who is experiencing financial difficulty. Concessions could include term extensions, payment deferrals, interest rate reductions, principal forgiveness, forbearance, or other actions designed to maximize our collection on the financial instrument. We determine the CECL reserve for financial instruments that are TDRs individually.
Operating real estate
Real estate acquisitions-Real estate acquired in acquisitions that are deemed to be business combinations is recorded at the fair values of the acquired components at the time of acquisition, allocated among land, buildings, improvements, equipment and lease-related tangible and identifiable intangible assets and liabilities, including forgone leasing costs, in-place lease values and above-or below-market lease values. Real estate acquired in acquisitions that are deemed to be asset acquisitions is recorded at the total value of consideration transferred, including transaction costs, and allocated to the acquired components based upon relative fair value. The estimated fair value of acquired land is derived from recent comparable sales of land and listings within the same local region based on available market data. The estimated fair value of acquired buildings and building improvements is derived from comparable sales, discounted cash flow analysis using market-based assumptions, or replacement cost, as appropriate. The fair value of site and tenant improvements is estimated based upon current market replacement costs and other relevant market rate information
Real Estate Held for Investment
Real estate held for investment is carried at cost less accumulated depreciation.
Costs Capitalized or Expensed-Expenditures for ordinary repairs and maintenance are expensed as incurred, while expenditures for significant renovations that improve or extend the useful life of the asset are capitalized and depreciated over their estimated useful lives.
Depreciation-Real estate held for investment, other than land, is depreciated on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets, as follows:
Real Estate Held for Investment
Impairment-We evaluate our real estate held for investment for impairment periodically or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts may not be recoverable. We evaluate real estate for impairment generally on an individual property basis. If an impairment indicator exists, we evaluate the undiscounted future net cash flows that are expected to be generated by the property, including any estimated proceeds from the eventual disposition of the property. If multiple outcomes are under consideration, we may apply a probability-weighted approach to the impairment analysis. Based upon the analysis, if the carrying value of a property exceeds its undiscounted future net cash flows, an impairment loss is recognized for the excess of the carrying value of the property over the estimated fair value of the property. In evaluating and/or measuring impairment, we consider, among other things, current and estimated future cash flows associated with each property, market information for each sub-market, including, where applicable, competition levels, foreclosure levels, leasing trends, occupancy trends, lease or room rates, and the market prices of similar properties recently sold or currently being offered for sale, and other quantitative and qualitative factors. Another key consideration in this assessment is our assumption about the highest and best use of our real estate investments and our intent and ability to hold them for a reasonable period that would allow for the recovery of their carrying values. If such assumptions change and we shorten its expected hold period, this may result in the recognition of impairment losses.
Real estate held for sale
Classification as held for sale-Real estate is classified as held for sale in the period when (i) management approves a plan to sell the asset, (ii) the asset is available for immediate sale in its present condition, subject only to usual and customary terms, (iii) a program is initiated to locate a buyer and actively market the asset for sale at a reasonable price, and (iv) completion of the sale is probable within one year. Real estate held for sale is stated at the lower of its carrying amount or estimated fair value less disposal cost, with any write-down to fair value less disposal cost recorded as an impairment loss. For any increase in fair value less disposal cost subsequent to classification as held for sale, the impairment loss may be reversed, but only up to the amount of cumulative loss previously recognized. Depreciation is not recorded on assets classified as held for sale. At the time a sale is consummated, the excess, if any, of sale price less selling costs over carrying value of the real estate is recognized as a gain.
If circumstances arise that were previously considered unlikely and, as a result, we decide not to sell the real estate asset previously classified as held for sale, the real estate asset is reclassified as held for investment. Upon reclassification, the real estate asset is measured at the lower of (i) its carrying amount prior to classification as held for sale, adjusted for depreciation expense that would have been recognized had the real estate been continuously classified as held for investment, and (ii) its estimated fair value at the time we decide not to sell.
Foreclosed properties
We receive foreclosed properties in full or partial settlement of loans held for investment by taking legal title or physical possession of the properties. Foreclosed properties are generally recognized, at the time the real estate is received at foreclosure sale or upon execution of a deed in lieu of foreclosure. Foreclosed properties are initially measured at fair value. If the fair value of the property is lower than the carrying value of the loan, the difference is recognized as provision for loan loss and the cumulative loss allowance on the loan is charged off. We periodically evaluate foreclosed properties for subsequent decrease in fair value, which is recorded as an additional impairment loss. Fair value of foreclosed properties is generally based on third party appraisals, broker price opinions, comparable sales or a combination thereof.
Real Estate Securities
We classify our CRE securities investments as available for sale on the acquisition date, which are carried at fair value. Unrealized gains (losses) are recorded as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income (“OCI”) in the consolidated statements of equity. However, we have elected the fair value option for the assets and liabilities of our investments in securitization financing entities (“Investing VIEs”), and as a result, any unrealized gains (losses) on the consolidated Investing VIEs are recorded in unrealized gain (loss) on mortgage loans and obligations held in securitization trusts, net in the
consolidated statements of operations. As of December 31, 2020, we held subordinate tranches of two securitization trusts, which represent our retained interest in the securitization trusts, which we consolidate under U.S. GAAP. Refer to Note 5, “Real Estate Securities, Available for Sale” to Part IV, Item 15, “Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules” for further discussion.
Impairment-CRE securities for which the fair value option is elected are not evaluated for impairment as any change in fair value is recorded in the consolidated statements of operations. Realized losses on such securities are reclassified to realized loss on mortgage loans and obligations held in securitization trust, net as losses occur.
CRE securities for which the fair value option is not elected are evaluated for impairment quarterly. Impairment of a security is considered when the fair value is below the amortized cost basis, which is then further analyzed when: (i) the holder has the intent to sell the impaired security; (ii) it is more likely than not the holder will be required to sell the security; or (iii) the holder does not expect to recover the entire amortized cost of the security. When a CRE security has been deemed impaired due to (i) or (ii) or (iii), the security is written down to its fair value and an impairment is recognized in the consolidated statements of operations. In all other situations, the unrealized loss is bifurcated into: (a) the amount related to expected credit losses; and (b) the amount related to other factors in excess of expected credit losses. The portion of impairment related to expected credit losses is recognized as an allowance for credit losses. The remaining impairment related to other factors is recognized as a component of accumulated OCI in the consolidated statements of equity. CRE securities which are not high-credit quality are considered to have an impairment if the security has an unrealized loss and there has been an adverse change in expected cash flow. The amount of impairment is then bifurcated as discussed above.
Investments in Unconsolidated Ventures
A noncontrolling, unconsolidated ownership interest in an entity may be accounted for using one of (i) equity method where applicable; (ii) fair value option if elected; (iii) fair value through earnings if fair value is readily determinable, including election of NAV practical expedient where applicable; or (iv) for equity investments without readily determinable fair values, the measurement alternative to measure at cost adjusted for any impairment and observable price changes, as applicable.
Fair value changes of equity method investments under the fair value option are recorded in earnings from investments in unconsolidated ventures. Fair value changes of other equity investments, including adjustments for observable price changes under the measurement alternative, are recorded in other gain (loss).
Equity Method Investments
We account for investments under the equity method of accounting if they have the ability to exercise significant influence over the operating and financial policies of an entity, but do not have a controlling financial interest. The equity method investment is initially recorded at cost and adjusted each period for capital contributions, distributions and our share of the entity’s net income or loss as well as other comprehensive income or loss. Our share of net income or loss may differ from the stated ownership percentage interest in an entity if the governing documents prescribe a substantive non-proportionate earnings allocation formula or a preferred return to certain investors. For certain equity method investments, we record our proportionate share of income on a one to three month lag. Distributions of operating profits from equity method investments are reported as operating activities, while distributions in excess of operating profits are reported as investing activities in the statement of cash flows under the cumulative earnings approach.
At December 31, 2020, our investments in unconsolidated joint ventures consisted of investments in PE Investments, senior loans, mezzanine loans and preferred equity held in joint ventures, as well as ADC arrangements accounted for as equity method investments.
Impairment
Evaluation of impairment applies to equity method investments and equity investments under the measurement alternative. If indicators of impairment exist, we will first estimate the fair value of its investment. In assessing fair value, we generally consider, among others, the estimated fair value of the investee, which is based on significant assumptions including the estimated timing and probabilities of the future cash flows of unconsolidated joint ventures, utilizing discount rates and capitalization rates.
For investments under the measurement alternative, if carrying value of the investment exceeds its fair value, an impairment is deemed to have occurred.
For equity method investments, further consideration is made if a decrease in value of the investment is other-than-temporary to determine if impairment loss should be recognized. Assessment of OTTI involves management judgment, including, but not limited to, consideration of the investee’s financial condition, operating results, business prospects and creditworthiness, our ability and intent to hold the investment until recovery of its carrying value. If management is unable to reasonably assert that
an impairment is temporary or believes that we may not fully recover the carrying value of its investment, then the impairment is considered to be other-than-temporary.
Investments that are other-than-temporarily impaired are written down to their estimated fair value. Impairment loss is recorded in earnings from investments in unconsolidated ventures for equity method investments and in other gain (loss) for investments under the measurement alternative.
Transfers of Financial Assets
Sale accounting for transfers of financial assets requires the transfer of an entire financial asset, a group of financial assets in its entirety, or if a component of the financial asset is transferred, that the component meets the definition of a participating interest with characteristics that mirror the original financial asset.
Transfers of financial assets are accounted for as sales when control over the assets has been surrendered. If we have any continuing involvement, rights or obligations with the transferred financial asset (outside of standard representations and warranties), sale accounting requires that the transfer meets the following conditions: (1) the transferred asset has been legally isolated; (2) the transferee has the right (free of conditions that constrain it from taking advantage of that right) to pledge or exchange the transferred asset; and (3) we do not maintain effective control over the transferred asset through an agreement that provides for (a) both an entitlement and an obligation by us to repurchase or redeem the asset before its maturity, (b) our unilateral ability to reclaim the asset and a more than trivial benefit attributable to that ability, or (c) the transferee requiring us to repurchase the asset at a price so favorable to the transferee that it is probable the repurchase will occur.
If sale accounting is met, the transferred financial asset is removed from the balance sheet and a net gain or loss is recognized upon sale, taking into account any retained interests. Transfers of financial assets that do not meet the criteria for sale are accounted for as financing transactions, or secured borrowing.
Recent Accounting Updates
For recent accounting updates, refer to Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in our accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15, “Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules.”