ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of the consolidated results of operations and financial condition of BioRestorative Therapies, Inc. and its subsidiary as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 and for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the notes to those financial statements that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report following Item 16 (“Form 10-K Summary”). References in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” to “us,” “we,” “our,” and similar terms refer to BioRestorative Therapies, Inc.. This Annual Report contains forward-looking statements as that term is defined in the federal securities laws. The events described in forward-looking statements contained in this Annual Report may not occur. Generally these statements relate to business plans or strategies, projected or anticipated benefits or other consequences of our plans or strategies, projected or anticipated benefits from acquisitions that may be made by us, or projections involving anticipated revenues, earnings or other aspects of our operating results. The words “may,” “will,” “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “project,” “plan,” “intend,” “estimate,” and “continue,” and their opposites and similar expressions, are intended to identify forward-looking statements. We caution you that these statements are not guarantees of future performance or events and are subject to a number of uncertainties, risks and other influences, many of which are beyond our control, which may influence the accuracy of the statements and the projections upon which the statements are based. Reference is made to “Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition” in this Item 7 for a discussion of some of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements.
Overview
We develop therapeutic products and medical therapies using cell and tissue protocols, primarily involving adult (non-embryonic) stem cells. We are currently pursuing our Disc/Spine Program with our initial investigational therapeutic product being called BRTX-100. We submitted an IND application to the FDA to obtain authorization to commence a Phase 2 clinical trial investigating the use of BRTX-100, our lead cell therapy candidate, in the treatment of chronic lower back pain arising from degenerative disc disease. We have received such authorization from the FDA. We intend to commence such clinical trial during 2021 (assuming the receipt of necessary funding). We have obtained a license to use technology for investigational adult stem cell treatment of disc and spine conditions, including protruding and bulging lumbar discs. The technology is an advanced stem cell injection procedure that may offer relief from lower back pain, buttock and leg pain, and numbness and tingling in the leg and foot. We are also developing our ThermoStem Program. This pre-clinical program involves the use of brown adipose (fat) in connection with the cell-based treatment of type 2 diabetes and obesity as well as hypertension, other metabolic disorders and cardiac deficiencies. United States patents related to the ThermoStem Program were issued in September 2015, January 2019, March 2020 and March 2021; a notice of allowance was also issued in March 2021 for a separate United States patent application in the ThermoStem Program and is expected to issue in the next few months; Australian patents related to the ThermoStem Program were issued in April 2017 and October 2019; a Japanese patent related to the ThermoStem Program was issued in December 2017; Israeli patents related to the ThermoStem Program were issued in October 2019 and May 2020; and European patents related to the ThermoStem Program were issued in April 2020 and January 2021.
We have licensed a patented curved needle device that is a needle system designed to deliver cells and/or other therapeutic products or materials to the spine and discs or other potential sites. We anticipate that FDA approval or clearance will be necessary for this device prior to commercialization. We do not intend to utilize this device in connection with our contemplated Phase 2 clinical trial with regard to BRTX-100.
Our offices are located in Melville, New York where we have established a laboratory facility in order to increase our capabilities for the further development of possible cellular-based treatments, products and protocols, stem cell-related intellectual property and translational research applications.
As of December 31, 2020, our accumulated deficit was $89,842,833 and our stockholders’ deficit was $1,331,492. We have historically only generated a modest amount of revenue, and our losses have principally been operating expenses incurred in research and development, marketing and promotional activities in order to commercialize our products and services, plus costs associated with meeting the requirements of being a public company. We expect to continue to incur substantial costs for these activities over at least the next year.
Based upon our forecast for continued operating losses, as of December 31, 2020, we required equity and/or debt financing to continue our operations. As of December 31, 2020, our outstanding debt of $9,637,102, together with interest at rates ranging between 5% and 7% per annum, was due on November 16, 2023. As of December 31, 2020, the outstanding debt amount of $9,637,102 did not include $657,598 of estimated DIP and Plan costs associated with the DIP Funding and the Plan (the “Auctus Costs”). As of December 31, 2020, the Auctus Costs were not finalized and, of which, $500,000 and $157,598 are recorded in debt discount and accrued expenses, respectively, on the consolidated balance sheets.
As discussed in Item 1 of this Annual Report (“Business - Business Development”), on March 20, 2020, we filed a voluntary petition commencing a case under chapter 11 of title 11 of the U.S. Code in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Eastern District of New York. On October 30, 2020, the Bankruptcy Court entered an order confirming the plan of reorganization and, on November 16, 2020, the plan became effective. As a result of the confirmed plan of reorganization $14,796,000 in outstanding debt and liabilities were exchanged for (i) shares of common stock, (ii) new convertible debt or (iii) new convertible debt and warrants to purchase common stock.
We anticipate that we will require approximately $12,000,000 in financing to complete a Phase 2 clinical trial with regard to our Disc/Spine Program. We anticipate that we will require approximately $45,000,000 in further additional funding to complete such clinical trials (assuming the receipt of no revenues). We will also require a substantial amount of additional funding to implement our other programs described in Item 1 of this Annual Report (“Business”), including our metabolic ThermoStem Program, repay our outstanding debt (assuming such debt is not converted into equity) and fund general operations. No assurance can be given that the anticipated amounts of required funding are correct or that we will be able to accomplish our goals within the timeframes projected. In addition, no assurance can be given that we will be able to obtain any required financing on commercially reasonable terms or otherwise.
We are currently seeking several different financing alternatives to support our future operations. The plan of reorganization provides that, at such time as we are current in our periodic SEC filings (which will be the case upon the filing of this Annual Report), subject to certain customary conditions, Auctus Fund, LLC (“Auctus”), which provided debtor-in-possession (“DIP”) financing to us during the reorganization process, is to provide a loan to us, as needed, in an amount equal to $3,500,000 less the sum of the DIP loans previously made by Auctus to us (inclusive of accrued interest, of $1,226,901) and the DIP costs incurred by Auctus as the DIP lender. In addition, Auctus and others provided debt financing in the aggregate principal amount of $3,848,548 at the effective date of our plan of reorganization. If we are unable to obtain such financing on a timely basis or other required financing as needed, we may have to curtail our development, marketing and promotional activities, which would have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations, and ultimately we could be forced to discontinue our operations and liquidate. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table presents selected items in our consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively:
Revenues
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we generated $77,000 and $130,000, respectively, of royalty revenue in connection with our sublicense agreement.
Marketing and promotion
Marketing and promotion expenses include advertising and promotion, marketing and seminars, meals, entertainment and travel expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2020, marketing and promotion expenses decreased by $292,999, or 91%, from $321,280 to $28,281 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due to the Company’s reduced spending on marketing prior to and during the Company’s Chapter 11 reorganization.
We expect that marketing and promotion expenses will increase in the future as we increase our marketing activities following full commercialization of our products and services.
Consulting
Consulting expenses consist of consulting fees and stock-based compensation to consultants. For the year ended December 31, 2020, consulting expenses decreased by $1,775,433, or 93%, from $1,912,683 to $137,250, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due to the Company’s reduced usage of consultants prior to and during the Company’s Chapter 11 reorganization.
Research and development
Research and development expenses include cash and non-cash compensation of (a) our Vice President of Research and Development; (b) our Scientific Advisory Board members; and (c) laboratory staff and costs related to our brown fat and disc/spine initiatives. Research and development expenses are expensed as they are incurred. For the year ended December 31, 2020, research and development expenses decreased by $845,509, or 49%, from $1,722,338 to $876,829, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily a result of the Company’s reduced spending on research and development prior to and during the Company’s Chapter 11 reorganization.
We expect that our research and development expenses will increase with the continuation of the aforementioned initiatives.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, bonuses, payroll taxes, severance costs and stock-based compensation to employees (excluding any cash or non-cash compensation of our Vice President of Research and Development and our laboratory staff), as well as corporate expenses such as legal and professional fees, investor relations and occupancy related expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2020, general and administrative expenses decreased by $2,818,988, or 61%, from $4,605,704 to $1,786,716, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily due to the Company’s reduced incurrence of general and administrative expenses prior to and during the Company’s Chapter 11 reorganization.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase as we expand our staff, develop our infrastructure and incur additional costs to support the growth of our business.
Interest expense
For the year ended December 31, 2020, interest expense decreased $1,105,911, or 75%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to the prepetition outstanding notes payable being reclassified to liabilities subject to compromise at the Petition Date and, as a result, pursuant to ASC 852, Reorganizations, the Company did not accrue any new interest related to these notes. Certain of these notes were converted into shares of the Company’s common stock at November 16, 2020. All new accrued interest was related to secured and unsecured convertible notes payable that resulted from the Plan.
Amortization of debt discount
For the year ended December 31, 2020, amortization of debt discount decreased $2,392,983, or 65%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the prepetition outstanding notes payable being reclassified to liabilities subject to compromise at the Petition Date and as a result, pursuant to ASC 852, Reorganizations, the remaining debt discount was written off to reorganization items on the consolidated statements of operations.
Loss on extinguishment of notes payable, net
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a loss on extinguishment of notes payable, net, of $658,152, as compared to a loss on extinguishment of notes payable, net of $1,895,116 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is associated with debtholders’ exchanges of debt into equity securities.
Change in fair value of derivative liabilities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a loss related to the change in fair value of derivative liabilities of $2,141,069 due to the decrease in time value of embedded conversion options within certain convertible notes payable, as compared to a gain related to the change in fair value of derivative liabilities of $788,970 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Reorganization items, net
Reorganization items, net consists primarily of costs associated the post-petition Chapter 11 bankruptcy. For the year ended December 31, 2020, reorganization items, net decreased $4,081,245, or 100%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to, pursuant to ASC 852, Reorganizations¸ legal fees associated with the Chapter 11 reorganization, the write-off of the outstanding debt discount at the date of the bankruptcy, the exchange of common stock and unsecured convertible debt for allowable claims, and the write-off of derivative liabilities related to the convertible notes included in the Chapter 11 reorganization allowable claims.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
We measure our liquidity in a number of ways, including the following:
Availability of Additional Funds
Based upon our accumulated deficit and stockholders’ deficit as of December 31, 2020 of $89,842,833 and $1,331,492, respectively, along with our forecast for continued operating losses and our need for financing to fund our contemplated clinical trials, as of such date, we required additional equity and/or debt financing to continue our operations.
As of December 31, 2020, our outstanding debt of $9,637,102, together with interest at rates ranging between 5% and 7% per annum, was due on November 16, 2023. As of December 31, 2020, the outstanding debt amount of $9,637,102 did not include $657,598 of estimated DIP and Plan costs associated with the DIP Funding and the Plan (the “Auctus Costs”). As of December 31, 2020, the Auctus Costs were not finalized and, of which, $500,000 and $157,598 are recorded in debt discount and accrued expenses, respectively, on the consolidated balance sheets.
Our operating needs include the planned costs to operate our business, including amounts required to fund working capital and capital expenditures. Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of our available funds will depend on many factors, including our ability to successfully commercialize our products and services, competing technological and market developments, and the need to enter into collaborations with other companies or acquire other companies or technologies to enhance or complement our product and service offerings.
We may be unable to raise sufficient additional capital when we need it or raise capital on favorable terms. We have granted a security interest in all of our assets to certain lenders, including Auctus, in connection with our Chapter 11 plan of reorganization. This may impede our ability to raise additional debt financing. In addition, future financing may require us to pledge certain assets and enter into covenants that could restrict certain business activities or our ability to incur further indebtedness and may contain other terms that are not favorable to our stockholders or us. If we are unable to obtain adequate funds on reasonable terms, we may be required to significantly curtail or discontinue operations or obtain funds by entering into financing agreements on unattractive terms.
Our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, or U.S. GAAP, which contemplate our continuation as a going concern and the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. The carrying amounts of assets and liabilities presented in the financial statements do not necessarily purport to represent realizable or settlement values. The financial statements do not include any adjustment that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
The following events have mitigated the above factors with regards to our ability to continue as a going concern: (i) as part of our Chapter 11 reorganization approximately $14,700,000 in outstanding debt and other liabilities were exchanged for (a) shares of common stock, (b) new convertible notes with three year terms or (c) new convertible notes with three year terms and warrants to purchase shares of common stock; (ii) we secured DIP financing during our Chapter 11 reorganization in the aggregate amount of $1,189,413, and $3,848,548 in debt financing as part of our Chapter 11 reorganization to sustain operations; and (iii) pursuant to the plan of reorganization, Auctus is required to loan to us, as needed and subject to our becoming current in our SEC reporting obligations (which will be the case upon the filing of this Annual Report), an additional amount equal to $3,500,000, less the amount of Auctus’ DIP financing ($1,226,901, inclusive of accrued interest) and its DIP costs. As a result of the above, we have sufficient cash to fund operations for the twelve months subsequent to the filing date. In addition, the Company will need to obtain further funding of at least $12,000,000 to commence and complete a Phase 2 clinical study of the use of BRTX-100.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our sources and uses of cash were as follows:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
We experienced negative cash flows from operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 in the amounts of $1,964,265 and $6,918,734, respectively. The net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to cash used to fund a net loss of $11,272,687, adjusted for non-cash expenses in the aggregate amount of $8,736,072 and partially offset by $572,350 of cash generated by changes in the levels of operating assets and liabilities, primarily as a result of increases in accrued expenses. The net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to cash used to fund a net loss of $14,647,890, adjusted for non-cash expenses in the aggregate amount of $7,189,303 and partially offset by $539,853 of cash generated by changes in the levels of operating assets and liabilities, primarily as a result of increases in accrued interest, expenses, and other current liabilities, partially offset by an increase in accounts payable.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, cash used in investing activities was $- and $35,631, respectively.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $5,027,211 and $6,838,505, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, $5,517,211 of net proceeds were from debt financings. During the year ended December 31, 2019, $10,888,339 of net proceeds were from debt financings, $1,658,500 of net proceeds were from equity financings, partially offset by $5,708,334 of repayments on debt financings and prepayment premiums.
We anticipate that the costs to complete our Phase 2 clinical trials with regard to our Disc/Spine Program will be at least $12,000,000. In addition, we anticipate approximately $45,000,000 in additional funding will be needed to complete the clinical trials using BRTX-100 (assuming the receipt of no revenues). As noted above in “Availability of Additional Funds” we secured additional funding as part of Chapter 11 reorganization in the aggregate amount of $5,037,961 as well as approximately $14,700,000 in outstanding debt and other liabilities being exchanged for (a) shares of common stock, (b) new convertible notes with three year terms or (c) new convertible notes with three year terms and warrants to purchase shares of common stock. Additionally, pursuant to the plan of reorganization, Auctus is required to loan to us, as needed and subject to our becoming current in our SEC reporting obligations (which will be the case upon the filing of this Annual Report), an additional amount equal to $3,500,000, less the amount of Auctus’ DIP financing ($1,226,901, inclusive of accrued interest) and its DIP costs. As a result of the above, we have sufficient cash to fund operations for the twelve months subsequent to the filing date.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent liabilities at dates of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the periods. Our significant estimates and assumptions include the recoverability and useful lives of long-lived assets, the fair value of our common stock, stock-based compensation, warrants issued in connection with notes payable, derivative liabilities and the valuation allowance related to our deferred tax assets. Certain of our estimates, including the carrying amount of the intangible assets, could be affected by external conditions, including those unique to us and general economic conditions. It is reasonably possible that these external factors could have an effect on our estimates and could cause actual results to differ from those estimates.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets are comprised of trademarks and licenses with original estimated useful lives of 10 and 17 years, respectively. Once placed into service, we amortize the cost of the intangible assets over their estimated useful lives on a straight-line basis.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
We review for the impairment of long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. An impairment loss would be recognized when estimated future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition are less than its carrying amount. While our near term liquidity is tight, historically we have been successful in raising capital as needed (although there can be no assurance that we will continue to be successful in raising capital as needed). We continue to progress our scientific agenda and meet related milestones. We have not identified any impairment losses.
Income Taxes
We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of items that have been included or excluded in our financial statements or tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined on the basis of the difference between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their respective financial reporting amounts, or temporary differences, at enacted tax rates in effect for the years in which the temporary differences are expected to reverse.
We adopted the provisions of Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Topic 740-10, which prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement process for financial statements recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure the cost of services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the fair value of the award. For employees and directors, the fair value of the award is measured on the grant date and for non-employees, the fair value of the award is generally re-measured on vesting dates and interim financial reporting dates until the service period is complete. The fair value amount is then recognized over the period during which services are required to be provided in exchange for the award, usually the vesting period. Since the shares underlying our 2010 Equity Participation Plan were registered on May 27, 2014, we estimate the fair value of the awards granted under the Plan based on the market value of our freely tradable common stock as reported on the OTC. The fair value of our restricted equity instruments was estimated by management based on observations of the cash sales prices of both restricted shares and freely tradable shares. Awards granted to directors are treated on the same basis as awards granted to employees.
Derivative Financial Instruments
We evaluate our convertible instruments to determine if those contracts or embedded components of those contracts qualify as derivative financial instruments to be separately accounted for in accordance with Topic 815 of the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC. The accounting treatment of derivative financial instruments requires that we record embedded conversion options (“ECOs”) and any related freestanding instruments at their fair values as of the inception date of the agreement and at fair value as of each subsequent balance sheet date. Any change in fair value is recorded as non-operating, non-cash income or expense for each reporting period at each balance sheet date. Conversion options are recorded as a discount to the host instrument and are amortized as amortization of debt discount on the consolidated financial statements over the life of the underlying instrument. We reassess the classification of our derivative instruments at each balance sheet date. If the classification changes as a result of events during the period, the contract is reclassified as of the date of the event that caused the reclassification.
The Multinomial Lattice Model and Black-Scholes Model were used to estimate the fair value of the ECOs of convertible notes payable, the warrants, and stock options that are classified as derivative liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets. The models include subjective input assumptions that can materially affect the fair value estimates. The expected volatility is estimated based on the actual volatility during the most recent historical period of time equal to the weighted average life of the instruments.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 included elsewhere in this Annual Report following Item 16 (“Form 10-K Summary”).
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition
The risk factors listed in this section provide examples of risks, uncertainties and events that may cause our actual results to differ materially from the expectations we describe in our forward-looking statements. Readers should be aware that the occurrence of any of the events described in these risk factors could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. We undertake no obligation to update or revise publicly any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise.
Risks Related to Our Business Generally
We have a limited operating history; we have incurred substantial losses since inception; we expect to continue to incur losses for the near term; as of December 31, 2020, we had a stockholders’ deficiency.
We have a limited operating history. Since our inception, we have incurred net losses. As of December 31, 2020, we had a working capital of $2,142,229 and a stockholders’ deficit of $1,331,492. On October 30, 2020, the Bankruptcy Court confirmed the plan of reorganization pursuant to the Chapter 11 Case (the “Plan of Reorganization”) and on November 16, 2020, the Plan of Reorganization became effective.
We will need to obtain a significant amount of financing to initiate and complete our clinical trials and implement our business plan.
Since our inception, we have not generated significant revenues from our operations and have funded our operations through the sale of our equity securities and debt securities. The implementation of our business plan, as discussed in Item 1 of this Annual Report (“Business”), will require the receipt of sufficient equity and/or debt financing to purchase necessary equipment, technology and materials, fund our clinical trials and other research and development efforts, retire our outstanding debt and otherwise fund our operations. We anticipate that we will require approximately $12,000,000 in financing to complete a Phase 2 clinical trial using BRTX-100. We anticipate that we will require approximately $45,000,000 in further additional funding to complete our clinical trials using BRTX-100 (assuming the receipt of no revenues). We will also require a substantial amount of additional funding to implement our other programs described in Item 1 of this Annual Report (“Business”), including our metabolic ThermoStem Program, repay our outstanding debt (assuming such debt is not converted into equity) and fund general operations. We received debtor-in-possession (“DIP”) funding of $1,189,413 during the Chapter 11 Case and debt financing of $3,848,548 on the effective date of the Chapter 11 Case. The Plan of Reorganization provides for additional debt funding of $3,500,000 (less our DIP funding obligation, including accrued interest, of $1,226,901 at the effective date of the Chapter 11 Case, less DIP costs incurred by the DIP lender) as needed, from our DIP lender upon our becoming current in our SEC periodic report filings (which will be the case upon the filing of this Annual Report). Such additional funding from the DIP lender, if received, will not be sufficient to satisfy our needs. No assurance can be given that the anticipated amounts of required funding are correct or that we will be able to accomplish our goals within the timeframes projected. In addition, no assurance can be given that we will be able to obtain any required financing on commercially reasonable terms or otherwise. In the event we do not obtain the financing required for the above purposes, we may have to curtail our development, marketing and promotional activities, which would have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations, and ultimately we could be forced to discontinue our operations and liquidate.
We may need to obtain additional financing to satisfy debt obligations. An event of default pursuant to our outstanding debt obligations could trigger an acceleration of the due date of such obligations, including our secured debt.
As described in this Item 7 (“Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Liquidity and Capital Resources - Availability of Additional Funds”), as of December 31, 2020, our outstanding debt of $9,634,104, together with interest at rates ranging between 5% and 7% per annum, was due on November 16, 2023. As of December 31, 2020, the outstanding debt amount of $9,637,102 did not include $657,598 of estimated DIP and Plan costs associated with the DIP Funding and the Plan (the “Auctus Costs”). As of December 31, 2020, the Auctus Costs were not finalized and, of which, $500,000 and $157,598 are recorded in debt discount and accrued expenses, respectively, on the consolidated balance sheets. The DIP lender is required, pursuant to the Plan of Reorganization as discussed above, to lend us an additional $3,500,000 (less our DIP funding obligation, including accrued interest, of $1,226,901 at the effective date of the Chapter 11 Case, less the DIP costs incurred by the DIP lender), as needed. Although our outstanding debt is repayable on November 16, 2023 (unless sooner converted into equity), an event of default pursuant to the secured and unsecured promissory notes evidencing such indebtedness could trigger an acceleration of the due dates of all of the notes. We do not have the financial resources to satisfy such debt obligations. Since the repayment of a substantial portion of our outstanding debt is secured by a security interest in all of our assets, in the event of a default, and foreclosure upon our assets, we could be forced to cease operations and liquidate.
Our business strategy is high risk.
We are focusing our resources and efforts primarily on the development of cellular-based products and services which will require extensive cash for research, development and commercialization activities. This is a high-risk strategy because there is no assurance that our products and services, including our Disc/Spine Program and our ThermoStem metabolic brown fat research initiative, will ever become commercially viable (commercial risk), that we will prevent other companies from depriving us of market share and profit margins by offering services and products based on our inventions and developments (legal risk), that we will successfully manage a company in a new area of business, regenerative medicine, and on a different scale than we have operated in the past (operational risk), that we will be able to achieve the desired therapeutic results using stem and regenerative cells (scientific risk), or that our cash resources will be adequate to develop our products and services until we become profitable, if ever (financial risk). We are using our cash in one of the riskiest industries in the economy (strategic risk). This may make our securities an unsuitable investment for many investors.
We will need to enter into agreements in order to implement our business strategy.
Except for a certain license agreement with Regenerative Sciences, LLC described in Item 1 of this Annual Report (“Business - Disc/Spine Program - License”), we do not have any material agreements or understandings in place with respect to the implementation of our business strategy. No assurances can be given that we will be able to enter into any necessary agreements with respect to the development of our business. Our inability to enter into any such agreements would have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition.
We depend on our executive officers and on our ability to attract and retain additional qualified personnel; we do not currently have a Chief Financial Officer.
Our performance is substantially dependent on the performance of Lance Alstodt, our Chief Executive Officer. We rely upon him for strategic business decisions and guidance. We are also dependent on the performance of Francisco Silva, our Vice President of Research and Development. Each of Messrs. Alstodt and Silva is subject to an employment agreement with us. We do not have any key-man insurance policies on the lives of either of our executive officers. We do not currently have a Chief Financial Officer. Pending the hiring of a Chief Financial Officer, we are utilizing financial consultants with regard to the preparation of our financial statements. We believe that our future success in developing marketable products and services and achieving a competitive position will depend in large part upon whether we can attract and retain additional qualified management and scientific personnel, including a Chief Financial Officer. Competition for such personnel is intense, and there can be no assurance that we will be able to attract and retain such personnel. The loss of the services of Mr. Alstodt and/or Mr. Silva or the inability to attract and retain additional personnel, including a Chief Financial Officer, and develop expertise as needed would have a substantial negative effect on our results of operations and financial condition.
The impact of COVID-19 and related risks could materially affect our results of operations and prospects.
Beginning in March 2020, the global pandemic related to the novel coronavirus COVID-19 began to impact the global economy. Because of the size and breadth of this pandemic, all of the direct and indirect consequences of COVID-19 are not yet known and may not emerge for some time. Risks presented by the ongoing effects of COVID-19 include, among others, the following:
Clinical Trials. We anticipate that the COVID-19 pandemic may negatively impact our contemplated clinical trials. Due to the worldwide efforts being taken to combat COVID-19 and the increased clinical work being done in this respect, we believe that it may be difficult for certain needed laboratory supplies, equipment and other materials to be obtained in order to conduct our clinical trials. We also anticipate that, due to a fear of COVID-19 transmission, there may be a hesitancy on the part of certain individuals to become clinical trial participants. We hope that these possible negative effects will lessen as more of the population becomes vaccinated; however, the impact that the vaccinations will have is uncertain at this time.
Adverse Legislative and/or Regulatory Action. Federal, state and local government actions to address and contain the impact of COVID-19 may adversely affect us. For example, we may be subject to legislative and/or regulatory action that negatively impacts the manner in which the clinical trials may be conducted.
Operational Disruptions and Heightened Cybersecurity Risks. Our operations could be disrupted if key members of our senior management or a significant percentage of our workforce are unable to continue to work because of illness, government directives or otherwise. In addition, in connection with increased remote working arrangements, we face a heightened risk of cybersecurity attacks or data security incidents and are more dependent on internet and telecommunications access and capabilities.
Risks Related to Our Cell Therapy Product Development Efforts
Our future success is significantly dependent on the timely and successful development and commercialization of BRTX-100, our lead product candidate for the treatment of chronic lumbar disc disease; if we encounter delays or difficulties in the development of this product candidate, as well as any other product candidates, our business prospects would be significantly harmed.
We are dependent upon the successful development, approval and commercialization of our product candidates. Before we are able to seek regulatory approval of our product candidates, we must conduct and complete extensive clinical trials to demonstrate their safety and efficacy in humans. Our lead product candidate, BRTX-100, is in early stages of development and we have not yet commenced a Phase 2 clinical trial using BRTX-100 to treat chronic lower back pain due to degenerative disc disease related to protruding/bulging discs.
Clinical testing is expensive, difficult to design and implement, and can take many years to complete. Importantly, a failure of one or more of these or any other clinical trials can occur at any stage of testing. We may experience numerous unforeseen events during, or as a result of, clinical trials that could delay or prevent our ability to complete our clinical studies, receive regulatory approval or commercialize our cell therapy product candidates, including the following:
● suspensions, delays or changes in the design, initiation, enrollment, implementation or completion of required clinical trials; adverse changes in our financial position or significant and unexpected increases in the cost of our clinical development program; changes or uncertainties in, or additions to, the regulatory approval process that require us to alter our current development strategy; clinical trial results that are negative, inconclusive or less than desired as to safety and/or efficacy, which could result in the need for additional clinical studies or the termination of the product’s development; delays in our ability to manufacture the product in quantities or in a form that is suitable for any required clinical trials;
● intellectual property constraints that prevent us from making, using, or commercializing any of our cell therapy product candidates;
● the supply or quality of our product candidates or other materials necessary to conduct clinical trials of these product candidates may be insufficient or inadequate; the inability to generate sufficient pre-clinical, toxicology, or other in vivo or in vitro data, to support the initiation of clinical studies;
● delays in reaching agreement on acceptable terms with prospective CROs and clinical study sites, the terms of which can be subject to extensive negotiation and may vary significantly among different CROs and clinical study sites;
● delays in obtaining required Institutional Review Board (“IRB”) approval at each clinical study site;
● imposition of a temporary or permanent clinical hold by regulatory agencies for a number of reasons, including after review of an IND application or amendment, or equivalent application or amendment; as a result of a new safety finding that presents unreasonable risk to clinical trial participants; a negative finding from an inspection of our clinical study operations or study sites; developments on trials conducted by competitors or approved products post-market for related technology that raise FDA concerns about risk to patients of the technology broadly; or if the FDA finds that the investigational protocol or plan is clearly deficient to meet its stated objectives;
● difficulty collaborating with patient groups and investigators;
● failure by our CROs, other third parties, or us to adhere to clinical study requirements;
● failure to perform in accordance with the FDA’s current Good Clinical Practices (“GCP”) requirements, or applicable regulatory guidelines in other countries;
● delays in having patients qualify for or complete participation in a study or return for post-treatment follow-up;
● patients dropping out of a study;
● occurrence of adverse events associated with the product candidate that are viewed to outweigh its potential benefits;
● changes in the standard of care on which a clinical development plan was based, which may require new or additional trials;
● transfer of manufacturing processes from any academic collaborators to larger-scale facilities operated by either a contract manufacturing organization (“CMO”) or by us, and delays or failure by our CMOs or us to make any necessary changes to such manufacturing process;
● delays in manufacturing, testing, releasing, validating, or importing/exporting sufficient stable quantities of our product candidates for use in clinical studies or the inability to do any of the foregoing;
● the FDA may not accept clinical data from trials that are conducted at clinical sites in countries where the standard of care is potentially different from the United States; and
● failure to raise sufficient funds to complete our clinical trials.
Any inability to successfully complete pre-clinical and clinical development could result in additional costs to us or impair our ability to generate revenue. In addition, if we make manufacturing or formulation changes to our product candidates, we may be required, or we may elect, to conduct additional studies to bridge our modified product candidates to earlier versions. Clinical study delays could also shorten any periods during which our products have patent protection and may allow our competitors to bring products to market before we do, which could impair our ability to successfully commercialize our product candidates and may harm our business and results of operations.
Even if we are able to successfully complete our clinical development program for our product candidates, and ultimately receive regulatory approval to market one or more of the products, we may, among other things:
● obtain approval for indications that are not as broad as the indications we sought;
● have the product removed from the market after obtaining marketing approval;
● encounter issues with respect to the manufacturing of commercial supplies;
● be subject to additional post-marketing testing requirements; and/or
● be subject to restrictions on how the product is distributed or used.
We anticipate that we will not be able to commercialize our BRTX-100 product candidate for at least five years.
We may experience delays and other difficulties in enrolling a sufficient number of patients in our clinical trials which could delay or prevent the receipt of necessary regulatory approvals.
We may not be able to initiate or complete as planned any clinical trials if we are unable to identify and enroll a sufficient number of eligible patients to participate in the clinical trials required by the FDA or other regulatory authorities. We also may be unable to engage a sufficient number of clinical trial sites to conduct our trials.
We may face challenges in enrolling patients to participate in our clinical trials due to the novelty of our cell-based therapies, the size of the patient populations and the eligibility criteria for enrollment in the trial. In addition, some patients may have concerns regarding cell therapy that may negatively affect their perception of therapies under development and their decision to enroll in the trials. Furthermore, patients suffering from diseases within target indications may enroll in competing clinical trials, which could negatively affect our ability to complete enrollment of our trials. Enrollment challenges in clinical trials often result in increased development costs for a product candidate, significant delays and potentially the abandonment of the clinical trial.
We may have other delays in completing our clinical trials and we may not complete them at all.
We have not commenced the clinical trials necessary to obtain FDA approval to market our product candidate, BRTX-100, or any of our other product candidates in development. Since our Company lacks significant experience in completing clinical trials and bringing a drug through commercialization, we have hired outside consultants with such experience. Clinical trials for BRTX-100 and other product candidates in development may be delayed or terminated as a result of many factors, including the following:
● patients failing to complete clinical trials due to dissatisfaction with the treatment, side effects or other reasons;
● failure by regulators to authorize us to commence a clinical trial;
● suspension or termination by regulators of clinical research for many reasons, including concerns about patient safety, the failure of study sites and/or investigators in our clinical research program to comply with GCP requirements, or our failure, or the failure of our contract manufacturers, to comply with current cGMP requirements;
● delays or failure to obtain clinical supply for our products necessary to conduct clinical trials from contract manufacturers;
● treatment candidates demonstrating a lack of efficacy during clinical trials;
● treatment candidates demonstrating significant safety signals; and/or
● inability to continue to fund clinical trials or to find a partner to fund the clinical trials.
Any delay or failure to complete clinical trials and obtain FDA approval for our product candidates could have a material adverse effect on our cost to develop and commercialize, and our ability to generate revenue from, a particular product candidate.
The development of our cell therapy product candidates is subject to uncertainty because autologous cell therapy is inherently variable.
When manufacturing an autologous cell therapy, the number and composition of the cell population varies from patient to patient. Such variability in the number and composition of these cells could adversely affect our ability to manufacture autologous cell therapies in a cost-effective or profitable manner and meet acceptable product release specifications for use in a clinical trial or, if approved, for commercial sale. As a consequence, the development and regulatory approval process for autologous cell therapy products could be delayed or may never be completed.
Any disruption to our access to the media (including cell culture media) and reagents we are using in the clinical development of our cell therapy product candidates could adversely affect our ability to perform clinical trials and seek future regulatory submissions.
Certain media (including cell culture media) and reagents, as well as devices, materials and systems, that we intend to use in our planned clinical trials, and that we may need or use in commercial production, are provided by unaffiliated third parties. Any lack of continued availability of these media, reagents, devices, materials and systems for any reason would have a material adverse effect on our ability to complete these studies and could adversely impact our ability to achieve commercial manufacture of our planned therapeutic products. Although other available sources for these media, reagents, devices, materials and systems may exist in the marketplace, we have not evaluated their cost, effectiveness, or intellectual property foundation and therefore cannot guarantee the suitability or availability of such other potential sources.
Products that appear promising in research and development may be delayed or may fail to reach later stages of clinical development.
The successful development of cellular based products is highly uncertain. Product candidates that appear promising in preclinical and early research and development may be delayed or fail to reach later stages of development. Decisions regarding the further development of product candidates must be made with limited and incomplete data, which makes it difficult to ensure or even accurately predict whether the allocation of limited resources and the expenditure of additional capital on specific product candidates will result in desired outcomes. Pre-clinical and clinical data can be interpreted in different ways, and negative or inconclusive results or adverse events during a clinical trial could delay, limit or prevent the development of a product candidate. Positive preclinical data may not continue or occur for future subjects in our clinical studies and may not be repeated or observed in ongoing or future studies involving our product candidates. Furthermore, our product candidates may also fail to show the desired safety and efficacy in later stages of clinical development despite having successfully advanced through initial clinical studies. In addition, regulatory delays or rejections may be encountered as a result of many factors, including changes in regulatory policy during the period of product development.
Our clinical trials may fail to demonstrate adequately the safety and efficacy of our product candidates, which would prevent or delay regulatory approval and commercialization.
The clinical trials of our product candidates are, and the manufacturing and marketing of our products will be, subject to extensive and rigorous review and regulation by numerous government authorities in the United States and in other countries where we intend to test and market our product candidates. Before obtaining regulatory approvals for the commercial sale of any of our product candidates, we must demonstrate through lengthy, complex and expensive preclinical testing and clinical trials that our product candidates are both safe and effective for use in each target indication. In particular, because our product candidates are subject to regulation as biological drug products, we will need to demonstrate that they are safe, pure, and potent for use in their target indications. Each product candidate must demonstrate an adequate risk versus benefit profile in its intended patient population and for its intended use. The risk/benefit profile required for product licensure will vary depending on these factors and may include decrease or elimination of pain, adequate duration of response, a delay in the progression of the disease, an improvement in function and/or decrease in disability.
In addition, even if such trials are successfully completed, we cannot guarantee that the FDA will interpret the results as we do, and more trials could be required before we submit our product candidates for approval. To the extent that the results of the trials are not satisfactory to the FDA for support of a marketing application, we may be required to expend significant resources, which may not be available to us, to conduct additional trials in support of potential approval of our product candidates.
Even if we complete the necessary clinical trials, we cannot predict when, or if, we will obtain regulatory approval to commercialize a product candidate, and the approval may be for a narrower indication than we seek.
We cannot commercialize a product candidate until the appropriate regulatory authorities have reviewed and approved the product candidate. Even if our product candidates meet their safety and efficacy endpoints in clinical trials, the regulatory authorities may not complete their review processes in a timely manner, or we may not be able to obtain regulatory approval. Additional delays may result if an FDA Advisory Committee or other regulatory authority recommends non-approval or restrictions or conditions on approval. In addition, we may experience delays or rejections based upon additional government regulation from future legislation or administrative action, or changes in regulatory authority policy during the period of product development, clinical trials and the review process. Regulatory authorities also may approve a product candidate for more limited indications than requested or they may impose significant limitations in the form of narrow indications, contraindications or a Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (“REMS”). These regulatory authorities may require warnings or precautions with respect to conditions of use or they may grant approval subject to the performance of costly post-marketing clinical trials. In addition, regulatory authorities may not approve the labeling claims or allow the promotional claims that are necessary or desirable for the successful commercialization of our product candidates. Any of the foregoing scenarios could materially harm the commercial prospects for our product candidates and materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects.
We may never obtain FDA approval for any of our product candidates in the United States and, even if we do, we may never obtain approval for or commercialize any of our product candidates in any foreign jurisdiction, which would limit our ability to realize our full market potential.
In order to eventually market any of our product candidates in any particular foreign jurisdiction, we must establish and comply with numerous and varying regulatory requirements regarding safety and efficacy on a jurisdiction-by-jurisdiction basis. Approval by the FDA in the United States, if obtained, does not ensure approval by regulatory authorities in other countries or jurisdictions. In addition, preclinical studies and clinical trials conducted in one country may not be accepted by regulatory authorities in other countries, and regulatory approval in one country does not guarantee regulatory approval in any other country.
Approval processes vary among countries and can involve additional product testing and validation and additional administrative review periods. Seeking foreign regulatory approval could result in difficulties and costs for us and require additional preclinical studies or clinical trials which could be costly and time consuming. Regulatory requirements can vary widely from country to country and could delay or prevent the introduction of our product candidates in those countries. The foreign regulatory approval process involves similar risks to those associated with FDA approval. We do not have any product candidates approved for sale in any jurisdiction, including international markets, nor have we attempted to obtain such approval. If we fail to comply with regulatory requirements in international markets or to obtain and maintain required approvals, or if regulatory approvals in international markets are delayed, our target market will be reduced and our ability to realize the full market potential of our products may be unrealized.
We presently lack manufacturing capabilities to produce our product candidates at commercial scale quantities and do not have an alternate manufacturing supply, which could negatively impact our ability to meet any future demand for the products.
Currently, we expect our laboratory (or a contract laboratory) to provide the cell processing services necessary for clinical production of BRTX-100 for our disc clinical trial. To date, we have not produced any products at our laboratory. We expect that we would need to significantly expand our manufacturing capabilities to meet potential commercial demand for BRTX-100 and any other of our product candidates, if approved, as well as any of our other product candidates that might attain regulatory approval. Such expansion would require additional regulatory approvals. Even if we increase our manufacturing capabilities, it is possible that we may still lack sufficient capacity to meet demand. Ultimately, if we are unable to supply our products to meet commercial demand, whether because of processing constraints or other disruptions, delays or difficulties that we experience, sales of the products and their long-term commercial prospects could be significantly damaged.
We do not presently have a third-party manufacturer for BRTX-100 or any of our other product candidates. If our facilities at which these product candidates would be manufactured or our equipment were significantly damaged or destroyed, or if there were other disruptions, delays or difficulties affecting manufacturing capacity, our planned and future clinical studies and commercial production for these product candidates would likely be significantly disrupted and delayed. It would be both time consuming and expensive to replace this capacity with third parties, particularly since any new facility would need to comply with the regulatory requirements.
Ultimately, if we are unable to supply our cell therapy product candidates to meet commercial demand (assuming commercial approval is obtained), whether because of processing constraints or other disruptions, delays or difficulties that we experience, our production costs could dramatically increase and sales of the product and its long-term commercial prospects could be significantly damaged.
The commercial potential and profitability of our products are unknown and subject to significant risk and uncertainty.
Even if we successfully develop and obtain regulatory approval for our cell therapy product candidates, the market may not understand or accept the products, which could adversely affect both the timing and level of future sales. Ultimately, the degree of market acceptance of our product candidates (or any of our future product candidates) will depend on a number of factors, including:
● the clinical effectiveness, safety and convenience of the product particularly in relation to alternative treatments;
● our ability to distinguish our products (which involve adult cells) from any ethical and political controversies associated with stem cell products derived from human embryonic or fetal tissue; and
● the cost of the product, the reimbursement policies of government and third-party payors and our ability to obtain sufficient third-party coverage or reimbursement.
Even if we are successful in achieving sales of our product candidates, it is not clear to what extent, if any, the products will be profitable. The costs of goods associated with production of cell therapy products are significant. In addition, some changes in manufacturing processes or procedures generally require FDA or foreign regulatory authority review and approval prior to implementation. We may need to conduct additional pre-clinical studies and clinical trials to support approval of any such changes. Furthermore, this review process could be costly and time-consuming and could delay or prevent the commercialization of product candidates.
We may have difficulties in sourcing brown adipose (fat) tissue.
We use brown adipose (fat) tissue to identify and characterize brown adipose derived stem cells for use in our pre-clinical ThermoStem Program. There is no certainty that we will be able to continue to collect brown adipose samples through any relationships that we have, have had or may establish with potential sources of brown adipose tissue. The inability to procure brown fat tissue would have a material adverse effect upon our ability to advance our ThermoStem Program.
We are required to complete a certain milestone to maintain our exclusive license rights with regard to the disc/spine technology. The loss of such exclusive rights would have a material adverse effect upon us.
Pursuant to our license agreement with Regenerative Sciences, LLC, we must complete our Phase 2 clinical trial by a certain date (which we believe to be February 2022) in order to maintain our exclusive rights with regard to the disc/spine technology. We will not be able to achieve such milestone. Any loss of such exclusive rights would have a material adverse effect upon our business, results of operations and financial condition. See “Business-Disc/Spine Program - License.”
If safety problems are encountered by us or others developing new stem cell-based therapies, our stem cell initiatives could be materially and adversely affected.
The use of stem cells for therapeutic indications is still in the very early stages of development. If an adverse event occurs during clinical trials related to one of our proposed products and/or services or those of others, the FDA and other regulatory authorities may halt clinical trials or require additional studies. The occurrence of any of these events would delay, and increase the cost of, our development efforts and may render the commercialization of our proposed products and/or services impractical or impossible.
We are vulnerable to competition and technological change, and also to physicians’ inertia.
We will compete with many domestic and foreign companies in developing our technology and products, including biotechnology, medical device and pharmaceutical companies. Many current and potential competitors have substantially greater financial, technological, research and development, marketing, and personnel resources. There is no assurance that our competitors will not succeed in developing alternative products and/or services that are more effective, easier to use, or more economical than those which we may develop, or that would render our products and/or services obsolete and non-competitive. In general, we may not be able to prevent others from developing and marketing competitive products and/or services similar to ours or which perform similar functions or which are marketed before ours.
Competitors may have greater experience in developing products, therapies or devices, conducting clinical trials, obtaining regulatory clearances or approvals, manufacturing and commercialization. It is possible that competitors may obtain patent protection, approval or clearance from the FDA or achieve commercialization earlier than we can, any of which could have a substantial negative effect on our business.
We will compete against cell-based therapies derived from alternate sources, such as bone marrow, adipose tissue, umbilical cord blood and potentially embryos. Doctors historically are slow to adopt new technologies like ours, whatever the merits, when older technologies continue to be supported by established providers. Overcoming such inertia often requires very significant marketing expenditures or definitive product performance and/or pricing superiority.
We expect that physicians’ inertia and skepticism will also be a significant barrier as we attempt to gain market penetration with our future products and services. We may need to finance lengthy time-consuming clinical studies (so as to provide convincing evidence of the medical benefit) in order to overcome this inertia and skepticism.
We may form or seek collaborations or strategic alliances or enter into additional licensing arrangements in the future, and we may not realize the benefits of such alliances or licensing arrangements.
We may form or seek strategic alliances, create joint ventures or collaborations, or enter into additional licensing arrangements with third parties that we believe will complement or augment our development and commercialization efforts with respect to our product candidates and any future product candidates that we may develop. Any of these relationships may require us to incur non-recurring and other charges, increase our near and long-term expenditures, issue securities that dilute the shares of our existing stockholders, or disrupt our management and business. In addition, we face significant competition in seeking appropriate strategic partners and the negotiation process is time-consuming and complex. Moreover, we may not be successful in our efforts to establish a strategic partnership or other alternative arrangements for our product candidates because they may be deemed to be at too early of a stage of development for collaborative effort and third parties may not view our product candidates as having the requisite potential to demonstrate safety and efficacy. To date, such efforts have not been successful.
Further, collaborations involving our product candidates, such as our collaborations with third-party research institutions, are subject to numerous risks, which may include the following:
● collaborators have significant discretion in determining the efforts and resources that they will apply to a collaboration;
● collaborators may not pursue development and commercialization of our product candidates or may elect not to continue or renew development or commercialization programs based on clinical trial results, changes in their strategic focus due to the acquisition of competitive products, availability of funding, or other external factors, such as a business combination that diverts resources or creates competing priorities;
● collaborators may delay clinical trials, provide insufficient funding for a clinical trial, stop a clinical trial, abandon a product candidate, repeat or conduct new clinical trials, or require a new formulation of a product candidate for clinical testing;
● collaborators could independently develop, or develop with third parties, products that compete directly or indirectly with our products or product candidates;
● a collaborator with marketing and distribution rights to one or more products may not commit sufficient resources to their marketing and distribution;
● collaborators may not properly maintain or defend our intellectual property rights or may use our intellectual property or proprietary information in a way that gives rise to actual or threatened litigation that could jeopardize or invalidate our intellectual property or proprietary information or expose us to potential liability;
● disputes may arise between us and a collaborator that cause the delay or termination of the research, development or commercialization of our product candidates, or that result in costly litigation or arbitration that diverts management attention and resources;
● collaborations may be terminated and, if terminated, may result in a need for additional capital to pursue further development or commercialization of the applicable product candidates; and
● collaborators may own or co-own intellectual property covering our products that results from our collaborating with them, and in such cases, we would not have the exclusive right to commercialize such intellectual property.
As a result, if we enter into collaboration agreements and strategic partnerships or license our products or businesses, we may not be able to realize the benefit of such transactions if we are unable to successfully integrate them with our existing operations and company culture, which could delay our timelines or otherwise adversely affect our business. We also cannot be certain that, following a strategic transaction or license, we will achieve the revenue or specific net income that justifies such transaction. Any delays in entering into new collaborations or strategic partnership agreements related to our product candidates could delay the development and commercialization of our product candidates in certain geographies for certain indications, which would harm our business prospects, financial condition, and results of operations.
We have limited experience in the development and marketing of cell therapies and may be unsuccessful in our efforts to establish a profitable business.
Our business plan has been focused historically on capturing a piece of the burgeoning field of cell therapy. We have limited experience in the areas of cell therapy product development and marketing, and in the related regulatory issues and processes. Although we have recruited a team that has experience with designing and conducting clinical trials and have hired FDA consultants, as a company, we have limited experience in conducting clinical trials and no experience in conducting clinical trials through to regulatory approval of any product candidate. In part because of this lack of experience, we cannot be certain that planned clinical trials will begin or be completed on time, if at all. We cannot assure that we will successfully achieve our clinical development goals or fulfill our plans to capture a piece of the cell therapy market.
Our cell therapy business is based on novel technologies that are inherently expensive, risky and may not be understood by or accepted in the marketplace, which could adversely affect our future value.
The clinical development, commercialization and marketing of cell and tissue-based therapies are at an early-stage, substantially research-oriented, and financially speculative. To date, very few companies have been successful in their efforts to develop and commercialize a cell therapy product. In general, cell-based or tissue-based products may be susceptible to various risks, including undesirable and unintended side effects, unintended immune system responses, inadequate therapeutic efficacy, or other characteristics that may prevent or limit their approval or commercial use. In addition, BRTX-100 is a cell-based candidate that is produced by using a patient’s own stem cells derived from bone marrow. Regulatory approval of novel product candidates such as BRTX-100, which is manufactured using novel manufacturing processes, can be more complex and expensive and take longer than other, more well-known or extensively studied pharmaceutical or biopharmaceutical products, due to the FDA’s lack of experience with them. To our knowledge, the FDA has not yet approved a disc related stem cell therapy product. This lack of experience may lengthen the regulatory review process, require us to conduct additional studies or clinical trials, which would increase our development costs, lead to changes in regulatory positions and interpretations, delay or prevent approval and commercialization of these product candidates or lead to significant post-approval limitations or restrictions. Furthermore, the number of people who may use cell or tissue-based therapies is difficult to forecast with accuracy. Our future success is dependent on the establishment of a large global market for cell- and tissue-based therapies and our ability to capture a share of this market with our product candidates.
Our cell therapy product candidates for which we intend to seek approval as biologic products may face competition sooner than anticipated.
The enactment of the Biologics Price Competition and Innovation Act of 2009 (“BPCIA”) created an abbreviated regulatory pathway for the approval of products demonstrated to be biosimilar, or “highly similar,” to or “interchangeable” with an FDA-approved innovator (original) biologic product. The abbreviated regulatory pathway establishes legal authority for the FDA to review and approve biosimilar biologics, including the possible designation of a biosimilar as “interchangeable” based on its similarity to an existing reference product. Under the BPCIA, an application for a biosimilar product cannot be approved by the FDA until 12 years after the original branded product is approved under a biologics license application (“BLA”). Although the FDA has approved several biosimilar products, complex provisions of the law are still being implemented by the FDA and interpreted by the federal courts. As a result, the ultimate impact, implementation, and meaning of the BPCIA are still subject to some uncertainty and FDA actions and court decisions concerning the law could have a material adverse effect on the future commercial prospects for our biological products.
We believe that, if any of our product candidates are approved as a biological product under a BLA, it should qualify for the 12-year period of exclusivity. However, there is a risk that the FDA could approve biosimilar applicants for other reference products that no longer have such exclusivity, thus potentially creating the opportunity for greater competition sooner than anticipated. Moreover, the extent to which a biosimilar, once approved, will be substituted for any one of our reference products in a way that is similar to traditional generic substitution for non-biological products is not yet clear, and will depend on a number of marketplace and regulatory factors that are still developing.
The FDA’s regulation of regenerative medicine products remains unpredictable and we are not certain what impact this will have on the potential approval of our products.
The FDA’s regulation of therapies derived from stem cell products and technologies is evolving and may continue to evolve. In December 2016, the 21st Century Cures Act (the “Cures Act”) was signed into law in the United States to advance access to medical innovations. Among other things, the Cures Act established a new FDA regenerative medicine advanced therapy (“RMAT”) designation. This designation offers a variety of benefits to product candidates, including enhanced FDA support during clinical development, priority review on application filing, accelerated approval based on potential surrogate endpoints, and the potential use of patient registry data and other forms of real world evidence for post-approval confirmatory studies. There is no certainty that any of our product candidates will receive RMAT designation or any other type of expedited review program designation from the FDA. In any event, the receipt of an FDA RMAT designation or other expedited review program designation may not result in a faster development process, review or approval compared to products considered for approval under conventional FDA procedures and does not assure ultimate approval by the FDA.
We may be subject to significant product liability claims and litigation, including potential exposure from the use of our product candidates in human subjects, and our insurance may be inadequate to cover claims that may arise.
Our business exposes us to potential product liability risks inherent in the testing, processing and marketing of cell therapy products. Such liability claims may be expensive to defend and result in large judgments against us. We face an inherent risk of product liability exposure related to the testing of our current and any future product candidates in human clinical trials and will face an even greater risk with respect to any commercial sales of our products should they be approved. No product candidate has been widely used over an extended period of time, and therefore safety data is limited. Cell therapy companies derive the raw materials for manufacturing of product candidates from human cell sources, and therefore the manufacturing process and handling requirements are extensive, which increases the risk of quality failures and subsequent product liability claims.
We will need to maintain insurance coverage adequate to cover our clinical trials and increase that coverage before commercializing product candidates, if ever. At any time during our clinical trials or after commercialization, if that occurs, we may not be able to obtain or maintain product liability insurance on acceptable terms with adequate coverage or at all, or if claims against us substantially exceed our coverage, then our financial position could be significantly impaired.
Whether or not we are ultimately successful in any product liability litigation that may arise, such litigation could consume substantial amounts of our financial and managerial resources, result in decreased demand for our products and injure our reputation.
We seek to maintain errors and omissions, directors and officers, workers’ compensation and other insurance at levels we believe to be appropriate to our business activities. If, however, we were subject to a claim in excess of this coverage or to a claim not covered by our insurance and the claim succeeded, we would be required to pay the claim from our own limited resources, which could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and business. Additionally, liability or alleged liability could harm our business by diverting the attention and resources of our management and damaging our reputation.
Our internal computer systems, or those that are expected to be used by our clinical investigators, clinical research organizations or other contractors or consultants, may fail or suffer security breaches, which could result in a material disruption of development programs for our product candidates.
We rely on information technology systems to keep financial records, maintain laboratory and corporate records, communicate with staff and external parties and operate other critical functions. Any significant degradation or failure of these computer systems could cause us to inaccurately calculate or lose data. Despite the implementation of security measures, these internal computer systems and those used by our clinical investigators, clinical research organizations, and other contractors and consultants are vulnerable to damage from computer viruses, unauthorized access, natural disasters, terrorism, war, and telecommunication and electrical failures. The techniques that could be used by criminal elements or foreign governments to attack these computer systems are sophisticated, change frequently and may originate from less regulated and remote areas of the world. While we have not experienced any such system failure, theft of information, accident or security breach to date, if such an event were to occur and cause interruptions in our operations, it could result in a material disruption of our clinical development activities. For example, the loss of clinical trial data from historical or future clinical trials could result in delays in regulatory approval efforts and significantly increase costs to recover or reproduce the data. To the extent that any disruption, theft of information, or security breach were to result in a loss of or damage to data or applications, or inappropriate disclosure of confidential or proprietary information, we could incur liability and the clinical development and the future development of our product candidates could be delayed.
To operate and sell in international markets carries great risk.
We intend to market our products and services both domestically and in foreign markets. A number of risks are inherent in international transactions. In order for us to market our products and services in non-U.S. jurisdictions, we need to obtain and maintain required regulatory approvals or clearances in these countries and must comply with the country specific regulations regarding safety, manufacturing processes and quality. These regulations, including the requirements for approvals or clearances to market, may differ from the FDA regulatory scheme. International operations and sales also may be limited or disrupted by political instability, price controls, trade restrictions and changes in tariffs. Additionally, fluctuations in currency exchange rates may adversely affect demand for our services and products by increasing the price of our products and services in the currency of the countries in which the products and services are offered.
There can be no assurance that we will obtain regulatory approvals or clearances in all of the countries where we intend to market our products and services, or that we will not incur significant costs in obtaining or maintaining foreign regulatory approvals or clearances, or that we will be able to successfully commercialize our products and services in various foreign markets. Delays in receipt of approvals or clearances to market our products and services in foreign countries, failure to receive such approvals or clearances or the future loss of previously received approvals or clearances could have a substantial negative effect on our results of operations and financial condition.
Our inability to obtain reimbursement for our products and services from private and governmental insurers could negatively impact demand for our products and services.
Market acceptance and sales of our product candidates may depend on coverage and reimbursement policies and health care reform measures. Decisions about formulary coverage as well as levels at which government authorities and third-party payors, such as private health insurers and health maintenance organizations, reimburse patients for the price they pay for our product candidates, as well as levels at which these payors pay directly for our product candidates, where applicable, could affect whether we are able to successfully commercialize these products. We cannot guarantee that reimbursement will be available for any of our product candidates. We also cannot guarantee that coverage or reimbursement amounts will not reduce the demand for, or the price of, our product candidates.
If coverage and reimbursement are not available or are available only at limited levels, we may not be able to successfully commercialize our products. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (“PPACA”) and other health reform proposals include measures that would limit or prohibit payments for certain medical treatments or subject the pricing of drugs to government control. In addition, in many foreign countries, particularly the countries of the European Union (the “EU”), the pricing of drugs and biologics is subject to government control. If our products are or become subject to government regulation that limits or prohibits payment for our products, or that subjects the price of our products to government control, we may not be able to generate revenue, attain profitability or commercialize our products.
In addition, third-party payors are increasingly limiting both coverage and the level of reimbursement of new drugs and biologics. They may also impose strict prior authorization requirements and/or refuse to provide any coverage of uses of approved products for medical indications other than those for which the FDA has granted market approvals. As a result, significant uncertainty exists as to whether and how much third-party payors will reimburse patients for their use of newly-approved drugs and biologics. If we are unable to obtain adequate levels of reimbursement for our product candidates, our ability to successfully market and sell our product candidates will be harmed.
Risks Related to Our Intellectual Property
We may not be able to protect our proprietary rights.
Our commercial success will depend in large part upon our ability to protect our proprietary rights. There is no assurance, for example, that any additional patents will be issued based on our or our licensor’s pending applications or, if issued, that such patents will not become the subject of a re-examination, will provide us with competitive advantages, will not be challenged by any third parties, or that the patents of others will not prevent the commercialization of products and services incorporating our technology. Furthermore, there can be no guarantee that others will not independently develop similar products and services, duplicate any of our products and services, or design around any patents we obtain.
Our commercial success will also depend upon our ability to avoid infringing patents issued to others. If we were judicially determined to be infringing on any third-party patent, we could be required to pay damages, alter our products, services or processes, obtain licenses, or cease certain activities. If we are required in the future to obtain any licenses from third parties for some of our products and/or services, there can be no guarantee that we would be able to do so on commercially favorable terms, if at all. United States and foreign patent applications are not immediately made public, so we might be surprised by the grant to someone else of a patent on a technology we are actively using. Although we conducted a freedom to operate (“FTO”) search on the licensed technology associated with our Disc/Spine Program, modifications made, and/or further developments that may be made, to that technology may not be covered by the initial FTO. No FTO has been undertaken with respect to our ThermoStem brown fat initiative.
Litigation, which would result in substantial costs to us and the diversion of effort on our part, may be necessary to enforce or confirm the ownership of any patents issued or licensed to us, or to determine the scope and validity of third-party proprietary rights. If our competitors claim technology also claimed by us and prepare and file patent applications in the United States, we may have to participate in interference proceedings declared by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (the “Patent Office”) or a foreign patent office to determine priority of invention, which could result in substantial costs and diversion of effort, even if the eventual outcome is favorable to us. Any such litigation or interference proceeding, regardless of outcome, could be expensive and time-consuming.
Successful challenges to our patents through oppositions, re-examination proceedings or interference proceedings could result in a loss of patent rights in the relevant jurisdiction. If we are unsuccessful in actions we bring against the patents of other parties, and it is determined that we infringe upon the patents of third parties, we may be subject to litigation, or otherwise prevented from commercializing potential products and/or services in the relevant jurisdiction, or may be required to obtain licenses to those patents or develop or obtain alternative technologies, any of which could harm our business. Furthermore, if such challenges to our patent rights are not resolved in our favor, we could be delayed or prevented from entering into new collaborations or from commercializing certain products and/or services, which could adversely affect our business and results of operations.
Furthermore, because of the substantial amount of discovery required in connection with intellectual property litigation, there is a risk that some of our confidential or sensitive information could be compromised by disclosure in the event of litigation. In addition, during the course of litigation there could be public announcements of the results of hearings, motions or other interim proceedings or developments. If securities analysts or investors perceive these results to be negative, it could have a substantial adverse effect on the price of our common stock.
In addition to patents, we rely on unpatented trade secrets and proprietary technological expertise. Some of our intended future cell-related therapeutic products and/or services may fit into this category. We also rely, in part, on confidentiality agreements with our partners, employees, advisors, vendors, and consultants to protect our trade secrets and proprietary technological expertise. There can be no guarantee that these agreements will not be breached, or that we will have adequate remedies for any breach, or that our unpatented trade secrets and proprietary technological expertise will not otherwise become known or be independently discovered by competitors.
Failure to obtain or maintain patent protection, failure to protect trade secrets, third-party claims against our patents, trade secrets, or proprietary rights or our involvement in disputes over our patents, trade secrets, or proprietary rights, including involvement in litigation, could divert our efforts and attention from other aspects of our business and have a substantial negative effect on our results of operations and financial condition.
We may not be able to protect our intellectual property in countries outside of the United States.
Intellectual property law outside the United States is uncertain and, in many countries, is currently undergoing review and revisions. The laws of some countries do not protect our patent and other intellectual property rights to the same extent as United States laws. Third parties may attempt to oppose the issuance of patents to us in foreign countries by initiating opposition proceedings. Opposition proceedings against any of our patent filings in a foreign country could have an adverse effect on our corresponding patents that are issued or pending in the United States. It may be necessary or useful for us to participate in proceedings to determine the validity of our patents or our competitors’ patents that have been issued in countries other than the United States. This could result in substantial costs, divert our efforts and attention from other aspects of our business, and could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition.
Changes to United States patent law may have a material adverse effect on our intellectual property rights.
The Leahy-Smith America Invents Act (“AIA”), which was signed into law in 2011, significantly changes United States patent law. It may take some time to establish what the law means, since it is just being interpreted by the lower courts, Federal Circuit Courts of Appeal, and the Supreme Court. The effects of these decisions are still not known. The first major change is that AIA switches the United States patent system from a “first to invent” system to a “first to file” system. Now that the first to file system is in effect, there is a risk that another company may independently develop identical or similar patents at approximately the same time, and be awarded the patents instead of us. Further, for the second major change, AIA abolished interference proceedings, and establishes derivation proceedings to replace interference proceedings in all cases in which the time period for instituting an interference proceeding has not lapsed where an inventor named in an earlier application derived the claimed invention from a named inventor. Now that the derivation proceedings are in effect, there is a risk that the inventorship of any pending patent application can be challenged for reasons of derivation. The third major change is that AIA established post-grant opposition proceedings that will apply only to patent applications filed after “first to file” became effective. Post-grant opposition will enable a person who is not the patent owner to initiate proceedings in the Patent Office within nine months after the grant of a patent that can result in cancellation of a patent as invalid. In addition to AIA, recent court decisions have created uncertainty with regard to our ability to obtain and maintain patents. Therefore there is a risk that any of our patents once granted may be subject to post-grant opposition, which will increase uncertainty on the validity of any newly granted patent or may ultimately result in cancellation of the patent.
In addition, the Supreme Court has recently taken more limiting positions as to what constitutes patentable subject matter. As a result, many patents covering what were previously patentable inventions are now determined to cover inventions which are deemed non-statutory subject matter and are now invalid. As a result of this and subsequent opinions by the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, the Patent Office is now applying more stringent limitations to claims in patent applications and is refusing to grant patents in areas of technology where patents were previously deemed available. Therefore there is a risk that we will be unable to acquire patents to cover our products and if such patents are granted they may subsequently be found to be invalid.
In certain countries, patent holders may be required to grant compulsory licenses, which would likely have a significant and detrimental effect on any future revenues in such country.
Many countries, including some countries in Europe, have compulsory licensing laws under which a patent owner may be compelled to grant licenses to third parties. In addition, most countries limit the enforceability of patents against government agencies or government contractors. In these countries, the patent owner may be limited to monetary relief and may be unable to enjoin infringement, which could materially diminish the value of the patent. Compulsory licensing of life-saving products is also becoming increasingly common in developing countries, either through direct legislation or international initiatives. Such compulsory licenses could be extended to our product candidates, which may limit our potential revenue opportunities, including with respect to any future revenues that may result from our product candidates.
Risks Related to Government Regulation
Even if we obtain regulatory approval for a product candidate, our products will remain subject to regulatory oversight.
Our product candidates for which we obtain regulatory approval will be subject to ongoing regulatory requirements for manufacturing, labeling, packaging, storage, advertising, promotion, record-keeping and submission of safety and other post-market information. Any regulatory approvals that we receive for our product candidates also may be subject to a REMS or the specific obligations imposed as a condition for marketing authorization by equivalent authorities in a foreign jurisdiction, limitations on the approved indicated uses for which the product may be marketed or to the conditions of approval, or contain requirements for potentially costly post-marketing testing, including Phase 4 clinical trials, and surveillance to monitor the quality, safety and efficacy of the product. For example, in the United States, the holder of an approved new drug application (“NDA”) or BLA is obligated to monitor and report adverse events and any failure of a product to meet the specifications in the NDA or BLA. The holder of an approved NDA or BLA also must submit new or supplemental applications and obtain FDA approval for certain changes to the approved product, product labeling or manufacturing process. Advertising and promotional materials must comply with the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (“FDCA”) and implementing regulations and are subject to FDA oversight and post-marketing reporting obligations, in addition to other potentially applicable federal and state laws.
In addition, product manufacturers and their facilities may be subject to payment of application and program fees and are subject to continual review and periodic inspections by the FDA and other regulatory authorities for compliance with cGMP requirements and adherence to commitments made in the NDA, BLA or foreign marketing application. If we or a regulatory authority discover previously unknown problems with a product, such as adverse events of unanticipated severity or frequency, or problems with the facility where the product is manufactured, or if a regulatory authority disagrees with the promotion, marketing or labeling of our product, a regulatory authority may impose restrictions relative to that product, the manufacturing facility or us, including requiring recall or withdrawal of the product from the market or suspension of manufacturing.
If we fail to comply with applicable regulatory requirements for any product candidate following approval, a regulatory authority may:
● issue a warning or untitled letter asserting that we are in violation of the law;
● seek an injunction or impose administrative, civil or criminal penalties or monetary fines;
● suspend or withdraw regulatory approval;
● suspend any ongoing clinical trials;
● refuse to approve a pending BLA or comparable foreign marketing application (or any supplements thereto) submitted by us or our strategic partners;
● restrict the marketing or manufacturing of the product;
● seize or detain the product or otherwise demand or require the withdrawal or recall of the product from the market;
● refuse to permit the import or export of products;
● request and publicize a voluntary recall of the product; or
● refuse to allow us to enter into supply contracts, including government contracts.
Any government enforcement action or investigation of alleged violations of law could require us to expend significant time and resources in response and could generate negative publicity. The occurrence of any event or penalty described above may inhibit our ability to commercialize our product candidates and adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects.
We may be subject, directly or indirectly, to federal and state healthcare fraud and abuse laws, false claims laws and health information privacy and security laws. If we are unable to comply, or have not fully complied, with such laws, we could face substantial penalties.
In the United States, the research, manufacturing, distribution, sale, and promotion of drugs and biologic products are subject to regulation by various federal, state, and local authorities, including the FDA, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (“CMS”), other divisions the Department of Health and Human Services (“HHS”) (e.g., the Office of Inspector General), the United States Department of Justice offices of the United States Attorney, the Federal Trade Commission and state and local governments. Our operations are directly, or indirectly through our prescribers, customers and purchasers, subject to various federal and state fraud and abuse laws and regulations, including the federal Anti-Kickback Statute (“AKS”), the federal civil and criminal False Claims Act (“FCA”), the Physician Payments Sunshine Act and regulations and equivalent provisions in other countries. In addition, we may be subject to patient privacy laws by both the federal government and the states in which we conduct our business.
State and federal regulatory and enforcement agencies continue actively to investigate violations of health care laws and regulations, and the United States Congress continues to strengthen the arsenal of enforcement tools. Most recently, the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 increased the criminal and civil penalties that can be imposed for violating certain federal health care laws, including the AKS. Enforcement agencies also continue to pursue novel theories of liability under these laws. Government agencies have recently increased regulatory scrutiny and enforcement activity with respect to programs supported or sponsored by pharmaceutical companies, including reimbursement and co-pay support, funding of independent charitable foundations and other programs that offer benefits for patients. Several investigations into these programs have resulted in significant civil and criminal settlements.
Because of the breadth of these laws and the narrowness of the statutory exceptions and safe harbors available, it is possible that some of our business activities could be subject to challenge under one or more of such laws. If our operations are found to be in violation of any of the laws described above or any other government regulations that apply to us, we may be subject to penalties, including civil and criminal penalties, damages, fines, exclusion from participation in government health care programs, such as Medicare and Medicaid, imprisonment and the curtailment or restructuring of our operations, any of which could adversely affect our ability to operate our business and our results of operations. Even if we are not determined to have violated these laws, government investigations into these issues typically require the expenditure of significant resources and generate negative publicity, which could harm our financial condition and divert the attention of our management from operating our business.
Further, in the event we determine to operate in foreign jurisdictions, including conducting clinical trials, we will need to comply with the United States Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977 (the “FCPA”). The FCPA prohibits a corporation, including its subsidiaries, third-party contractors, distributors, consultants and employees, from corruptly making or offering to make payments to foreign officials for the purpose of obtaining or enhancing business. Under the law, “foreign officials” include employees of health systems operated by government entities. The FCPA also establishes specific record-keeping and internal accounting controls. Violations of the FCPA can result in the imposition of civil penalties or criminal prosecution. Failure to comply with the FCPA will adversely affect our business.
In addition to the FCPA, we will also need to comply with the foreign government laws and regulations of each individual country in which any therapy centers that we may establish are located and products are to be distributed and sold. These regulations vary in complexity and can be as stringent, and on occasion even more stringent, than FDA regulations in the United States. Due to the fact that there are new and emerging stem cell and cell therapy regulations that have recently been drafted and/or implemented in various countries around the world, the application and subsequent implementation of these new and emerging regulations have little to no precedence. Therefore, the level of complexity and stringency is not always precisely understood today for each country, creating greater uncertainty for the international regulatory process. Furthermore, there can be no guarantee that laws and regulations will not be implemented, amended and/or reinterpreted in a way that will negatively affect our business. Likewise, there can be no assurance that we will be able, or will have the resources, to maintain compliance with all such healthcare laws and regulations. Failure to comply with such healthcare laws and regulations, as well as the costs associated with such compliance or with enforcement of such healthcare laws and regulations, may have a material adverse effect on our operations or may require restructuring of our operations or impair our ability to operate profitably.
Our current and future employees, consultants and advisors and our future principal investigators, medical institutions and commercial partners may engage in misconduct or other improper activities, including non-compliance with regulatory standards and requirements.
We are exposed to the risk of fraud or other misconduct by our current and future employees, consultants and advisors and our future principal investigators, medical institutions and commercial partners, including contract laboratories, and CROs. Misconduct by these parties could include intentional failures to comply with FDA regulations or the regulations applicable in other jurisdictions, provide accurate information to the FDA and other regulatory authorities, comply with healthcare fraud and abuse laws and regulations in the United States and abroad, report financial information or data accurately or disclose unauthorized activities to us.
We currently do not and in the future may not independently conduct all aspects of our product candidate research and preclinical and clinical testing and product candidate manufacturing. If we rely on third parties, including CROs, medical institutions, and contract laboratories to monitor and manage data for our ongoing preclinical and clinical programs, we will still maintain responsibility for ensuring their activities are conducted in accordance with the applicable study protocol, legal, regulatory and scientific standards. We and our third-party vendors will be required to comply with current cGMP, GCP, and Good Laboratory Practice (“GLP”) requirements, which are a collection of laws and regulations enforced by the FDA, the EU and comparable foreign authorities for all of our product candidates in clinical development.
In addition, sales, marketing and business arrangements in the healthcare industry are subject to extensive laws and regulations intended to prevent fraud, misconduct, kickbacks, self-dealing and other abusive practices. These laws and regulations restrict or prohibit a wide range of pricing, discounting, marketing and promotion, sales commission, customer incentive programs and other business arrangements. Such misconduct also could involve the improper use of information obtained in the course of clinical trials or interactions with the FDA or other regulatory authorities, which could result in regulatory sanctions and cause serious harm to our reputation.
The precautions we take to detect and prevent employee and third-party misconduct may not be effective in controlling unknown or unmanaged risks or losses or in protecting us from government investigations or other actions or lawsuits stemming from a failure to comply with these laws or regulations. If any such actions are instituted against us, and we are not successful in defending ourselves or asserting our rights, those actions could have a significant impact on our business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects, including the imposition of significant fines or other sanctions.
The failure to receive regulatory approvals for our cell therapy product candidates would likely have a material and adverse effect on our business and prospects.
To date, we have not received regulatory approval to market any of our product candidates in any jurisdiction. If we seek approval of any of our cell therapy product candidates, we will be required to submit to the FDA and potentially other regulatory authorities extensive pre-clinical and clinical data supporting its safety and efficacy, as well as information about the manufacturing process and to undergo inspection of our manufacturing facility or other contract manufacturing facilities, if utilized, among other things. The process of obtaining FDA and other regulatory approvals is expensive, generally takes many years and is subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, particularly with complex and/or novel product candidates such as our cell-based product candidates. Changes in regulatory approval requirements or policies may cause delays in the approval or rejection of an application or may make it easier for our competitors to gain regulatory approval to enter the marketplace. Ultimately, the FDA and other regulatory agencies have substantial discretion in the approval process and may refuse to accept any application or may decide that our product candidate data are insufficient for approval without the submission of additional preclinical, clinical or other studies. In addition, varying agency interpretations of the data obtained from preclinical and clinical testing could delay, limit or prevent regulatory approval of a product candidate. Any difficulties or failures that we encounter in securing regulatory approval for our product candidates would likely have a substantial adverse impact on our ability to generate product sales, and could make any search for a collaborative partner more difficult. Similarly, any regulatory approval we ultimately obtain may be limited or subject to restrictions or post-approval commitments that render the approved product not commercially viable.
If we are unable to conduct clinical studies in accordance with regulations and accepted standards, we may be delayed in receiving, or may never receive, regulatory approvals of our product candidates from the FDA and other regulatory authorities.
To obtain marketing approvals for our product candidates in the United States and abroad, we must, among other requirements, complete adequate and well-controlled clinical trials sufficient to demonstrate to the FDA and other regulatory bodies that the product candidate is safe and effective for each indication for which approval is sought. If the FDA finds that patients enrolled in the trial are or would be exposed to an unreasonable and significant risk of illness or injury, due to, among other things, occurrence of a serious adverse event in an ongoing clinical trial, the FDA can place one or more of our clinical trials on hold. If safety concerns develop, we may, or the FDA or an institutional review board may require us to, stop the affected trials before completion.
The completion of our clinical trials also may be delayed or terminated for a number of other reasons, including if:
● third-party clinical investigators do not perform the clinical trials on the anticipated schedule or consistent with the clinical trial protocol, good clinical practices required by the FDA and other regulatory requirements, or other third parties do not perform data collection and analysis in a timely or accurate manner;
● inspections of clinical trial sites by the FDA or other regulatory authorities reveal violations that require us to undertake corrective action, suspend or terminate one or more sites, or prohibit use of some or all of the data in support of marketing applications; or
● the FDA or one or more institutional review boards suspends or terminates the trial at an investigational site, or precludes enrollment of additional subjects.
Our development costs will increase if there are material delays in our clinical trials, or if we are required to modify, suspend, terminate or repeat a clinical trial. If we are unable to conduct our clinical trials properly, we may never receive regulatory approval to market our product candidates.
Health care companies have been the subjects of federal and state investigations, and we could become subject to investigations in the future.
Both federal and state government agencies have heightened civil and criminal enforcement efforts. There are numerous ongoing investigations of health care companies, as well as their executives and managers. In addition, amendments to the federal FCA, including under healthcare reform legislation, have made it easier for private parties to bring “qui tam” (or whistleblower) lawsuits against companies under which the whistleblower may be entitled to receive a percentage of any money paid to the government. The FCA provides, in part, that an action can be brought against any person or entity that has knowingly presented, or caused to be presented, a false or fraudulent request for payment from the federal government, or who has made a false statement or used a false record to get a claim approved. The government has taken the position that claims presented in violation of the federal AKS, Stark Law or other healthcare-related laws, including laws enforced by the FDA, may be considered a violation of the FCA. Penalties include substantial fines for each false claim, plus three times the amount of damages that the federal government sustained because of the act of that person or entity and/or exclusion from the Medicare program. In addition, a majority of states have adopted similar state whistleblower and false claims provisions.
We are not aware of any government investigations involving any of our facilities or management. While we believe that we are in compliance with applicable governmental healthcare laws and regulations, any future investigations of our business or executives could cause us to incur substantial costs, and result in significant liabilities or penalties, as well as damage to our reputation.
It is uncertain to what extent the government, private health insurers and third-party payors will approve coverage or provide reimbursement for the therapies and products to which our services relate. Availability for such reimbursement may be further limited by reductions in Medicare, Medicaid and other federal healthcare program funding in the United States.
To the extent that health care providers cannot obtain coverage or reimbursement for our products and therapies, they may elect not to provide such products and therapies to their patients and, thus, may not need our services. Further, as cost containment pressures are increasing in the health care industry, government and private payors may adopt strategies designed to limit the amount of reimbursement paid to health care providers.
Similarly, the trend toward managed health care and bundled pricing for health care services in the United States, could significantly influence the purchase of healthcare products and services, resulting in lower prices and reduced demand for our therapeutic products under development.
We may directly or indirectly receive revenues from federal health care programs, such as Medicare. Federal health care programs are subject to changes in coverage and reimbursement rules and procedures, including retroactive rate adjustments. These contingencies could materially decrease the range of services covered by such programs or the reimbursement rates paid directly or indirectly for our products and services. To the extent that any health care reform favors the reimbursement of other therapies over our therapeutic products under development, such reform could affect our ability to sell our services, which may have a material adverse effect on our revenues.
The limitation on reimbursement available from private and government payors may reduce the demand for, or the price of, our products and services, which could have a material adverse effect on our revenues. Additional legislation or regulation relating to the health care industry or third-party coverage and reimbursement may be enacted in the future which could adversely affect the revenues generated from the sale of our products and services.
Furthermore, there has been a trend in recent years towards reductions in overall funding for Medicare, Medicaid and other federal health care programs. There has also been an increase in the number of people who are not eligible for or enrolled in Medicare, Medicaid or other governmental programs. The reduced funding of governmental programs could have a negative impact on the demand for our services to the extent it relates to products and services which are reimbursed by government and private payors.
Unintended consequences of healthcare reform in the United States may adversely affect our business.
The healthcare industry is undergoing fundamental changes resulting from political, economic and regulatory influences. In the United States, the PPACA was signed into law in 2010 under the Obama administration. By implementing comprehensive reforms, the law seeks to, among other things, increase access to healthcare for the uninsured and control the escalation of healthcare expenditures within the economy. While we do not believe this law will have a direct impact on our business, the law requires the adoption of various implementing regulations, which may have unintended consequences or indirectly impact our business.
In addition, other legislative changes have been adopted since the PPACA was enacted. These changes include aggregate reductions in Medicare payments to providers of 2% per fiscal year, which went into effect on April 1, 2013 and, following passage of the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, will remain in effect through 2027 unless additional Congressional action is taken. In January 2013, President Obama signed into law the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012, which, among other things, further reduced Medicare payments to several types of providers and increased the statute of limitations period for the government to recover overpayments to providers from three to five years. In the past two years, Congress has considered additional reductions in Medicare reimbursement for drugs and devices as part of legislation to reduce the budget deficit. Similar legislation could be enacted in the future. The Medicare regulations and interpretive determinations that determine how drugs, devices and services are covered and reimbursed also are subject to change. These laws may result in additional reductions in Medicare and other health care funding, which could impact our business.
Healthcare reform measures that may be adopted in the future, may result in more rigorous coverage criteria and decreased reimbursement. Under the Trump administration, Congress passed certain legislation to alter the PPACA. In addition, Congress and select states have proposed legislation to alter and/or repeal the PPACA and/or transform certain aspects of existing federal and state health programs. The implementation of cost containment measures or other healthcare reforms may prevent us from being able to generate revenue, attain profitability or commercialize our product candidates. It is difficult to predict how enforcement initiatives under the PPACA and/or additional legislation or regulation enacted in the future may impact our business. If the PPACA and/or additional legislation or regulation enacted in the future cause such unintended consequences or indirect impact, they could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Competitor companies or hospitals in the EU may be able to take advantage of EU rules permitting sales of unlicensed medicines for individual patients to sell competing products without a marketing authorization.
The EU medicines rules allow individual member states to permit the supply of a medicinal product without a marketing authorization to fulfill special needs, where the product is supplied in response to a bona fide unsolicited order, formulated in accordance with the specifications of a healthcare professional and for use by an individual patient under his direct personal responsibility. This may, in certain countries, also apply to products manufactured in a country outside the EU and imported to treat specific patients or small groups of patients. In addition, advanced therapy medicinal products do not need a marketing authorization if they are prepared on a non-routine basis and are used within the same EU member state in a hospital in accordance with a medical prescription for an individual patient.
These exemptions could allow our competitors to make sales in the EU without having obtained a marketing authorization and without undergoing the expense of clinical trials, especially if those competitors have cell processing facilities in the relevant EU member state. Similarly, certain hospitals may be able to compete with us on the basis of these rules.
Risks Related to and Our Common Stock
We pay no dividends.
We have never paid cash dividends in the past, and currently do not intend to pay any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
There is no assurance that an active trading market for our securities will be sustained.
No assurance can be given that an active market for our shares will be sustained. In addition, although there have been market makers in our common stock, we cannot assure that these market makers will continue to make a market in our securities or that other factors outside of our control will not cause them to stop market making in our securities. Making a market in securities involves maintaining bid and ask quotations and being able to effect transactions in reasonable quantities at those quoted prices, subject to various securities laws and other regulatory requirements. Furthermore, the maintenance of a public trading market depends upon the existence of willing buyers and sellers, the presence of which is not within our control or that of any market maker. Market makers are not required to maintain a continuous two-sided market, are required to honor firm quotations for only a limited number of securities, and are free to withdraw firm quotations at any time. Even with a market maker, factors such as our past losses from operations and the small size of our company mean that there can be no assurance that an active and liquid market for our securities will be sustained or that stockholders will be able to resell their securities at any price.
Stockholders who hold unregistered shares of our common stock are subject to resale restrictions pursuant to Rule 144 due to our former status as a “shell company.”
We previously were a “shell company” pursuant to Rule 144, promulgated under the Securities Act (“Rule 144”), and, as such, sales of our securities pursuant to Rule 144 cannot be made unless, among other things, we continue to remain subject to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act, and we file all of our required periodic reports with the SEC under the Exchange Act. Because our unregistered securities cannot be sold pursuant to Rule 144 unless we continue to meet such requirements, any unregistered securities we sell in the future or issue to consultants or employees, in consideration for services rendered or for any other purpose, will have no liquidity unless we continue to comply with such requirements. As a result, it may be more difficult for us to obtain financing to fund our operations and pay our consultants and employees with our securities instead of cash.
We have incurred, and will continue to incur, increased costs as a result of being an SEC reporting company.
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, as well as a variety of related rules implemented by the SEC, have required changes in corporate governance practices and generally increased the disclosure requirements of public companies. As a reporting company, we incur significant legal, accounting and other expenses in connection with our public disclosure and other obligations. Based upon SEC regulations currently in effect, we are required to establish, evaluate and report on our internal control over financial reporting. We believe that compliance with the myriad of rules and regulations applicable to reporting companies and related compliance issues will continue to require a significant amount of time and attention from our management.
Our stock prices may fluctuate significantly and be highly volatile and this may make it difficult for a stockholder to resell our securities at the volume, prices and times the stockholder finds attractive.
The market price of our common stock may be subject to significant fluctuations and be highly volatile, which may make it difficult for a stockholder to resell our securities at the volume, prices and times the stockholder finds attractive. There are many factors that will impact our stock price and trading volume, including, but not limited to, the factors listed above under “Risks Related to Our Business Generally,” “Risks Related to Our Cell Therapy Product Development Efforts,” “Risks Related to Our Intellectual Property,” “Risks Related to Government Regulation” and “Risks Related to Our Common Stock”.
Stock markets, in general, experience significant price and volume volatility, and the market price of our securities may continue to be subject to such market fluctuations that may be unrelated to our operating performance and prospects. Increased market volatility and fluctuations could result in a substantial decline in the market price of our securities.
There may be significant future issuances or resales of our common stock which may materially and adversely dilute stockholders’ ownership interest and affect the market price of our securities.
We have authorization to issue up to 300,000,000,000 shares of common stock of which, as of April 27, 2021, 3,175,977,710 shares were issued and outstanding. We are not restricted from issuing additional shares of our common stock in the future, including securities convertible into, or exchangeable or exercisable for, shares of our common stock. Pursuant to the Plan of Reorganization, we issued warrants for the purchase of an aggregate of 15,226,346,970 shares of our common stock. In addition, pursuant to the Plan of Reorganization, we issued or will be issuing convertible notes in the aggregate estimated principal amount of $11,794,700. Such notes are or will be convertible into shares of our common stock at prices related to the market price of our common stock at the time of conversion. Our issuance of additional shares of common stock in the future will dilute the ownership interests of our then existing stockholders.
Pursuant to the Plan of Reorganization, an aggregate of 1,049,726,797 shares of common stock were issued to holders of unsecured claims. Such shares are freely tradeable in the public market, except for shares held by affiliates.
We have effective registration statements on Form S-8 under the Securities Act registering an aggregate of 19,955,000 shares of our common stock issuable under our 2010 Equity Participation Plan (the “2010 Plan”). As of April 27, 2021, options to purchase 4,879,617 shares of our common stock were outstanding under the 2010 Plan. In addition, as of such date, 45,000 shares of common stock were issued as stock grants pursuant to the 2010 Plan. The 2010 Plan terminated on November 17, 2020 and accordingly no further grants may be made under the 2010 Plan.
Immediately following the filing of this Annual Report, we intend to file a registration statement on Form S-8 under the Securities Act registering 4,700,000,000 shares of our common stock issuable under our 2021 Stock Incentive Plan (the “2021 Plan”). As of April 27, 2021, options to purchase 2,347,835,948 shares of our common stock were outstanding under the 2021 Plan. In addition, as of such date, 1,173,917,974 restricted stock units were outstanding under the 2021 Plan. All of such options and restricted stock units are held by our senior management team, Messrs. Alstodt and Silva.
The shares issuable pursuant to the registration statements on Form S-8 will be freely tradable in the public market, except for shares held by affiliates. We intend to include a resale prospectus in our registration statement on Form S-8 with regard to the 2021 Plan covering the resale of the shares issuable to Messrs. Alstodt and Silva upon their exercise of the above described options and the vesting of the above described RSUs. The resale of such shares will be currently subject to the volume limitations imposed by Rule 144.
The sale of a substantial number of shares of our common stock or securities convertible into, or exchangeable or exercisable for, shares of our common stock, whether directly by us in future offerings or by our existing stockholders in the secondary market, the perception that such issuances or resales could occur or the availability for future issuances or resale of shares of our common stock or securities convertible into, or exchangeable or exercisable for, shares of our common stock could materially and adversely affect the market price of our securities and our ability to raise capital through future offerings of equity or equity-related securities on attractive terms or at all.
In addition, our Board of Directors is authorized to designate and issue preferred stock without further stockholder approval, and we may issue other equity and equity-related securities that are senior to our common stock in the future for a number of reasons, including, without limitation, to support operations and growth, and to comply with any future changes in regulatory standards.
Anti-takeover provisions and the regulations to which we may be subject may make it more difficult for a third party to acquire control of us, even if the change in control would be beneficial to our securityholders.
We are incorporated in Delaware. Anti-takeover provisions in Delaware law and our certificate of incorporation and bylaws could make it more difficult for a third party to acquire control of us and may prevent stockholders from receiving a premium for their securities. Our certificate of incorporation provides that our Board of Directors may issue up to 20,000,000 shares of preferred stock, in one or more series, without stockholder approval and with such terms, preferences, rights and privileges as the Board of Directors may deem appropriate. These provisions and other factors may hinder or prevent a change in control, even if the change in control would be perceived as beneficial to, or sought by, our other stockholders.
Our common stock is classified as a “penny stock;” the restrictions of the penny stock regulations of the SEC may result in less liquidity for our common stock.
The SEC has adopted regulations which define a “penny stock” to be any equity security that has a market price (as therein defined) of less than $5.00 per share or an exercise price of less than $5.00 per share, subject to certain exceptions. Unless exempt, the rules require the delivery, prior to any transaction involving a penny stock by a retail customer, of a disclosure schedule prepared by the SEC relating to the penny stock market. Disclosure is also required to be made about commissions payable to both the broker/dealer and the registered representative and current quotations for the securities. Finally, monthly statements are required to be sent disclosing recent price information for the penny stock held in the account and information on the limited market in penny stocks. Our common stock is classified as a penny stock. As a result of the penny stock restrictions, brokers or potential investors may be reluctant to trade in our securities, which may result in less liquidity for our securities.
Substantial future sales of shares of our common stock in the public market could cause our stock price to fall.
Shares of our common stock that we have issued or are issuable upon the exercise of warrants or upon the conversion of convertible debt may be covered by registration statements which permit the public sale of stock. Other holders of shares of common stock that we have issued, including shares issuable upon the exercise of warrants and the conversion of convertible debt, may be entitled to dispose of their shares subject to the requirements of Rule 144 or other applicable exemption from registration under the Securities Act. Pursuant to the Plan of Reorganization, the shares of our common stock issuable pursuant to the conversion of convertible promissory notes in the aggregate principal amount of $3,644,279 are subject to certain lock-up restrictions over the 180 day period following the November 16, 2020 effective date of the Plan of Reorganization. As those lock-up restrictions expire during said 180 day period, the shares of common stock issuable pursuant to the conversion of such notes will become eligible for resale in the open market (subject to Rule 144 volume limitations applicable to affiliates), resulting in more shares eligible for sale and potentially causing sales in the market to increase and our stock price to decline. In addition, effective February 17, 2021, certain lock-up restrictions imposed by the Plan of Reorganization with regard to the resale of the 1,049,726,797 shares of common stock issued to holders of unsecured claims expired. The unrestricted eligibility of such shares for resale in the open market (subject to Rule 144 volume limitations applicable to affiliates) could also have a negative effect upon our stock price. Additional sales of a substantial number of our shares of our common stock in the public market, or the perception that sales could occur, could have a material adverse effect on the price of our stock.