Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our future plans, estimates, beliefs and expected performance. The forward-looking statements are dependent upon events, risks and uncertainties that may be outside our control. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences are described in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” included earlier in this report. Please see “-Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
This section of the Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between those years. For discussion of our year ended December 31, 2018, as well as the year ended 2019 compared to year ended 2018, refer to Part II, Item 7 - “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Executive Overview
We are a western United States independent upstream energy company focused on the development and production of onshore, low geologic risk, long-lived conventional oil reserves primarily located in California.
In the aggregate, our assets are characterized by high oil content. Most of our assets are located in the oil-rich reservoirs in the San Joaquin basin of California, which has more than 150 years of production history and substantial remaining oil in place. As a result of the substantial data produced over the basin’s long history, its reservoir characteristics are well understood, leading to predictable, repeatable, low geological risk and low-cost development opportunities. In California, we focus on conventional, shallow oil reservoirs, the drilling and completion of which are relatively low-cost in contrast to unconventional resource plays. We also have assets in the low-operating cost, oil-rich reservoirs in the Uinta basin of Utah and in the low geologic risk natural gas resource play in the Piceance basin in Colorado. We believe that the successful execution of our strategy across our low-declining, oil-weighted production base and extensive inventory of identified drilling locations with attractive full-cycle economics will support our objectives to generate Levered Free Cash Flow to fund our operations, optimize capital efficiency, and return capital to stockholders, while maintaining a low leverage profile and focusing on attractive organic and strategic growth through commodity price cycles.
We have a progressive approach to evolving and growing the business in today's dynamic oil and gas industry. Our strategy includes proactively engaging the many forces driving our industry and impacting our operations, whether positive or negative, to maximize our assets, create value for shareholders, and support environmental goals that align with a more positive future.
How We Plan and Evaluate Operations
We use “Levered Free Cash Flow” in planning our capital allocation to sustain production levels and fund internal growth opportunities, as well as determine hedging needs. Levered Free Cash Flow is a non-GAAP financial measure that we define as Adjusted EBITDA less capital expenditures, interest expense and dividends. Adjusted EBITDA is also a non-GAAP financial measure that is discussed and defined below.
We use the following metrics to manage and assess the performance of our operations: (a) Adjusted EBITDA; (b) operating expenses; (c) environmental, health & safety (“EH&S”) results; (d) general and administrative expenses; and (e) production.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is the primary financial and operating measurement that our management uses to analyze and monitor the operating performance of our business. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure that
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
we define as earnings before interest expense; income taxes; depreciation, depletion, and amortization (“DD&A”); derivative gains or losses net of cash received or paid for scheduled derivative settlements; impairments; stock compensation expense; and other unusual, out-of-period and infrequent items.
Operating expenses
Overall, operating expense is used by management as a measure of the efficiency with which operations are performing. We define operating expenses as lease operating expenses, electricity generation expenses, transportation expenses, and marketing expenses, offset by the third-party revenues generated by electricity, transportation and marketing activities, as well as the effect of derivative settlements (received or paid) for gas purchases. Lease operating expenses include fuel, labor, field office, vehicle, supervision, maintenance, tools and supplies, and workover expenses. Taxes other than income taxes are excluded from operating expenses. Marketing revenues represent sales of natural gas purchased from and sold to third parties. The electricity, transportation and marketing activity related revenues are viewed and treated internally as a reduction to operating costs when tracking and analyzing the economics of development projects and the efficiency of our hydrocarbon recovery. Additionally, we strive to minimize the variability of our fuel gas costs for our steam operations with gas hedges.
Environmental, health & safety
Like other companies in the oil and gas industry, our operations are subject to stringent and complex federal, state and local laws and regulations governing the discharge of materials into the environment or otherwise relating to environmental protection. Current and future laws and regulations, as well as legislative and regulatory changes and other government activities, can materially impact our exploration, development, production and abandonment plans, including by restricting the production rate of oil, natural gas and NGLs below the rate that would otherwise be possible. Additionally, the regulatory burden on the industry increases the cost of doing business and consequently effects capital expenditures and earnings.
As part of our commitment to creating long-term stockholder value, we strive to conduct our operations in an ethical, safe and responsible manner, to protect the environment and to take care of our people and the communities in which we live and operate. We also seek proactive and transparent engagement with regulatory agencies, the communities in which we operate and our other stakeholders in order to realize the full potential of our resources in a timely fashion that safeguards people and the environment and complies with existing laws and regulations. We monitor our EH&S performance through various measures, and incentivize our employees to perform at high standards, including through our annual short-term incentive program.
General and administrative expenses
We monitor our cash general and administrative expenses as a measure of the efficiency of our overhead activities and less than 10% of such costs are capitalized, which is significantly less than industry norms. Such expenses are a key component of the appropriate level of support our corporate and professional team provides to the development of our assets and our day-to-day operations.
Production
Oil and gas production is a key driver of our operating performance, an important factor to the success of our business, and used in forecasting future development economics. We measure and closely monitor production on a continuous basis, adjusting our property development efforts in accordance with the results. We track production by commodity type and compare it to prior periods and expected results.
Business Environment and Market Conditions
Our operating and financial results, and those of the oil and gas industry as a whole, are heavily influenced by commodity prices. Oil and gas prices and differentials have, and may continue to, fluctuate significantly as a result
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
of numerous market-related variables, including global geopolitical and economic conditions. As discussed below, our 2020 operating and financial results have been adversely impacted by the deterioration and prolonged weakness in commodity prices resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and certain actions by foreign oil and gas producers. While oil prices began to improve toward the end of 2020, they remain volatile.
The extent to which our operating and financial results of future periods will be adversely impacted by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic will depend largely on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted. We are unable to reasonably predict when, or to what extent, commodity prices and the overall markets and global economy will stabilize, and the pace of any subsequent recovery for the oil and gas industry. Further, to what extent these events do ultimately impact our future business, liquidity, financial condition, and results of operations is highly uncertain and dependent on numerous factors that are not within our control and cannot be predicted, including the duration and extent of the pandemic and speculation as to future actions by Saudi Arabia, Russia and other foreign producers. We have taken steps and continue to work to address the evolving challenges and mitigate mounting repercussions from both the COVID-19 pandemic and the industry downturn on our operations, our financial condition and our people. We continue to plan for a prolonged downturn well into 2021, in spite of recent slight improvements in oil prices. However, given the tremendous volatility and turmoil, there is no certainty that the measures we take will ultimately be sufficient.
The COVID-19 Pandemic and Industry Downturn
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus (SARS-Cov-2), which causes COVID-19, was reported to have surfaced in China. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 to be a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has caused significant disruption globally since January 2020 and the U.S. economy continues to experience profound effects. The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains and created significant volatility and disruption of the financial and commodity markets. The oil and gas industry has been severely impacted by the steep and prolonged deterioration in the price of oil caused by the significant decrease in demand because of the COVID-19 pandemic and corresponding preventative measures taken around the world to mitigate the spread of the virus, compounded by a supply surge from Saudi Arabia and Russia in the first half of 2020.
In March 2020, OPEC+ failed to reach an agreement on production levels for crude oil, at which point Saudi Arabia and Russia aggressively increased oil production and exports. The convergence of these events - the unprecedented dual impact of a severe global oil demand decline related to the COVID-19 pandemic coupled with a substantial increase in supply - drove oil prices to historically low levels and created significant volatility, uncertainty, and turmoil in the oil and gas industry. As a result, the price of oil was extremely depressed and even reached historic lows during the second quarter 2020, with the price of Brent crude bottoming to just under $20 per Bbl in mid April 2020. These market conditions prompted producers all over the world to shut-in production and delay new oil and gas projects. OPEC+ eventually announced production cuts in April 2020, and then in June 2020 agreed to extend the cuts through the end of July 2020. In August these production cuts were eased slightly and the output reduction levels remained through the end of 2020. In December 2020 and January 2021, OPEC+ agreed to cut production slightly beginning in January 2021 and will continue to reassess monthly.
Additionally, the effects of demand destruction with a supply surge globally was amplified during the second quarter 2020 as available storage for crude oil and refined products became increasingly limited and there were concerns that available storage could become completely unavailable in 2020 and beyond, depending on the duration and severity of the ongoing pandemic. With the storage and transportation constraints further adding to the pressure on commodities prices, during the second quarter 2020 refiners started to curtail output and producers all over the world - including in the United States - started to shut-in production. Toward the end of the second quarter 2020, oil prices began to recover as the production cuts reduced the supply overhang and global demand began to increase gradually with containment of the COVID-19 outbreak in areas around the globe. The storage concerns were partially relieved as a result. Demand, and pricing, may again decline due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, particularly if there is a continued resurgence of the outbreak, although the extent of the additional impact on our industry and our business cannot be reasonably predicted at this time.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
As we focus on managing our business and operations in response to this health and economic crisis, the safety and well-being of our employees and the communities in which we operate has been, and is, our top priority. For the protection of our employees and to help contain the spread of COVID-19, at times since the pandemic began we modified our business practices, including temporary closing of offices not required to maintain critical operations and instead allowing a large portion of our workforce to work from home, and we have implemented recommended practices with respect to social distancing, quarantines, travel bans and other restrictions. Although we managed the transition to remote work arrangements and subsequent office reopening without a loss in business continuity, we incurred additional costs and experienced some inefficiencies; importantly, none of which had an impact on our financial reporting systems, internal control over financial reporting or disclosure controls and procedures. We managed minimal workforce disruption, with no furloughs, as a result of the pandemic, in part due to the “essential” nature of our business. As discussed above, the situation remains volatile and, if there is a resurgence of the COVID-19 outbreak in our areas of operation, we may be forced to again temporarily close our offices and transition to work from home; although we currently expect our operations would continue as normal and without significant additional impact due to the essential nature of our business. We remain committed to being a good corporate citizen by focusing on the well-being of our employees and communities, including maintaining our strong safety and environmental standards and investing in community impact initiatives.
As a result of the industry downturn, commodity price outlook, and increasing uncertainty, on April 1, 2020, we provided updated guidance for the 2020 fiscal year, reflecting a heightened focus on driving operational efficiencies, preserving cash and reducing costs, including through reducing planned 2020 capital expenditures. We also temporarily suspended our quarterly cash dividend, starting with the second quarter of 2020, and we did not repurchase any common stock under our authorized share repurchase program during 2020.
Our California production increased slightly year-over-year, even with the limited capital deployed. While our Rockies production decreased largely due to natural declines and no drilling programs during 2020. Due to the significant drop in prices in early 2020, we temporarily discontinued our California drilling activity in April and engaged in proactive maintenance and well management activities. We restarted our drilling activity in mid-October 2020, which we currently expect to continue through 2021 if our financial position and market conditions continue to support it. Capital spending for the full year 2020 was approximately $69 million, excluding capitalized overhead and interest, acquisitions and asset retirement spending. During the second quarter of 2020, we obtained additional storage capacity to support our planned production for the remainder of the year and into 2021. As market conditions improved, we released a portion of the capacity. We currently believe our storage capacity will be sufficient to support our current planned production and we do not anticipate a need to shut in production or delay or discontinue our drilling plans in the near future unless conditions significantly deteriorate, economics dictate or storage becomes unavailable. Currently we have storage capacity of 315,000 Bbls through June of 2021 to help mitigate these potential consequences. For a discussion of certain potential risks, costs and other considerations related to storage constraints and production curtailment, please see Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors in this report - “The marketability of our production is dependent upon transportation and storage facilities and other facilities, most of which we do not control, and the availability of such transportation and storage capabilities, which have been severely limited by recent market conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic and the accompanying oversupply of oil and natural gas. If we are unable to access such facilities on commercially reasonable terms, our operations would likely be interrupted, our production could be curtailed, and our revenues reduced, among other adverse consequences.”
Commodity Pricing and Differentials
Our revenue, costs, profitability and future growth are highly dependent on the prices we receive for our oil and natural gas production, as well as the prices we pay for our natural gas purchases, which are affected by a variety of factors, including those discussed in Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report.
Average oil prices were lower for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Brent crude oil contract prices ranged from $68.91 per Bbl to $19.33 per Bbl and averaged $42.10 per Bbl during the first half of 2020 and averaged $44.30 per Bbl during the second half of 2020. Though the California market generally receives Brent-influenced pricing, California oil prices are determined ultimately by local supply
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
and demand dynamics. Even as Brent pricing fell, and was weak, due to the effects of demand destruction with a supply surge globally, during the second quarter of 2020, we also experienced an adverse widening in the price differential between Brent and California benchmark, caused primarily by to the lack of local demand and storage capacity. This differential contracted in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 as local demand improved and market storage concerns softened. We planned for significant deterioration of these differentials and refinery utilizations, and our plan for this expected worsening situation did not fully materialize, which enabled us to mitigate the impact. As described above, if reactions to the COVID-19 pandemic against cause demand to worsen, and/or if OPEC+ producers take actions that again create a supply surge, and if necessary storage availability is not sufficient, oil prices may again go materially lower and Brent and/or California pricing could potentially even become negative as WTI oil prices did on April 20, 2020.
In California, the price we pay for fuel gas purchases is generally based on the Kern, Delivered Index, which was as high as $12.69 per MMBtu and as low as $1.25 per MMBtu during 2020, while we paid an average of $2.46 per MMBtu for the year.
The following table presents the average Brent, WTI, Kern Delivered, and Henry Hub prices for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
As mentioned above, California oil prices are Brent-influenced as California refiners import more than 70% of the state’s demand from OPEC+ countries and other waterborne sources. Without the higher costs and potential environmental impact associated with importing crude via rail or supertanker, we believe our in-state production and low-cost crude transportation options, coupled with Brent-influenced pricing, in appropriate oil price environments, should continue to allow us to realize positive cash margins in California over the cycle.
Utah oil prices have historically traded at a discount to WTI as the local refineries are designed for Utah's unique oil characteristics and the remoteness of the assets makes access to other markets logistically challenging.
Prices and differentials for NGLs are related to the supply and demand for the products making up these liquids. Some of them more typically correlate to the price of oil while others are affected by natural gas prices as well as the demand for certain chemical products for which they are used as feedstock. In addition, infrastructure constraints magnify pricing volatility.
Natural gas prices and differentials are strongly affected by local market fundamentals, availability of transportation capacity from producing areas and seasonal impacts. We purchase substantially more natural gas for our California steamfloods and cogeneration facilities, than we produce and sell in Utah and Colorado (“the Rockies”). Additionally, in recent history, the California gas markets have had higher gas prices than the Rockies and the rest of the United States. Consequently, higher gas prices have a negative impact on our operating results. However, we mitigate a portion of this exposure by selling excess electricity from our cogeneration operations to third parties at prices linked to the price of natural gas. We also strive to minimize the variability of our fuel gas costs for our steam operations by hedging a significant portion of such as purchase. The negative impact of higher gas prices on our California operating expenses is partially offset by higher gas sales for the gas we produce in the Rockies.
Our earnings are also affected by the performance of our cogeneration facilities. These cogeneration facilities generate both electricity and steam for our properties and electricity for off-lease sales. While a portion of the electric output of our cogeneration facilities is utilized within our production facilities to reduce operating expenses,
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
we also sell electricity produced by three of our cogeneration facilities under long-term contracts with terms ending in July 1, 2021 through December 1, 2026. We are currently in discussions with the counterparty with regards to the power purchase agreement (“PPA”) expiring in 2021. The most significant input and cost of the cogeneration facilities is natural gas. We generally receive significantly more revenue from these cogeneration facilities in the summer months, June through September, due to negotiated capacity payments we receive.
Seasonal weather conditions can impact our drilling and production activities. These seasonal conditions can occasionally pose challenges in our operations for meeting well-drilling and completion objectives and increase competition for equipment, supplies and personnel, which could lead to shortages and increase costs or delay operations. For example, our operations may have been and in the future may be impacted by ice and snow in the winter and by electrical storms and high temperatures in the spring and summer, as well as by wild fires and rain.
Additionally, like other companies in the oil and gas industry, our operations are subject to stringent federal, state and local laws and regulations relating to drilling, completion, well stimulation, operation, maintenance or abandonment of wells or facilities, managing energy, water, land, greenhouse gases or other emissions, protection of health, safety and the environment, or transportation, marketing, and sale of our products. Federal, state and local agencies may assert overlapping authority to regulate in these areas. See “Items 1 and 2. Business and Properties-Regulation of Health, Safety and Environmental Matters” for a description of laws and regulations that affect our business. For more information related to regulatory risks, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Operations and Industry”.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Certain Operating and Financial Information
The following tables set forth information regarding average daily production, total production, and average prices for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
__________
(1) Production represents volumes sold during the period. We also consume a portion of the natural gas we produce on lease to extract oil and gas.
(2) Natural gas volumes have been converted to Boe based on energy content of six Mcf of gas to one Bbl of oil. Barrels of oil equivalence does not necessarily result in price equivalence. The price of natural gas on a barrel of oil equivalent basis is currently substantially lower than the corresponding price for oil and has been similarly lower for a number of years. For example, in the year ended December 31, 2020, the average prices of Brent oil and Henry Hub natural gas were $43.21 per Bbl and $2.03 per MMBtu respectively.
(3) Kern, Delivered Index is the relevant index used for gas purchases in California.
(4) Henry Hub is the relevant index used for gas sales in the Rockies.
The following table sets forth average daily production by operating area for the periods indicated:
__________
(1) Production represents volumes sold during the period.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Average daily oil production was essentially flat for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. California production, which is 100% oil, was 22.9 MBoe/d for the year ended December 31, 2020 an increase of 1.3% year-over-year where the majority of our capital in 2019 and 2020 was deployed. Of the 45 California wells drilled in 2020, 34 were producing wells, nine were delineation and two were injector wells. Production levels in 2020 were also negatively impacted by the significant reduction in development capital spending compared to the prior year. The production in Utah and Colorado decreased 13% year-over-year, as very little capital was deployed in either year.
Summary by Area
The following table shows a summary by area of our selected historical financial information and operating data for the periods indicated.
__________
(1) Operating income (loss) includes oil, natural gas and NGL sales, marketing revenues, other revenues, and scheduled oil derivative settlements, offset by operating expenses (as defined elsewhere), general and administrative expenses, DD&A, impairment of oil and gas properties, and taxes, other than income taxes.
(2) Excludes corporate capital expenditures.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Results of Operations
Revenues and Other
Oil, natural gas and NGL sales decreased by $187 million, or 33%, to approximately $379 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was driven by $178 million and $4 million of lower prices for oil and natural gas, respectively, and an $11 million decrease in volumes in the Rockies, offset by a $9 million increase in volumes in California.
Electricity sales which represent sales to utilities decreased by $4 million, or 12%, to approximately $26 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was largely a result of 16% lower unit sales prices that were driven by lower natural gas prices.
Gain or loss on oil and gas sales derivatives consists of settlement gains and losses and mark-to-market gains and losses. Our settlement gains for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $152 million and $43 million, respectively. The increase in settlement gains was driven by lower oil prices relative to the derivative fixed prices in 2020 compared to 2019. The mark-to-market non-cash loss for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 of $34 million and $81 million, respectively, were due to higher future prices relative to the derivative fixed prices at each year end.
Marketing and other revenues were lower for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to lower average gas prices.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
__________
(1) We report electricity, transportation and marketing sales separately in our financial statements as revenues in accordance with GAAP. However, these revenues are viewed and used internally in calculating operating expenses which is used to track and analyze the economics of development projects and the efficiency of our hydrocarbon recovery. We purchase third-party gas to generate electricity through our cogeneration facilities to be used in our field operations activities and view the added benefit of any excess electricity sold externally as a cost reduction/benefit to generating steam for our thermal recovery operations. Marketing revenues and expenses mainly relate to natural gas purchased from third parties that moves through our gathering and processing systems and then is sold to third parties. Transportation sales relate to water and other liquids that we transport on our systems on behalf of third parties and have not been significant to date. Operating expenses also include the effect of derivative settlements (received or paid) for gas purchases.
(2) Total unhedged operating expenses equals total operating expenses, excluding the derivative settlements paid (received) for gas purchases.
(3) Total non-energy operating expenses equals total operating expenses, excluding fuel, electricity sales and gas purchase derivative settlements (gains) losses.
(4) Total energy operating expenses equals fuel and gas purchase derivative settlements (gains) losses less electricity sales.
(5) Includes non-recurring costs and non-cash stock compensation expense, in aggregate, of approximately $1.94 per Boe and $1.08 per Boe for the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
(6) Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income (Loss) are financial measures that are not calculated in accordance with GAAP. For definitions and a reconciliation to the Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities and Net Income (Loss), please see “Item 7 - Non-GAAP Financial Measures”.
Expenses
Operating expenses, including hedge effects, decreased 9% or $1.81 per Boe for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $20.32 for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to $2.56 per Boe lower lease operating expenses, partially offset by $0.79 per Boe of higher gas hedge settlement losses. Additionally, operating expenses, on an unhedged basis were $17.62 per Boe for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was 13% lower than the year ended December 31, 2019. Operating expenses are defined above in “How We Plan And Evaluate Operations.”
As a result of our cost savings and efficiency initiatives implemented beginning in the second quarter of 2020, we achieved a positive and substantial impact on operating expenses in 2020 when compared to 2019 without compromising our safety standards or curtailing production to reduce costs. Through these initiatives, non-energy operating expense decreased approximately $15 million, $1.17 per Boe, when compared to the prior year. Primary year-over-year cost reductions were driven by lower outside services ($0.71 per Boe), well maintenance ($0.52) and surface facilities maintenance ($.04 per Boe). These decreases were slightly offset by our increased non-capital workover and recompletion campaign ($0.06 per Boe), which began in the fourth quarter. Energy operating expense declined $7 million, $0.63 per Boe, year-over-year due to lower hedged fuel expense of $0.93 per Boe which was partially offset by lower electricity sales of $0.30. The lower hedged fuel expense was largely due to lower prices, as well as a 3% year-over-year reduction in daily fuel consumption, saving $0.20 per Boe. Average purchase price of natural gas in 2020 was $2.55 MMbtu, down from $3.18 in the prior year. Notional volumes for our gas purchase hedges averaged 59,200 MMBtu/d and 46,000 MMBtu/d in 2020 and 2019, respectively, whereas the fixed contract prices remained unchanged at $2.92 year to year.
Electricity generation expenses decreased 14% to $1.59 per Boe for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $1.84 for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily driven by lower fuel cost. Decreased fuel costs included in electricity generation expenses exclude the effects of natural gas derivative settlements discussed elsewhere.
Gain or loss on natural gas purchase derivatives for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were losses of $1 million and $7 million, respectively. The settlement loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $9 million, or $0.89 per Boe, compared to a settlement loss of $1 million, or $0.10 per Boe for same period in 2019, consistent with the changes in futures prices at the end of each period. The mark-to-market valuation gain or loss for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 was a gain of $8 million and a loss of $6 million, respectively.
Transportation expenses decreased 13% to $0.66 per Boe for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.76 for the year ended December 31, 2019, mainly due to lower volumes shipped from our Rockies assets.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Marketing expenses decreased 35% to $0.13 per Boe for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.20 per Boe for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to lower gas prices. Marketing expenses in these periods, which exclude the effects of hedging, represented the cost of natural gas purchased and sold to third parties.
General and administrative expenses increased by approximately $15 million or 24%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase is a result of $9 million of non-cash stock compensation and non-recurring costs, as well as $6 million of adjusted general and administration expenses noted below. For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, general and administrative expenses included non-cash stock compensation costs of approximately $14 million and $8 million, respectively, and non-recurring costs of approximately $6 million and $3 million, respectively. Non-recurring costs in 2020 mainly consisted of employee reorganization and termination costs and to a lesser degree costs associated with the volatile and depressed price environment. In 2019, these costs primarily were temporary professional services for our transition to a stand-alone company as well as to a public company.
Adjusted general and administrative expenses, which excluded non-cash compensation costs and non-recurring costs, were $57 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $51 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The year-over-year increases in adjusted general and administrative expenses were primarily due to higher employee compensation and increased activities necessary in a heavily regulated industry for our participation in the regulatory, political and legislative process primarily in California. Please see “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a reconciliation of adjusted general and administrative expense to general and administrative expenses, the most directly comparable financial measures calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
DD&A increased by $33 million, or 31%, to approximately $139 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due to the higher depreciation and depletion rates for 2020. On a per Boe basis, year-over-year DD&A increased $3.33 to $13.34 from $10.01 due to our extensive 2019 capital development program and to a lesser degree that of early 2020.
Impairment of Oil and Gas Properties
In the first quarter of 2020, we performed impairment tests with respect to our proved and unproved oil and gas properties as a result of significant declines in oil prices. As a result, we recorded a non-cash pre-tax asset impairment charge of $289 million on proved properties in Utah and certain California locations. At year end 2019, we evaluated our proved and unproved natural gas properties in regards to the decline in our expectations of future gas prices. As a result, we recorded a non-cash pre-tax asset impairment charge of $51 million for our Piceance gas properties in Colorado, of which $23 million was for proved properties and $28 million for unproved properties.
Taxes, Other Than Income Taxes
Taxes, other than income taxes, decreased $0.43 to $3.41 per Boe for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $3.84 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was largely due to lower greenhouse gas prices during 2020 including some allowance purchases we made at low prices due to a temporary market dislocation in the first quarter of 2020, as well as lower CO2 emissions. During 2020, we experienced higher property tax rates, as well as higher severance tax rates due to the expiration of certain deductions.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Other Operating Expense (Income)
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 other operating expenses were $6 million and $5 million, respectively. These other operating expenses mainly consisted of the costs in excess of the liability, due to earlier than anticipated abandonment and spending, related to our long-term abandonment activities and obligation. Additionally in 2020, as a result of the drastic and abrupt change to the oil supply and demand environment, we incurred additional costs for added oil tank storage capacity and drilling rig standby charges, partially offset by tax and other refunds from prior years received in 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was comparable for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Reorganization Items, Net
Reorganization items, net were not material for the year ended December 31, 2020 and year ended December 31, 2019.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had income tax benefits of approximately $7 million and $37 million, respectively. The key contributors to the change in our effective tax rate from (523)% in the year ended December 31, 2019 to 2.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 is due to the valuation allowance recorded in 2020 and the recognition of US federal general business credits in 2019 related to the 2017 and 2018 tax periods. The credits recorded in 2019 are available to offset future federal income tax liabilities. Refer to Note 8 of the consolidated financial statements for more information about our income taxes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Currently, we expect to fund our capital expenditures with cash flows from our operations, supplemented in 2021 by cash on hand resulting from the excess Levered Free Cash Flow we generated during 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had liquidity of $273 million, consisting of $80 million cash in the bank and borrowing availability of $193 million under our RBL Facility (excluding $7 million in stand-by letters of credit). We also have $400 million in aggregate principal amount of 7.0% senior unsecured notes due February 2026 (the “2026 Notes”) outstanding, as further discussed below. In November 2020, we completed our scheduled semi-annual borrowing base redetermination under our RBL Facility, which resulted in a reaffirmed borrowing base and the Company's elected commitment at $200 million with no further borrowing restrictions beyond the covenants noted below. The RBL Facility matures on July 29, 2022, unless terminated earlier in accordance with the RBL Facility terms. We currently believe that our liquidity, capital resources and cash on hand will be sufficient to conduct our business and operations for at least the next 12 months.
We currently expect our operations to continue to generate positive Levered Free Cash Flow for the combined two-year down-cycle through the end of 2021 at the current oil price levels, based on our current operating plans and current hedge positions. We currently have oil sales hedges of approximately 19,000 Bbls/d at nearly $46 per barrel in the first half of 2021 and approximately 14,000 Bbls/d in the second half of 2021 at $49 per barrel. However, our business, like other producers, has been and is expected to continue to be negatively affected by the ongoing and evolving volatility, uncertainty, and turmoil in the oil and gas industry created by the COVID-19 demand destruction and the unknown supply levels caused by OPEC+’s actions, as further discussed under “Business Environment and Market Conditions” in this report. We may potentially use Levered Free Cash Flow to opportunistically repurchase the 2026 Notes, to explore accretive acquisitions that would strengthen our asset base or to fund our 2021 capital expenditures in the event there is insufficient operating cash flow.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
In the longer term, if depressed oil prices were to persist through 2021 and longer, we may not be able to continue to generate the same level of Levered Free Cash Flow we are currently generating and our liquidity and capital resources may not be sufficient to conduct our business and operations in the longer term until commodity prices recover. In light of continuing uncertainty, negative commodity price outlook, and significant risks mentioned above and further discussed elsewhere in this report (including under Part I, Item 1.A. “Risk Factors”), we continue to plan for a prolonged downturn and our strategy to survive is focused on preserving cash, reducing costs and maintaining business continuity. We temporarily suspended our quarterly cash dividend, starting with the second quarter of 2020, and we did not repurchase any common stock under our authorized share repurchase program in 2020. We did declare a quarterly dividend in the first quarter of 2021, subject to ongoing quarterly determination by the Company's Board of Directors. The Board declared a regular dividend at a rate of $0.04 per share on the Company’s outstanding common stock, payable on April 15, 2021 to shareholders of record at the close of business on March 15, 2021. Although we continue to actively work to mitigate the evolving challenges of this severe industry downturn on our operations, our financial condition and our employees and contractors, there is no certainty that the measures we take will ultimately be sufficient. We are unable to reasonably predict when, or to what extent, commodity prices and the overall markets and global economy will stabilize, and the pace of any subsequent recovery for the oil and gas industry. Further, to what extent these events do ultimately impact our business, liquidity, financial condition, and results of operations is highly uncertain and dependent on numerous evolving factors that cannot be predicted, including the severity and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and future actions by OPEC+.
The RBL Facility
On July 31, 2017, we entered into a credit agreement that provided for a revolving loan with up to $1.5 billion of commitment, subject to a reserve borrowing base (“RBL Facility”). The RBL Facility provides a letter of credit subfacility for the issuance of letters of credit in an aggregate amount not to exceed $25 million. Issuances of letters of credit reduce the borrowing availability for revolving loans under the RBL Facility on a dollar for dollar basis. Borrowing base redeterminations generally become effective each May and November, although each of us and the administrative agent may make one interim redetermination between scheduled redeterminations. The RBL Facility has an elected commitment feature that allows us to increase commitments to the amount of our borrowing base with lender approval. In November 2020, we completed our scheduled semi-annual borrowing base redetermination under our RBL Facility, which resulted in a reaffirmed borrowing base and the Company's elected commitment at $200 million with no further borrowing restrictions beyond the covenants noted below; certain anti-cash hoarding provisions, including the requirement to repay outstanding loans on a weekly basis in the amount of any cash on the balance sheet (subject to certain exceptions) in excess of $30 million; and further limits to dividends and share repurchases. The RBL Facility matures on July 29, 2022, unless terminated earlier in accordance with the RBL Facility terms.
The RBL Facility contains customary events of default and remedies for credit facilities of a similar nature. If we do not comply with the financial and other covenants in the RBL Facility, the lenders may, subject to customary cure rights, require immediate payment of all amounts outstanding under the RBL Facility and exercise all of their other rights and remedies, including foreclosure on all of the collateral.
The outstanding borrowings under the RBL Facility bear interest at a rate equal to either (i) a customary London interbank offered rate plus an applicable margin ranging from 2.5% to 3.5% per annum, and (ii) a customary base rate plus an applicable margin ranging from 1.5% to 2.5% per annum, in each case depending on levels of borrowing base utilization. In addition, we must pay the lenders a quarterly commitment fee of 0.5% on the average daily unused amount of the borrowing availability under the RBL Facility. We have the right to prepay any borrowings under the RBL Facility with prior notice at any time without a prepayment penalty, other than customary “breakage” costs with respect to euro-dollar loans.
The RBL Facility requires us to maintain on a consolidated basis as of each quarter-end (i) a Leverage Ratio of no more than 4.0 to 1.0 and (ii) a Current Ratio of at least 1.0 to 1.0. The RBL Facility also contains customary restrictions. As of December 31, 2020, our Leverage Ratio and Current Ratio were 1.8:1.0 and 2.2:1.0, respectively. In addition, the RBL Facility currently provides that to the extent we incur unsecured indebtedness, including any
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
amounts raised in the future, the borrowing base will be reduced by an amount equal to 25% of the amount of such unsecured debt. We were in compliance with all financial covenants under the RBL Facility as of December 31, 2020.
The RBL Facility permits us to repurchase equity and indebtedness, among other things, if availability is equal to or greater than 20% of the elected commitments or borrowing base, whichever is in effect, and our pro forma leverage ratio is less than or equal to 2.5 to 1.0.
Berry Corp. guarantees and each future subsidiary of Berry Corp. (other than Berry LLC), with certain exceptions, is required to guarantee, our obligations and obligations of the other guarantors under the RBL Facility and under certain hedging transactions and banking services arrangements (the “Guaranteed Obligations”). In addition, pursuant to a Guaranty Agreement dated as of July 31, 2017, Berry LLC guarantees the Guaranteed Obligations. The lenders under the RBL Facility hold a mortgage on 85% of the present value of our proven oil and gas reserves. The obligations of Berry LLC and the guarantors are also secured by liens on substantially all of our personal property, subject to customary exceptions. The RBL Facility, with certain exceptions, also requires that any future subsidiaries of Berry LLC will also have to grant mortgages, security interests and equity pledges.
Senior Unsecured Notes Offering
In February 2018, we completed a private issuance of $400 million in aggregate principal amount of 7.0% senior unsecured notes due February 2026 (the “2026 Notes”), which resulted in net proceeds to us of approximately $391 million after deducting expenses and the initial purchasers’ discount. We used a portion of the net proceeds from the issuance of the 2026 Notes to repay the $379 million outstanding balance on the RBL Facility and used the remainder for general corporate purposes.
We may, at our option, redeem all or a portion of the 2026 Notes at any time on or after February 15, 2021. We are also entitled to redeem up to 35% of the aggregate principal amount of the 2026 Notes before February 15, 2021, with an amount of cash not greater than the net proceeds that we raise in certain equity offerings at a redemption price equal to 107% of the principal amount of the 2026 Notes being redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any. In addition, prior to February 15, 2021, we may redeem some or all of the 2026 Notes at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof, plus a “make-whole” premium, plus any accrued and unpaid interest. If we experience certain kinds of changes of control, holders of the 2026 Notes may have the right to require us to repurchase their notes at 101% of the principal amount of the 2026 Notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any.
The 2026 Notes are our senior unsecured obligations and rank equally in right of payment with all of our other senior indebtedness and senior to any of our subordinated indebtedness. The notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by us and will also be guaranteed by certain of our future subsidiaries (other than Berry LLC). The 2026 Notes and related guarantees are effectively subordinated to all of our secured indebtedness (including all borrowings and other obligations under the RBL Facility) to the extent of the value of the collateral securing such indebtedness, and structurally subordinated in right of payment to all existing and future indebtedness and other liabilities (including trade payables) of any future subsidiaries that do not guarantee the 2026 Notes.
The indenture governing the 2026 Notes contains restrictive covenants and customary events of default, including, among others, (a) non-payment; (b) non-compliance with covenants (in some cases, subject to grace periods); (c) payment default under, or acceleration events affecting, material indebtedness and (d) bankruptcy or insolvency events involving us or certain of our subsidiaries.
The 2026 Notes do not restrict us from making open market and other purchases of such notes.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Bond Repurchase Program
In February 2020, our Board of Directors adopted a program to spend up to $75 million for the opportunistic repurchase of our 2026 Notes. The manner, timing and amount of any purchases will be determined based on our evaluation of market conditions, compliance with outstanding agreements and other factors, may be commenced or suspended at any time without notice and does not obligate Berry Corp. to purchase the 2026 Notes during any period or at all. We have not yet repurchased any bonds under this program.
Corporate Organization
Berry Corp., as Berry LLC's parent company, has no independent assets or operations. Any guarantees of potential future registered debt securities by Berry Corp. or Berry LLC would be full and unconditional. Berry Corp. and Berry LLC currently do not have any other subsidiaries. In addition, there are no significant restrictions upon the ability of Berry LLC to distribute funds to Berry Corp. by distribution or loan other than under the RBL Facility. None of the assets of Berry Corp. or Berry LLC represent restricted net assets.
The RBL permits Berry LLC to make distributions to Berry Corp. so long as both before and after giving pro forma effect to such distribution no default or borrowing base deficiency exists, availability equals or exceeds 20% of the then effective borrowing base, and Berry Corp. demonstrates a pro forma leverage ratio less than or equal to 2.5 to 1.0. The conditions are currently met with significant margin.
Hedging
We have protected a significant portion of our anticipated cash flows through our commodity hedging program, including through fixed-price derivative contracts. We hedge crude oil and gas production to protect against oil and gas price decreases and we also hedge gas purchases to protect against price increases. Our generally low-decline production base, coupled with our stable operating cost environment, affords an ability to hedge a material amount of our future expected production. We expect our operations to generate sufficient cash flows at current commodity prices including our 2021 hedging positions. For information regarding risks related to our hedging program, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Operations and Industry”.
As of December 31, 2020, we had the following crude oil production and gas purchases hedges.
As of December 31, 2020 we also had open swap positions that are excluded from the table above where we are both buyer and seller of equal notional volumes of 12,500 MMBtu/d of fixed price gas sales swaps each indexed to Northwest Pipeline Rocky Mountains and CIG, for the period January 1, 2021 through December 31, 2021. These swap positions effectively cancel each other while resulting in a mark-to-market gain of $2.6 million. This gain will be cash settled in 2021 as the positions expire
In February 2021, we added 3,000 Bbls/d of fixed price oil swaps (Brent) at approximately $58 for the period July 2021 through December 31, 2021.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
The following table summarizes the historical results of our hedging activities.
Cash Dividends
Our Board of Directors approved a $0.12 per share quarterly cash dividend on our common stock for the first quarter of 2020, which we paid in April 2020. We temporarily discontinued our quarterly dividends in the second quarter 2020 following the historic oil price drop and economic impact of Covid-19. We reinstituted a quarterly dividend in the first quarter of 2021, subject to future determination by the Company's Board of Directors. The Board declared a regular dividend at a rate of $0.04 per share on the Company’s outstanding common stock, payable on April 15, 2021 to shareholders of record at the close of business on March 15, 2021. As of December 31, 2020 we have paid approximately $65 million in dividends on our common stock since our IPO in July 2018.
Capital Program
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 our capital expenditures were approximately $69 million and $209 million, respectively, on an accrual basis excluding capitalized overhead and interest, acquisitions and asset retirement spending.
The decrease in capital expenditures year over year was due to the reduction of our planned 2020 capital expenditures by approximately 50% from our original 2020 guidance towards the end of the first quarter of 2020 in response to the sudden and significant oil and gas price deterioration caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, coupled with OPEC+ actions, which created significant volatility, uncertainty, and turmoil in the oil and gas industry. During the second and third quarters of 2020, capital expenditures were focused on continuing our permitting and proactive maintenance activities to support ongoing activity and safe operations. We proactively initiated an intense permitting program during the first quarter 2020 to ensure adequate inventory once we restarted our drilling program. We restarted our drilling program in mid-October 2020 and increased workover and recompletion projects during the fourth quarter 2020. The 2020 capital expenditures included approximately $24 million for facilities and cogen projects, including long-term maintenance, as well as approximately $38 million for drilling, completions and equipping.
Nearly all of the 2020 capital was dedicated to California activity. California production increased slightly more than 1% year-over-year even with the significant reduction in our capital program.
Our currently anticipated 2021 capital expenditure budget is approximately $120 to $130 million, which we expect will result in flat year-over-year production and a higher exit rate for 2021 than the beginning of the year. We currently anticipate oil production will be approximately 89% of total production volume in 2021, compared to 88% in 2020 and 87% in 2019. Based on current commodity prices and our drilling success rate to date, we expect to be able to fund our 2021 capital development programs with cash flow from operations and current cash on hand, which was generated during 2020 and anticipated for use to supplement our 2021 capital program. We currently expect to employ up to three drilling rigs in California during 2021. Additionally, we currently expect to drill approximately 170 to 200 development wells and 10 to 15 delineation wells during 2021, all of which are
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
anticipated to be in California for oil production. The execution of these plans requires regulatory permits and approvals, and changes in laws and regulations, including those relating to the permit review and approval process, could impact our ability to successfully execute our plans. Please see “Regulation of Health, Safety and Environmental Matters” for additional discussion.
The amount and timing of capital expenditures are within our control and subject to our management’s discretion, and may be adjusted during the year depending on commodity prices, storage constraints, supply/demand considerations and other factors. We retain the flexibility to defer planned capital expenditures depending on a variety of factors, including but not limited to the success of our drilling activities, prevailing and anticipated prices for oil, natural gas and NGLs, the receipt and timing of required regulatory permits and approvals, the availability of necessary equipment, infrastructure and capital, seasonal conditions, drilling and acquisition costs and the level of participation by other interest owners, as well as general market conditions.
In addition to capital expenditures, we also incur costs associated with retiring assets and remediating property at the end of its useful life, both due to regulatory obligations and our focus on EH&S as we develop existing fields. Most of these obligations and activities are regulated by governmental agencies. We spent approximately $18 million on plugging and abandonment activities, exceeding our annual obligations requirements under the California Idle Well Management Program, and in 2021 we expect to spend approximately $19 million to $23 million for such activities
Acquisitions
In May 2020, we acquired approximately 740 net acres in the North Midway Sunset Field for approximately $5 million. We paid $2 million at closing and the remaining $3 million was paid following our first production from this property, in the fourth quarter 2020. This property is adjacent to, and extends, our existing producing area and we have identified numerous future drilling locations. We believe additional opportunities exist in other productive reservoirs of this property. We also acquired all existing idle wells on this property, some of which we plan to return to production in the near future as price and strategy dictate. We will plug and abandon the remaining idle wells pursuant to the California Idle Well Management Program. We recorded a $6 million liability for asset retirement obligations of the existing wells on this property.
In 2020 we also acquired approximately 267 acres in McKittrick Field which will allow us to continue development of the 21Z mineral fee and leases without requiring written approval from a third party surface fee owner for infrastructure on or across the surface fee property. The purchase price was not material.
Stock Repurchase Program
In December 2018, our Board of Directors adopted a program for the opportunistic repurchase of up to $100 million of our common stock. Based on the Board’s evaluation of market conditions for our common stock at the time, they authorized repurchases of up to $50 million under the program at such time. The Company repurchased a total of 5,057,682 shares at an average price of $9.88 per share under the stock repurchase program for approximately $50 million in 2018 and 2019. In February 2020, the Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of the remaining $50 million of our $100 million repurchase program. Repurchases may be made from time to time in the open market, in privately negotiated transactions or by other means, as determined in the Company's sole discretion. The manner, timing and amount of any purchases will be determined based on our evaluation of market conditions, stock price, compliance with outstanding agreements and other factors, may be commenced or suspended at any time without notice and does not obligate Berry Corp. to purchase shares during any period or at all. Any shares acquired will be available for general corporate purposes. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not repurchase any shares under the stock repurchase program.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Statements of Cash Flows
The following is a comparative cash flow summary:
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 by approximately $45 million when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due to decreased sales of $191 million, and increased cash general and administrative expenses of $9 million. These decreases were partially offset by increased derivative settlements received of $100 million, decreased lease operating expenses and electricity generation expenses of $33 million, decreased taxes, other than income taxes of $5 million, and working capital changes of $16 million.
Investing Activities
The following provides a comparative summary of cash flow from investing activities:
__________
(1) Based on actual cash payments rather than accrual.
Cash used in investing activities decreased $131 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a decrease in capital spending in response to the sudden and significant oil and gas price deterioration in early 2020, which created significant volatility, uncertainty, and turmoil in the oil and gas industry.
Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities was approximately $22 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and decreased by approximately $63 million from the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily due to treasury stock purchases of $47 million in 2019 and none in 2020. Additionally, we paid fewer dividends in 2020 by approximately $20 million, since the Company's Board of Directors termporarily suspsended the resgular quarterly dividend in the second quarter of 2020. Partially offsetting the positive cash impact of these activities, we reduced our net borrowings by approximately $4 million on the RBL Facility in 2020 compared to 2019.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Commitments, and Contingencies
In the normal course of business, we, or our subsidiary, are the subject of, or party to, pending or threatened legal proceedings, contingencies and commitments involving a variety of matters that seek, or may seek, among other things, compensation for alleged personal injury, breach of contract, property damage or other losses, punitive damages, fines and penalties, remediation costs, or injunctive or declaratory relief.
We accrue reserves for currently outstanding lawsuits, claims and proceedings when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the liability can be reasonably estimated. We have not recorded any reserve balances at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. We also evaluate the amount of reasonably possible losses that we could incur as a result of these matters. We believe that reasonably possible losses that we could incur in excess of reserves accrued on our balance sheet would not be material to our consolidated financial position or results of operations.
We, or our subsidiary, or both, have indemnified various parties against specific liabilities those parties might incur in the future in connection with transactions that they have entered into with us. As of December 31, 2020, we are not aware of material indemnity claims pending or threatened against us.
We have certain commitments under contracts, including purchase commitments for goods and services. Prior to our 2017 emergence, Berry entered into a Carry and Earning Agreement with Encana, effective June 7, 2006, in connection with our Piceance assets which, among other things, required us to either build a road or secure a license for alternative access, in lieu of paying a $6 million penalty. As of December 31, 2019, we fulfilled the obligation by delivering the access license pursuant to the agreement. On January 30, 2020, Caerus Piceance LLC, the successor of Encana's interests filed a claim in the City and County of Denver District Court challenging the sufficiency of such access, which we dispute. We will continue to defend the matter vigorously, however, given the uncertainty of litigation and the stage of the case, among other things, at this time we cannot estimate the likelihood or an amount of possible loss, that may result from this action.
Contractual Obligations
The following is a summary of our commitments and contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
__________
(1) Amounts include payments which will become due under long-term agreements to purchase goods and services used in the normal course of business to secure transportation of our natural gas production to market, as well as, pipeline, processing and storage capacity.
(2) Amounts include a purchase commitment of $6 million to build a road, which is classified as current. Additionally, we have a drilling commitment in California, for which we are required to drill 97 wells with an estimated total cost of $29 million by April 2023 and 40 of those wells are estimated at $12 million and are required to be drilled by December 2021.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Balance Sheet Analysis
The changes in our balance sheet from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 are discussed below.
See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources” for discussions about the changes in cash and cash equivalents.
The $20 million decrease in accounts receivable was driven mostly by lower sales, both price and volume, period-over-period, partially offset by higher hedge settlements outstanding in 2020.
The $26 million decrease in net derivative assets and liabilities is due to the change from a net asset of $5 million in 2019 to a net liability of $21 million in 2020. Changes to mark-to-market derivative values at the end of each period result from differences in the forward curve prices relative to the contract fixed prices, changes in positions held and settlements received and paid throughout the periods.
The $318 million decrease in property, plant and equipment was largely the result of the $289 million impairment on our oil and gas properties in the first quarter of 2020, as well as depreciation expense of $129 million, partially offset by capital investments of $69 million, $14 million of acquisitions, including capitalized interest and overhead, and $16 million for asset retirement obligations.
The $6 million decrease in other non-current assets was primarily due to deferred debt issuance cost amortization.
The changes in accounts payable and accrued expenses included an increase of approximately $36 million of greenhouse gas liability as the entire amount is due in the fourth quarter of 2021, offset by $17 million of decreased accruals and spending for various capital and operating costs due to the reduced level of these costs in 2020, $10 million fewer royalties accrued due to decreased sales, and the $10 million impact of dividends accrued at the end of 2019 with no corresponding accrual at December 31, 2020.
The decrease in long-term deferred income taxes liability is due to the income tax benefit during the year.
The $11 million increase in the long-term portion of the asset retirement obligation from $124 million at December 31, 2019 to $135 million at December 31, 2020 was due to revised cost estimates of $10 million, $10 million of accretion and $6 million of liabilities incurred. These increases were partially offset by $15 million of liabilities settled during the period.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
The $33 million decrease in other non-current liabilities was due to the non-current greenhouse gas liability entire amount coming due in the fourth quarter of 2021 and thus classified as a current liability in accounts payable and accrued expenses as of December 31, 2020.
The $258 million decrease in stockholders' equity was due to the net loss of $263 million and $10 million of common stock dividends declared. These decreases were partially offset by $15 million of stock-based equity awards, net of taxes.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA, Levered Free Cash Flow, Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Adjusted General and Administrative Expenses
Adjusted Net Income (Loss) is not a measure of net income (loss), Levered Free Cash Flow is not a measure of cash flow, and Adjusted EBITDA is not a measure of either, in all cases, as determined by GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Levered Free Cash Flow are supplemental non-GAAP financial measures used by management and external users of our financial statements, such as industry analysts, investors, lenders and rating agencies.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as earnings before interest expense; income taxes; depreciation, depletion, and amortization; derivative gains or losses net of cash received or paid for scheduled derivative settlements; impairments; stock compensation expense; and other unusual, out-of-period and infrequent items. We define Levered Free Cash Flow as Adjusted EBITDA less capital expenditures, interest expense and dividends.
Our management believes Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information in assessing our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows and is widely used by the industry and the investment community. The measure also allows our management to more effectively evaluate our operating performance and compare the results between periods without regard to our financing methods or capital structure. Levered Free Cash Flow is used by management as a primary metric to plan capital allocation to sustain production levels and for internal growth opportunities, as well as hedging needs. It also serves as a measure for assessing our financial performance and our ability to generate excess cash from operations to service debt and pay dividends.
Adjusted Net Income (Loss) excludes the impact of unusual, out-of-period and infrequent items affecting earnings that vary widely and unpredictably, including non-cash items such as derivative gains and losses. This measure is used by management when comparing results period over period. We define Adjusted Net Income (Loss) as net income (loss) adjusted for derivative gains or losses net of cash received or paid for scheduled derivative settlements, other unusual, out-of-period and infrequent items, and the income tax expense or benefit of these adjustments using our effective tax rate.
While Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Levered Free Cash Flow are non-GAAP measures, the amounts included in the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Levered Free Cash Flow were computed in accordance with GAAP. These measures are provided in addition to, and not as an alternative for, income and liquidity measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. Certain items excluded from Adjusted EBITDA are significant components in understanding and assessing our financial performance, such as our cost of capital and tax structure, as well as the historic cost of depreciable and depletable assets. Our computations of Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Levered Free Cash Flow may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures used by other companies. Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Levered Free Cash Flow should be read in conjunction with the information contained in our financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Adjusted General and Administrative Expenses is a supplemental non-GAAP financial measure that is used by management and external users of our financial statements, such as industry analysts, investors, lenders and rating agencies. We define Adjusted General and Administrative Expenses as general and administrative expenses adjusted
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
for non-cash stock compensation expense and unusual, out of period and infrequent costs. Management believes Adjusted General and Administrative Expenses is useful because it allows us to more effectively compare our performance from period to period.
We exclude the items listed above from general and administrative expenses in arriving at Adjusted General and Administrative Expenses because these amounts can vary widely and unpredictably in nature, timing, amount and frequency and stock compensation expense is non-cash in nature. Adjusted General and Administrative Expenses should not be considered as an alternative to, or more meaningful than, general and administrative expenses as determined in accordance with GAAP. Our computations of Adjusted General and Administrative Expenses may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies.
The following tables present reconciliations of the non-GAAP financial measures Adjusted EBITDA and Levered Free Cash Flow to the GAAP financial measures of net income (loss) and net cash provided or used by operating activities, as applicable, for each of the periods indicated.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
__________
(1) Capital expenditures on an accrual basis excludes capitalized overhead and interest and acquisitions. Also excluded is asset retirement spending of $18.1 million and $26.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(2) Levered Free Cash Flow includes cash received for scheduled derivative settlements of $142 million and $42 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
The following table presents a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measure Adjusted Net Income (Loss) to the GAAP financial measure of net income (loss).
__________
(1) Excludes discrete income tax items from the total additions (subtractions), net line item and the tax effect the discrete income tax items have on the current rate.
The following table presents a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measure Adjusted General and Administrative Expenses to the GAAP financial measure of general and administrative expenses for each of the periods indicated.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Commitments, and Contingencies” and “-Contractual Obligations ” for information regarding our off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The process of preparing financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to select appropriate accounting policies and to make informed estimates and judgments regarding certain items and transactions. Changes in facts and circumstances or discovery of new information may result in revised estimates and judgments, and actual results may differ from these estimates upon settlement. We consider the following to be our most critical accounting policies and estimates that involve management’s judgment and that could result in a material impact on the financial statements due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment.
Oil and Natural Gas Properties
Proved Properties
We account for oil and natural gas properties in accordance with the successful efforts method. Under this method, all acquisition costs of proved properties are capitalized and amortized on a unit-of-production basis over the remaining life of the proved reserves. All development costs of proved properties are capitalized and amortized on a unit-of-production basis over the remaining life of the proved developed reserves. Costs of retired, sold or abandoned properties that constitute a part of an amortization base are charged or credited, net of proceeds, to accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization unless doing so significantly affects the unit-of-production amortization rate, in which case a gain or loss is recognized in the current period. Gains or losses from the disposal of other properties are recognized in the current period. For assets acquired, we base the capitalized cost on fair value at the acquisition date. We expense expenditures for maintenance and repairs necessary to maintain properties in operating condition, as well as annual lease rentals, as they are incurred. Estimated dismantlement and abandonment costs are capitalized at their estimated net present value and amortized over the remaining lives of the related assets. Interest is capitalized only during the periods in which these assets are brought to their intended use. We only capitalize the interest on borrowed funds related to our share of costs associated with qualifying capital expenditures.
We evaluate the impairment of our proved oil and natural gas properties generally on a field by field basis or at the lowest level for which cash flows are identifiable, whenever events or changes in circumstance indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. We reduce the carrying values of proved properties to fair value when the expected undiscounted future cash flows are less than net book value. We measure the fair values of proved properties using valuation techniques consistent with the income approach, converting future cash flows to a single discounted amount. Significant inputs used to determine the fair values of proved properties include estimates of: (i) reserves; (ii) future operating and development costs; (iii) future commodity prices; and (iv) a risk-adjusted discount rate. These inputs require significant judgments and estimates by our management at the time of the valuation. The most significant financial statement effect from a change in our oil and gas reserves or impairment of its proved properties would be to the DD&A rate. For example, a 5% increase or decrease in the amount of oil and gas reserves would change the DD&A rate by approximately $0.60 per MMBoe, which would increase or decrease pre-tax income by approximately $6 million annually at current production rates. In addition, the underlying commodity prices are embedded in our estimated cash flows and are the product of a process that begins with the relevant forward curve pricing, adjusted for estimated location and quality differentials, as well as other factors our management believes will impact realizable prices. The fair value was estimated using inputs characteristic of a Level 3 fair value measurement.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Unproved Properties
A portion of the carrying value of our oil and gas properties was attributable to unproved properties. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the net capitalized costs attributable to unproved properties was approximately $311 million and $314 million, respectively. The unproved amounts were not subject to depreciation, depletion and amortization until they were classified as proved properties and amortized on a unit-of-production basis. We evaluate the impairment of our unproved oil and gas properties whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. If the exploration and development work were to be unsuccessful, or management decided not to pursue development of these properties as a result of lower commodity prices, higher development and operating costs, contractual conditions or other factors, the capitalized costs of such properties would be expensed. The timing of any write-downs of unproved properties, if warranted, depends upon management’s plans, the nature, timing and extent of future exploration and development activities and their results. We believe our current plans and exploration and development efforts will allow us to realize the carrying value of our unproved property balance at December 31, 2020.
As of March 31, 2020, we performed impairment tests with respect to our proved and unproved oil and gas properties as a result of significant declines in oil prices during the latter part of the first quarter. These declines were driven by the uncertainty surrounding the outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus (SARS-Cov-2), which causes COVID-19 and other macroeconomic events such as the geopolitical tensions between the OPEC and Russia. The COVID-19 pandemic and related economic repercussions, coupled with actions taken by OPEC and other oil producing nations (“OPEC+”), created significant volatility, uncertainty, and turmoil in the oil and gas industry, which have negatively affected and are expected to continue to negatively affect our business.
Consequently, we recorded a non-cash pre-tax asset impairment charge of $289 million during the first quarter of 2020 on proved properties in Utah and certain California locations. We evaluated our proved properties in accordance with accounting guidance and fair value techniques utilizing the period-end forward price curve, as well as assessing projects we determine we would not pursue in the foreseeable future given the current environment. We believe our current plans and exploration and development efforts will allow us to realize the carrying value of our unproved property balance December 31, 2020.
At year end 2019, we evaluated our proved and unproved natural gas properties in regards to the decline in our expectations of future gas prices. As a result, we recorded a non-cash pre-tax asset impairment charge of $51 million for our Piceance gas properties in Colorado, of which $23 million was for proved properties and $28 million for unproved properties.
Asset Retirement Obligation
We recognize the fair value of asset retirement obligations (“AROs”) in the period in which a determination is made that a legal obligation exists to dismantle an asset and remediate the property at the end of its useful life and the cost of the obligation can be reasonably estimated.
The liability amounts are based on future retirement cost estimates and incorporate many assumptions such as time to abandonment, technological changes, future inflation rates and the risk-adjusted discount rate. When the liability is initially recorded, we capitalize the cost by increasing the related property, plant and equipment (“PP&E”) balances. If the estimated future cost of the AROs changes, we record an adjustment to both the ARO and PP&E. Over time, the liability is increased, and expense is recognized through accretion, and the capitalized cost is depreciated over the useful life of the asset.
Fair Value Measurements
We have categorized our assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value in a three-level fair value hierarchy, based on the inputs to the valuation techniques: Level 1-using quoted prices in active markets for the assets or liabilities; Level 2-using observable inputs other than quoted prices for the assets or liabilities; and Level 3-using unobservable inputs. Transfers between levels, if any, are recognized at the end of each reporting period.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
We primarily apply the market approach for recurring fair value measurement, maximize our use of observable inputs and minimize use of unobservable inputs. We generally use an income approach to measure fair value when observable inputs are unavailable. This approach utilizes management’s judgments regarding expectations of projected cash flows and discounts those cash flows using a risk-adjusted discount rate.
We determine the fair value of our oil and gas sales and natural gas purchase derivatives using valuation techniques which utilize market quotes and pricing analysis. Inputs include publicly available prices and forward price curves generated from a compilation of data gathered from third parties. We classify these measurements as Level 2.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability approach for financial accounting and reporting. The amount of income taxes recorded requires interpretations of complex rules and regulations of federal and state taxing authorities. We have recognized deferred tax assets and liabilities for temporary differences, operating losses and tax carryforwards. We evaluate the probability of realizing the future benefits of our deferred tax assets and provide a valuation allowance for the portion of any deferred tax assets where the likelihood of realizing an income tax benefit in the future does not meet the more likely than not criteria for recognition.
We account for uncertainty in income taxes by recognizing the financial statement benefit of a tax position only after determining that the relevant tax authority would more likely than not sustain the position following an audit. For tax positions meeting the more likely than not threshold, the amount recognized in the financial statements is the benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the relevant tax authority. See Note 8 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II-Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this report for a discussion of new accounting matters
Stock-based Compensation
We have issued restricted stock units (“RSUs”) that vest over time and performance-based restricted stock units (“PSUs”) that vest based on our achievement of certain average prices per share or total shareholder return, to certain employees and non-employee directors. The fair value of the stock-based awards is determined at the date of grant and is not remeasured. Prior to our IPO in July 2018, we determined the fair value of the RSUs based on an estimate of the fair value of our equity using an income approach. We used a discounted cash flow method to value the estimated future cash flows at an appropriate discount rate. Subsequent to our IPO, since the underlying shares are now trading in the public markets, these estimates are no longer necessary. For PSUs, compensation value is measured on the grant date using payout values derived from a Monte-Carlo valuation model. Estimates used in the Monte Carlo valuation model are considered highly complex and subjective. Compensation expense, net of actual forfeitures, for the RSUs and PSUs is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods, which is over the awards’ respective vesting or performance periods which range from one to three years.
Significant Accounting and Disclosure Changes
See Note 1 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II-Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this report for a discussion of new accounting matters.
Inflation
Inflation in the United States has been relatively low in recent years and did not have a material impact on our results of operations for the periods discussed. Although the impact of inflation has been insignificant in recent years, it is still a factor in the United States economy and we may experience inflationary pressure on the cost of oilfield services and equipment as increasing oil, natural gas and NGL prices increase drilling activity in our areas of operations. An increase in oil, natural gas and NGL prices may cause the costs of materials and services to rise.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
The information included or incorporated by reference in this report includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties that could materially affect our expected results of operations, liquidity, cash flows and business prospects. Such statements specifically include our expectations as to our future financial position, liquidity, cash flows, results of operations and business strategy, potential acquisition opportunities, other plans and objectives for operations, capital for sustained production levels, expected production and costs, reserves, hedging activities, capital expenditures, return of capital, improvement of recovery factors and other guidance. Actual results may differ from anticipated results, sometimes materially, and reported results should not be considered an indication of future performance. You can typically identify forward-looking statements by words such as aim, anticipate, achievable, believe, budget, continue, could, effort, estimate, expect, forecast, goal, guidance, intend, likely, may, might, objective, outlook, plan, potential, predict, project, seek, should, target, will or would and other similar words that reflect the prospective nature of events or outcomes. For any such forward-looking statement that includes a statement of the assumptions or bases underlying such forward-looking statement, we caution that, while we believe such assumptions or bases to be reasonable and make them in good faith, assumed facts or bases almost always vary from actual results, sometimes materially. Material risks that may affect us are discussed above in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” in this prospectus, in any applicable prospectus supplement and in the documents incorporated by reference.
Factors (but not necessarily all the factors) that could cause results to differ include among others:
•the impact of current, pending and/or future laws and regulations, and of legislative and regulatory changes and other government activities, including those related to drilling, completion, well stimulation, operation, maintenance or abandonment of wells or facilities, managing energy, water, land, greenhouse gases or other emissions, protection of health, safety and the environment, or transportation, marketing and sale of our products;
•the length, scope and severity of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, including the effects of related public health concerns and the impact of actions taken by governmental authorities and other third parties in response to the pandemic and its impact on commodity prices, supply and demand considerations, and storage capacity;
•global economic trends, geopolitical risks and general economic and industry conditions, such as these resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and from the actions of foreign producers, importantly including OPEC+ and change in OPEC+'s production levels;
•volatility of oil, natural gas and NGL prices; including the sharp decline in crude oil prices that occurred in the first quarter and second quarter of 2020;
•the California and global energy future, including the factors and trends that are expected to shape it, such as concerns about climate change and other air quality issues, the transition to a low-emission economy and the expected role of different energy sources;
•supply of and demand for oil, natural gas and NGLs;
•disruptions to, capacity constraints in, or other limitations on the pipeline systems that deliver our oil and natural gas and other processing and transportation considerations;
•inability to generate sufficient cash flow from operations or to obtain adequate financing to fund capital expenditures, meet our working capital requirements or fund planned investments;
•price fluctuations and availability of natural gas and electricity and the cost of steam;
•our ability to use derivative instruments to manage commodity price risk;
•availability or timing of, or conditions imposed on, permits and approvals;
•the regulatory environment, including availability or timing of, and conditions imposed on, obtaining and/or maintaining permits and approvals, including those necessary for drilling and/or development projects;
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
•our ability to meet our planned drilling schedule, including due to our ability to obtain permits on a timely basis or at all, and to successfully drill wells that produce oil and natural gas in commercially viable quantities;
•concerns about climate change and other air quality issues;
•uncertainties associated with estimating proved reserves and related future cash flows;
•our ability to replace our reserves through exploration and development activities;
•drilling and production results, lower-than-expected production, reserves or resources from development projects or higher-than-expected decline rates;
•our ability to obtain timely and available drilling and completion equipment and crew availability and access to necessary resources for drilling, completing and operating wells;
•changes in tax laws;
•effects of competition;
•uncertainties and liabilities associated with acquired and divested assets;
•our ability to make acquisitions and successfully integrate any acquired businesses;
•market fluctuations in electricity prices and the cost of steam;
•asset impairments from commodity price declines;
•large or multiple customer defaults on contractual obligations, including defaults resulting from actual or potential insolvencies;
•geographical concentration of our operations;
•the creditworthiness and performance of our counterparties with respect to our hedges;
•impact of derivatives legislation affecting our ability to hedge;
•failure of risk management and ineffectiveness of internal controls;
•catastrophic events, including wildfires, earthquakes and pandemics;
•environmental risks and liabilities under federal, state, tribal and local laws and regulations (including remedial actions);
•potential liability resulting from pending or future litigation;
•our ability to recruit and/or retain key members of our senior management and key technical employees;
•information technology failures or cyber attacks.
•governmental actions and political conditions, as well as the actions by other third parties that are beyond our control.
Except as required by law, we undertake no responsibility to publicly release the result of any revision of our forward-looking statements after the date they are made.
All forward-looking statements, expressed or implied, included in this report are expressly qualified in their entirety by this cautionary statement. This cautionary statement should also be considered in connection with any subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements that we or persons acting on our behalf may issue.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data