Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations may contain some statements and information that are not historical facts but are forward-looking statements. For a discussion of these forward-looking statements, and of important factors that could cause results to differ materially from the forward-looking statements contained in this report, see Item 1 of Part I, “Business-Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” and Item 1A of Part I, “Risk Factors.”
Overview
Bsquare is a software and services company that designs, configures, and deploys technologies that solve difficult problems for manufacturers and operators of connected devices. Our customers choose Bsquare to help realize the promise of IoT to transform their businesses. Our products include software that connect devices to create intelligent systems that are cloud-enabled, contribute critical data, and facilitate distributed control and decision making. Our services include 24/7 IoT operations that allow our customers to focus on their businesses while we take care of security, monitoring, and general technology updates. The opportunity to help companies explore and capture the value of IoT is attractive and growing. In the last two years alone, we helped hundreds of companies deploy and manage over two million devices. We operate large IoT systems for our customers with device fleets that range in size and complexity. We believe we offer a unique combination of expertise in device-level solutions, embedded operating systems, and IoT services and software that is valued by a global customer base, from start-ups to Fortune 100 companies, across a diverse set of industries.
In 2020, we continued our initiatives commenced in 2019 to reposition our business. We believe the additional focus we placed on serving our customers contributed to the financial and operating results of 2020.
Revenue and Customers
The COVID-19 pandemic interrupted our customer ordering patterns, causing a significant disruption to our Partner Solutions business in 2020. After an exceptionally strong revenue in the first quarter, we saw a significant decrease in Partner Solution revenue in the second quarter. Partner Solutions revenue improved and stabilized in the third and fourth quarters, but at levels lower than our pre-COVID-19 expectations. We suspect our Partner Solutions revenue also decreased because competing Microsoft distributors offered deep discounts on Windows IoT OS software as part of hardware / software bundles. We expect this will continue in 2021. We are working aggressively to retain our large customers and attract new customers with superior service and technical support, pricing that rewards loyalty, and a path to IoT operations.
Investments made to ensure we were meeting our operating commitments, while re-tooling and addressing issues with software previously delivered to some of our larger IoT customers, started to pay off in 2020. We expanded our relationship with Itron, Inc. (“Itron”) and our work helping them build their intelligent utility grid. We anticipate investments in our other large IoT customers will continue in 2021, but at lower levels than in 2020 as the bulk of the rework is now complete. Beyond gaining credibility as a reliable technology partner, we believe the experience we have gained serving Itron and our other large IoT customers positions us to improve our IoT software and services in 2021 and beyond.
Expenses and Operating Results
Despite the disruption of COVID-19, we had one of our strongest years in recent history. 2020 operating loss and net loss improved dramatically over 2019, by $7.5 million and $7.3 million respectively. These strong results became possible through prior efforts to enter 2020 with an expense structure that made sense for our business and an entrepreneurial leadership team that acted on changing business circumstances and opportunities as they emerged. We believe this operating discipline demonstrates our ability to manage through adversity.
Cash and Liquidity
Our cash and cash equivalents increased by $2.4 million during 2020. Our access to loan proceeds from the $1.6 million PPP loan supported our efforts to maintain our engineering staffing levels and pursue new opportunities created by our unique expertise. Our current cash balance and lack of debt service obligations (other than any unforgiven portions of our PPP loan principal) have provided sufficient liquidity for the business.
Critical Accounting Judgments
Revenue recognition
We recognize revenue when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. We generate all of our revenue from contracts with customers.
Embedded operating system software
We sell embedded operating system software licenses based upon a customer purchase order, shipping a certificate of authenticity (“COA”) to satisfy this single performance obligation. These shipments are also subject to limited return rights; historically, returns have been insignificant. We recognize revenue from third-party products at the time of shipment when the customer accepts control of the COA.
Proprietary software
We sell our proprietary software products to customers under a contract or by purchase order. Our Edge to Cloud software contracts generally include professional services, a perpetual or term license and support and maintenance. In contracts with multiple performance obligations, we identify each performance obligation and evaluate whether the performance obligations are distinct within the context of the contract at contract inception. Performance obligations that are not distinct at contract inception are combined. Contracts that include software customization may result in the combination of the customization services with the software license as one distinct performance obligation. We allocate the transaction price to each distinct performance obligation based on the estimated standalone selling price for each performance obligation. We then look to how control of the software transfers to the customer in order to determine the timing of revenue recognition. In contracts that include customer acceptance, we recognize revenue when we have delivered the software and received customer acceptance. We recognize revenue from support and maintenance over the service delivery period. We recognize revenue from royalties in the period of usage.
Our software products generally do not include customization or modification services and are sold in the form of term licenses. These software licenses represent one distinct performance obligation. Revenue is recognized when the software is delivered to the customer.
Professional services
We enter into contracts for professional services, including for our IoT-related service offerings, that include software development and customization. We identify each performance obligation in our professional services contracts at contract inception. The contracts generally include project deliverables specified by each customer. The contract pricing is either at stated billing rates per service hour and material costs or at a fixed amount. Services provided under professional engineering contracts generally result in the transfer of control of the applicable deliverable over time. We recognize revenue on service contracts based on time and materials as we have the right to invoice. We recognize revenue on fixed fee contracts on the proportion of labor hours expended to the total hours expected to complete the contract performance obligation. Certain professional service contracts include substantive customer acceptance provisions, in which case we recognize revenue upon customer acceptance.
The determination of the total labor hours expected to complete the performance obligations on fixed fee contracts involves significant judgment. We incorporate revisions to hour and cost estimates when the causal facts become known. In certain situations, when it is impractical for us to reasonably measure the outcome of a performance obligation, and where we anticipate that we will not incur a loss, an adjusted cost-based input method is used for revenue recognition. Equal amounts of revenue and cost are recognized during the contract period, and profit is recognized when the project is completed and accepted.
Leases
We lease office facilities, primarily under operating leases, which expire at various dates through 2027. These leases generally contain renewal options for a defined number of years at the then-fair market rental rate or rate stipulated in the lease agreement, which we have an option to exercise at the end of the initial lease term.
We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. On our balance sheet, our office facility leases are included in Right-of-Use (“ROU”) assets and related lease liabilities are included in the Operating leases and Operating leases, long-term statement line items. ROU assets represent our right to use the underlying assets for the lease term and operating lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease agreements. Operating lease ROU assets and liabilities are recognized at the lease commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the term of the lease. For leases that do not provide an implicit rate, we use an incremental borrowing rate based on information available at the commencement date to determine the present value of lease payments. We will use the implicit rate in the lease when readily determinable. The Company accounts for its lease expense with free rent periods and step-rent provisions on a straight-line basis over the original term of the lease and any extension options that the Company more likely than not expects to exercise, from the date the Company has control of the property. Certain leases provide for periodic rental increases based on price indices. Lease expense for lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Intangible assets
We evaluate our intangible assets for indications of impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Our intangible assets consist of customer relationships arising from business acquisitions. We periodically assess the value of our intangible assets. Factors that could trigger an impairment analysis include significant under-performance relative to historical or projected future operating results, significant changes in the manner of our use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business or significant negative industry or economic trends. If this evaluation indicates that the value of the intangible asset may be impaired, we assess the likelihood of recoverability of the net carrying value of the asset over its remaining useful life. If this assessment indicates that the intangible asset is not recoverable, based on the estimated undiscounted future cash flows of the technology over the remaining useful life, we reduce the net carrying value of the related intangible asset to fair value.
Taxes
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate income taxes in each of the countries and other jurisdictions in which we operate. This process involves estimating our current tax expense together with assessing temporary differences resulting from the differing treatment of items for tax and accounting purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities. Net operating losses and tax credits, to the extent not already utilized to offset taxable income or income taxes, also give rise to deferred tax assets. We must then assess the likelihood that any deferred tax assets will be realized from future taxable income, and, to the extent we believe that recovery is not likely, we must establish a valuation allowance. We are required to use judgment as to the appropriate weighting of all available evidence when assessing the need for the establishment or the release of valuation allowances. As part of this analysis, we examine all available evidence on a jurisdiction-by-jurisdiction basis and weigh the positive and negative information when determining the need for full or partial valuation allowances. The evidence considered for each jurisdiction includes, among other items, (i) the historical levels of income or loss over a range of time periods that extends beyond the two years presented, (ii) the historical sources of income and losses, (iii) the expectations and risk associated with underlying estimates of future taxable income, (iv) the expectations and risk associated with new product offerings and uncertainties with the timing of future taxable income, and (v) prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. Significant judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance recorded against our deferred tax assets. We estimate the valuation allowance related to our deferred tax assets on a quarterly basis.
Our sales may be subject to other taxes, particularly withholding taxes, due to our sales to customers in countries other than the United States. The tax regulations governing withholding taxes are complex, causing us to have to make assumptions about the appropriate tax treatment. Further, we make sales in many jurisdictions across the United States, where tax regulations are varied and complex. We must therefore continue to analyze our state tax exposure and determine what the appropriate tax treatments are, and make estimates for sales, franchise, income and other state taxes.
Results of Operations
The following table presents our summarized results of operations for the periods indicated. Our historical operating results are not necessarily indicative of the results for any future period.
Revenue
We generate revenue from the sale of software, both embedded operating system software that we resell and our own proprietary software, and related professional services. Total revenue decreased in 2020 compared to 2019, due to decreased sales in our Partner Solutions segment, primarily in North America and Asia, as well as decreased revenue in our Edge to Cloud segment.
Additional revenue details were as follows:
Partner Solutions revenue
Partner solutions revenue decreased $8.4 million and 17% in 2020 compared to 2019,We believe customer demand for embedded operating systems was adversely impacted by the economic downturn and related uncertainty stemming from the global COVID-19 pandemic. We have some customer concentration in industries particularly impacted by COVID-19, such as casino gaming, hospitality, and point-of-sale systems.
Edge to Cloud revenue
Edge to Cloud revenue decreased $3.8 million and 44% in 2020 compared to 2019, due primarily to professional services revenue earned in 2019 that was not repeated in 2020. We expect Edge to Cloud revenue will continue to vary in timing and amounts.
Gross profit and gross margin
Cost of Partner Solutions revenue consists primarily of the cost of embedded operating system software product costs payable to third-party vendors, net of rebate credits earned through Microsoft's distributor incentive program. Cost of Edge to Cloud revenue consists primarily of salaries and benefits, contractor costs and re-billable expenses, and amortization of certain intangible assets related to acquisitions.
Gross profit and gross margin were as follows:
(1) For gross margin, amounts represent percentage point change.
Partner Solutions gross profit declined in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily as a result of lower third-party software sales. Partner Solutions gross margin was favorably impacted by rebate credits earned through Microsoft’s distributor incentives program. In accordance with program rules, we allocate a portion of the incentive earnings to reduce cost of revenue with the remaining portion utilized to offset qualified marketing expenses in the period the expenditures are claimed and approved. During 2019, 20% was allocated to offset cost of revenue and the remaining 80% was potentially available to offset qualified marketing expenses. During the second quarter of 2020 the program allocation was changed by Microsoft to a 50/50 split between the two components. In 2020, we recorded approximately $757,000 in rebate credits as an offset to cost of revenue compared to approximately $314,000 in 2019.
Partner Solutions gross margin was also favorably impacted by a small amount of revenue for which only the margin is recognized as revenue given our role as agent in the transaction.
Edge to Cloud gross profit and gross margin decreased in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to decreased sales of software and services in 2020 compared to 2019 and lower margin project work.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses were as follows:
Selling, general and administrative
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses consist primarily of salaries and related benefits, commissions and bonuses for our sales, marketing and administrative personnel and related facilities and depreciation costs, as well as professional services fees (such as consulting, legal, audit and tax). SG&A expenses decreased in 2020 compared to 2019 due to lower salaries and related benefits resulting from prior period restructuring efforts, and from lower professional services fees and contract labor. These reductions were partially offset by increased stock-based compensation expense.
Research and development
Research and development (“R&D”) expenses consist primarily of salaries and benefits for software development and quality assurance personnel, and contractor and consultant costs. R&D expenses decreased in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to lower salaries and related benefits resulting from restructuring efforts in prior periods, including the elimination of R&D positions.
Restructuring costs
Restructuring costs incurred during 2019 include $1.9 million in severance and benefits related to a workforce reduction plan announced by management in the second quarter of 2019 and a non-cash impairment charge in the second quarter of 2019 of $0.4 million related to certain software development cost assets. There were no restructuring costs incurred during 2020.
Other income (loss), net
Other income and loss consist primarily of interest income on our cash and investments, gains and losses we may recognize on our investments, gains and losses on foreign exchange transactions and other items. The decrease in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to lower total interest earned on our cash and investments and foreign exchange rate fluctuations.
Income taxes
Income tax expense for 2020 and 2019 related to state and local income taxes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $13.0 million of cash, cash equivalents and investments (including $0.3 million in restricted cash), compared to $10.6 million at December 31, 2019, reflecting a net increase of approximately $2.4 million in cash, cash equivalents and investments. We generally invest our excess cash in high quality marketable investments. These investments generally include corporate notes and bonds, commercial paper and money market funds, although specific holdings can vary from period to period depending upon our cash requirements. Our investments held at December 31, 2019 had minimal default risk and short-term maturities. There were no investments held at December 31, 2020.
Operating activities provided cash of approximately $1.1 million in 2020, which included a net loss of $1.9 million, partially offset by non-cash adjustments of $1.4 million and a change in working capital of approximately $1.5 million. Operating activities used cash of approximately $6.0 million in 2019, which included a net loss of approximately $9.2 million, partially offset by non-cash adjustments of approximately $1.8 million and a change in working capital of approximately $1.4 million.
Investing activities provided cash of approximately $2.0 million in 2020, primarily due to net cash inflows on short-term investments of $2.3 million, partially offset by capital expenditures of $0.3 million. Investing activities provided cash of approximately $3.9 million in 2019, primarily due to net cash inflows on short-term investments of $4.3 million, partially offset by capital expenditures of $0.4 million.
Financing activities provided $1.6 million of cash in 2020 due to proceeds from the PPP Loan. There was no cash provided by financing activities in 2019.
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments will be sufficient to meet our needs for working capital and capital expenditures for at least the next 12 months.
Contractual commitments
Future operating lease commitments were as follows as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.