Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operation should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes that appear elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements and information relating to our business that reflect our current views and assumptions with respect to future events and are subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause our or our industry’s actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements.
Fiscal Year
The Company’s fiscal year is a 52/53-week year, ending on the Sunday closest to December 31. The 53-week fiscal 2020 ended on January 3, 2021 and the 52-week fiscal 2019 year ended on December 29, 2019.
Introduction
We own and operate ten fast food restaurants, including nine Burger Time restaurants and one Dairy Queen restaurant, all of which are in the North Central region of the United States. Our Burger Time restaurants feature a wide variety of burgers and other affordably priced foods such as chicken sandwiches, pulled pork sandwiches, sides and soft drinks. Our Dairy Queen restaurant offers the established Dairy Queen menu consisting of burgers, chicken, sides, ice cream and other desserts, and a wide array of beverages. Our revenues are derived from the sale of food and beverages at our restaurants.
Our Burger Time operating principles include: (i) offering bigger burgers and more value for the money; (ii) offering a limited menu to permit attention to quality and speed of preparation; (iii) providing fast service by way of single and double drive-thru designs and a point-of-sale system that expedites the ordering and preparation process; and (iv) great tasting quality food made fresh to order at a fair price. Our primary strategy is to serve the drive-thru and take-out segment of the quick-service restaurant industry.
Operationally, we take several steps to maintain efficiency, including maintaining inventory of no more than approximately $5,000 per store at any given time (which also has the advantage of allowing for frequent deliveries of fresh food).
Our Burger Time investment model targets an average total cash investment of between $325,000 and $535,000. Real estate and finance costs may vary materially by location but, assuming the average investment figure applies, the amount allocated to the purchase of real estate would be approximately $225,000. These costs can fluctuate significantly, based on the number and timing of restaurant openings and the specific expenses incurred for each restaurant.
Our average customer transaction increased by approximately 4% in the fiscal 2020 compared to 2019 principally the result of price increase implemented in the middle of 2020. Our sales trends are influenced by many factors and the environment remains challenging for smaller restaurant chains as competition from the major fast-food hamburger-focused business is intense.
Material Trends and Uncertainties
There are industry trends which may have a significant adverse effect on our business. These trends principally relate to the rapidly changing area of technology and food delivery. The major companies in the restaurant industry have rapidly adopted and developed applications for the smart phone and mobile delivery, have aggressively expanded drive-through operations and have developed loyalty programs and data base marketing supported by a robust technology platform. We expect these trends to continue as restaurants aggressively complete for customers. Further, the major QSR’s have been increasingly willing to strategically discount prices through promotions such as a “dollar menu”. We expect these significant trends will continue.
The cost of food has increased over the last two years; however, we expect prices to remain stable or decrease in 2021. Beef costs were stable in 2020 following an increase of approximately 5% in 2019. Given the competitive nature of the fast-food burger restaurant industry, it may be difficult to raise menu prices to fully cover future cost increases. During 2020, a significant increase in business volume contributed to improved profit margins. Additional margin improvements may have to be made through operational improvements, equipment advances and increased volumes to help offset any food cost increases, due to the competitive state of the restaurant industry.
Labor will continue to be a critical factor in the foreseeable future. In most areas where we operate our restaurants, there historically has been a shortage of suitable labor. This has resulted in higher wages as the competition for employees intensifies, not only in the restaurant industry, but in practically all retail and service industries. It is crucial for the Company to develop and maintain programs to attract and retain quality employees.
Increases in the federally and state mandated minimum wage may also impact our operations. While details have not been determined the initial proposal by the Biden Administration includes a proposal to increase the minimum wage to $15 per hour. In North Dakota, the minimum wage is set at the federally mandated minimum wage of $7.25 per hour and the rates are annually adjusted to reflect any increase in cost of living. South Dakota has established a minimum wage of $9.10 per hour which is annually adjusted to increase with the cost of living. Minnesota’s minimum-wage rate for small employers, such as us, is $8.04 per hour. Our hourly employees earn a wage of on average of approximately $12 per hour. An increase in the minimum wage to $15 per hour would adversely impact our profit margins.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared coronavirus COVID-19 a global pandemic. A health pandemic is a disease outbreak that spreads rapidly and widely by infection and affects many individuals in an area or population at the same time. This contagious disease outbreak, which increases and decreases in intensity and any related adverse public health developments, has adversely affected workforces, customers, economies, and financial markets globally, potentially leading to an economic downturn. While our stores have remained open for drive-through business. The response to COVID-19 has disrupted the normal operations of many businesses, including ours.
Most states, including Minnesota and North Dakota, have limited or banned public gatherings to halt or delay the spread of disease. Under these emergency orders, essential services have remained open, including, but not limited to gas stations, pharmacies, grocery stores, food banks, convenience stores, take-out and delivery restaurants, banks, hospitals, and laundromats. Under the directions limiting public gatherings, regulators have generally allowed drive-through restaurant services to remain open. To date, our restaurants have remained open although we have curtailed some hours and have experiences temporary restaurant closures while locations have been cleaned and employees tested. Thus far, we have been able to reopen after two or three days. Local, regional or national governments may, at any time, implement directives that further limit or order our business to close or take other measures intended to mitigate the spread of disease. Further, customers may choose to remain in self-imposed isolation and avoid public gathering places.
While a program to vaccinate a majority of Americans is currently in progress, it is not possible for us to predict the duration or magnitude of the effects of the outbreak and its impact on our business or results of operations at this time. The conditions may influence restaurant customer traffic and our ability to adequately staff our restaurants, receive deliveries on a timely basis or perform functions at the corporate level. Further, such conditions could impact the availability of the menu items we offer and the ability of suppliers to deliver such products. We also may be adversely affected if jurisdictions in which we have restaurants impose mandatory closures, seek voluntary closures or impose restrictions on operations. Even if such measures are not implemented, the perceived risk of infection or significant health risk may adversely affect our business.
Growth Strategy and Outlook
As disclosed elsewhere in this Annual Report, we are focused on growing our business and building value for our shareholders. We are seeking to increase value for our shareholders in the foodservice industry. We expect to pursue the acquisition of multi-unit restaurant concepts and individual restaurant properties at attractive multiples of earnings. Once acquired, we will operate the business or businesses with a shared central management organization. Assuming we are successful in acquiring an operating business, following the acquisition, we expect to pursue growth strategies to both expand the number of locations and to increase comparable store sales and profits.
Our business plan is to grow through acquisitions in the foodservice industry. In addition, we may develop additional Burger Time locations through the acquisition and conversion of existing properties. We also expect to identify and complete acquisitions of existing restaurant units and multi-unit chains which could be operated and expanded through the addition of new locations.
Our growth strategy is predicated upon (i) building or acquiring new restaurants, (ii) growing comparable restaurant sales and profits, and (iii) quickly and cost-effectively scaling our growth while leveraging our corporate services.
We believe that we will have opportunities to acquire new restaurant businesses. We intend to follow a disciplined strategy of evaluating acquisition opportunities to determine the operations are in markets meeting our demographic, real estate and investment criteria. Our ability to successfully evaluate an acquisition opportunity and to understand the competitive landscape of a new market will be critical in making a successful acquisition. Additionally, our ability to identify, recruit and hire both salaried and hourly staff will impact our ability to expand as will changes in the legal environment, including increases to the minimum wage, which could impact our ability to expand into certain areas. Further, we believe that there has been an oversaturation of restaurants in certain areas which could decrease the number of markets that we believe will be attractive to expand into. Even if we can acquire restaurants, the new restaurants, and our Company, will be subject to various risks, some of which, including factors impacting our customers, such as declining economic conditions, are entirely out of our control. We will seek to quickly and cost-effectively scale our growth by leveraging our general and administrative costs.
Our ability to acquire or open new restaurants is predicated on the availability of capital for such purposes. We cannot be certain that capital will be available to us on acceptable terms if at all.
Results of Operations.
The following table sets forth, for the fiscal years indicated, our Consolidated Statements of Income expressed as percentage of total revenues. Percentages below may not reconcile because of rounding.
53 Week Period Ended January 3, 2021 (Fiscal 2020) compared to the 52 Week Period Ended December 29, 2019 (Fiscal 2019)
Net Revenues:
Net sales for Fiscal 2020 increased $1,679,232 or 25.9% to $8,159,796 from $6,480,564 in Fiscal 2019. The significant increase, which occurred beginning in March of 2020, was principally the result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the temporary shutdown of many restaurant alternatives. The result of limiting indoor seating at restaurants was customers choosing drive-through alternatives including Burger Time.
Restaurant sales for Fiscal 2020 ranged from a low of $536,000 to a high of $1,043,500 and average sales for each Burger Time unit during the period was approximately $839,000 in 2020 an increase of approximately 25% from $669,000 in 2019.
Costs of Sales - food and paper:
Cost of sales - food and paper for Fiscal 2020 decreased to 37.9% of restaurant sales from 39.7% of restaurant sales in Fiscal 2019. This decrease was mainly due to a price increase taken in the middle of 2020 during a relatively stable cost environment.
Restaurant Operating Costs:
Despite increases in general restaurant operating costs during Fiscal 2020, restaurant operating costs (which refer to all the costs associated with the operation of our restaurants, but do not include general and administrative costs, depreciation and amortization and impairment charges including the write-down of goodwill) as a percent of restaurant sales decreased to 80.4% in 2020 from 89.2% in Fiscal 2019. This was due primarily to matters discussed in the “Cost of Sales,” “Labor Costs,” “Occupancy and Other Operating Cost” sections below. The changes in restaurant-level costs from Fiscal 2019 to Fiscal 2020 are principally the result of a significant increase in restaurant sales volume in 2020 and may be detailed as follows:
Labor Costs:
For Fiscal 2020, labor and benefits costs decreased to 28.6% of restaurant sale from 33.0% of restaurant sales in Fiscal 2019. The decrease was the result of the significant increase in business activity and the latter three quarters of 2020 which resulted in a favorable utilization of the fixed portion of labor costs. The Company continues to benefit from minimal turnover in its unit restaurant management. Payroll costs are semi-variable in nature, meaning that they do not decrease proportionally to decreases in revenue, thus they decrease as a percentage of restaurant sales when there is a increase in restaurant sales volume.
Occupancy and Other Operating Costs:
For Fiscal 2020, occupancy and other costs declined to 13.9% of sales, or $1,136,257, compared to 16.5% of restaurant sales, or $1,072,407, in Fiscal 2019 principally as a result of the significant increase in restaurant volume.
Depreciation and Amortization Costs:
For Fiscal 2020, depreciation and amortization costs decreased 11.0%, or $23,398, to $189,389 (2.3% of sales) from $212,787 (3.3 % of sales) in Fiscal 2019. Depreciation costs have been declining as the Company’s equipment reaches a fully depreciated status and in 2020 decreased as percentage of sales because of the significant sales increase during 2020.
General and Administrative Costs
General and administrative costs increased 22.6%, or $126,639, from $560,885 (6.9% of sales) in Fiscal 2019 to $687,524 (9.4% of sales) in Fiscal 2020. The increase was principally the result of increased executive bonus compensation based on the strong financial performance in 2020.
Impairment of Assets Held for Sale and Goodwill
In 2019, the Company recorded a $93,488 charge to provide for a loss resulting from the closing of its Richmond, Indiana location and the planned sale of the property. In 2020, an additional $100,000 impairment charge was recognized for related to the Richmond property and a $90,493 charge was recorded to recognize impairment of the majority of costs associated with property in St. Louis, Missouri which the company had originally acquired for development. Additionally, in 2019, there was a $248,500 charge to write-off goodwill arising from the 2018 Share Exchange.
Income (loss) from Operations:
The income from operations was $529,368 in Fiscal 2020 compared to a loss from operations of $373,548 in Fiscal 2019. The change in income from operations in Fiscal 2020 compared to Fiscal 2019 was due to the matters discussed in the “Net Revenues”, “Restaurant Operating Costs” and “Impairment and Goodwill Write-down Charges” sections above.
Interest expense:
In Fiscal 2020, our interest expense decreased $30,084 to $177,757 (2.2% of restaurant sales) from $207,841 (3.2% restaurant sales) in Fiscal 2019.
Interest Income:
The $103,623 increase in interest income in 2020 was the result of interest earned on the Company’s advances to Next Gen Ice, Inc. (NGI), a related company, and includes $75,000 of interest income related to the value of equity received by the Company as part of a modification of the notes receivable.
Other Income:
The $466,758 of other income in Fiscal 2020 is the result of the Company having borrowed $460,400 under the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). The Company was informed by its lender in 2021 that the entire amount of PPP advances been forgiven and therefore the anticipated loan forgiveness is reflected as “Other Income”. In accordance with recent Federal stimulus legislation, the PPP loan has been treated as an SBA Grant during 2020 and the funds advanced under the program have been treated as non-taxable for federal income tax purposes in determining the provision for income taxes.
Net Income (loss):
The net income $791,992 for Fiscal 2020, compared to a loss of $466,577 in Fiscal 2019. The change from Fiscal 2020 from Fiscal 2019 was primarily attributable to the matters discussed in the “Net Revenues,” “Restaurant Operating Costs,” “General and Administrative Costs,” and “Other Income” sections above due to the matters discussed above.
Restaurant-level EBITDA:
To supplement the consolidated financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP, the Company uses restaurant-level EBITDA, which is not a measure defined by GAAP. This non-GAAP operating measure is useful to both management and, we believe, to investors because it represents one means of gauging the overall profitability of our recurring and controllable core restaurant operations. This measure is not, however, indicative of our overall results, nor does restaurant-level profit accrue directly to the benefit of stockholders, primarily due to the exclusion of corporate-level expenses. Restaurant-level EBITDA should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, operating income, which is calculated in accordance with GAAP, and the reconciliations to operating income set forth below should be carefully evaluated.
We define restaurant-level EBITDA as operating income before pre-opening costs, if any, general and administrative costs, depreciation and amortization and impairment charges. General and administrative costs are excluded as they are generally not specifically identifiable to restaurant specific costs. Depreciation and amortization and impairment charges are excluded because they are not ongoing controllable cash expenses, and they are not related to the health of ongoing operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resource
Since March of 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has had a positive impact of the Company’s sales and liquidity. For the 53 weeks ended January 3, 2021, the Company earned an after-tax profit of $791,992. On January 3, 2021, the Company had $1,321,244 in cash and working capital of $371,693, an increase of $843,688 from the prior year-end deficit of $471,995.
COVID-19 has had, and likely will to continue to have a significant adverse impact on the United States economy. It is difficult to predict either the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic or the impact of governmental responses on the United States economy in general, and specifically the impact on the quick service drive-through segment of the food service industry and on Company’s operating results and financial condition as the situation is evolving.
In May 2020, the Company received pandemic-related loans totaling $487,900. Included in that amount was $460,400 borrowed under the Small Business Administration’s Paycheck Protection Program under the terms of the program, the Company applied for forgiveness of the loans in 2020, anticipating its application qualified the loans for forgiveness. Following application by the Company, the loans were forgiven in full 2021. As a result of forgiveness of the PPP advances, the loan forgiveness is reflected as “Other Income” in 2020. In accordance with federal stimulus legislation, the PPP loans have been treated as SBA Grants and the funds advanced under the program have been treated as non-taxable for federal income tax purposes in determining the provision for income taxes. Also, in May 2020, the Company also borrowed $27,500 at no interest under the Minnesota Small Business Emergency Loan Program, and in addition, two of the Company’s mortgage lenders suspended and deferred current payments for a period of three months during the first half of 2020. A total of $93,602 in payments were deferred under these programs. The Company expects to have sufficient cash assets to meet its obligations for more than a year from the date of this Annual Report.
Our primary requirements for liquidity are to fund our working capital needs, capital expenditures, and general corporate needs, as well as to invest in or acquire companies that are synergistic with or complimentary to our business. Our operations do not require significant working capital, and, like many restaurant companies, we generally operate with negative working capital. We anticipate that working capital deficits may be incurred in the future and possibly increase.
Our restaurant sales are primarily received in cash or by credit card and our restaurant operations do not require significant inventories or receivables. In addition, we receive trade credit for the purchase of food, beverages and supplies, reducing the need for incremental working capital to support growth. Based on current information, we believe that we will have enough capital to meet our long-term debt obligations, working capital and recurring capital expenditure needs in fiscal 2021; however, our projections of future cash needs and cash flows may differ from actual results, and the difference could be material. If cash that may be generated from our business operations is insufficient to continue to operate our business, we may be required to obtain more working capital. We may seek to obtain additional working capital through sales of our equity securities or through bank credit facilities or public or private debt from various financial institutions where possible. We cannot be certain that additional funding will be available on acceptable terms, or at all. Our plans indicate that the Company can meet its working capital needs through 2022. If we identify sources for additional funding, the sale of additional equity securities or convertible debt could result in dilution to our shareholders. Additionally, the sale of equity securities or issuance of debt securities may be subject to certain security holder approvals or may result in the downward adjustment of the exercise or conversion price of our outstanding securities. We can give no assurance that we will generate sufficient cash flows in the future to satisfy our liquidity requirements or sustain future operations, or that other sources of funding, such as sales of equity or debt, would be available or would be approved by our security holders, if needed, on favorable terms or at all. If we fail to obtain additional working capital as and when needed, such failure could have a material adverse impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition. Furthermore, such lack of funds may inhibit our ability to respond to competitive pressures or unanticipated capital needs, or may force us to reduce operating expenses, which would significantly harm the business and development of operations.
Qualitative and Quantitative Disclosure about Market Risk
Commodity Price Risk
We are subject to volatility in food costs as a result of market risk associated with commodity prices. Our ability to recover increased costs through higher pricing is, at times, limited by the competitive environment in which we operate. We do not enter into pricing agreements with any of our suppliers to manage these risks. Beef is our largest single food purchase and the price we pay for beef fluctuates weekly based on beef commodity prices. We do not currently manage this risk with commodity future and option contracts. A ten percent increase in the cost of beef would result in approximately $98,000 of additional food costs for the Company annually.
Seasonality and Inflation
Seasonal factors and the timing of holidays cause our revenue to fluctuate from quarter to quarter. Our revenue per restaurant is typically slightly lower in the first and fourth quarters due to holiday closures and the impact of cold weather at all our locations. Adverse weather conditions may also affect customer traffic, especially in the first and fourth quarters, when customers do not use our outdoor seating areas, which impacts the use of these areas and may adversely affect our revenue.
Management does not believe that inflation has had a material effect on income during the 2020 or 2019 fiscal years. Increases in food, labor or other operating costs could adversely affect the Company’s operations. In the past, however, the Company generally has been able to increase menu prices or modify its operating procedures to substantially offset increases in its operating costs.
Our business is subject to a wide range of federal, state and local regulations, which are subject to change in ways we cannot now anticipate. We are uncertain as to the effect, if any, that changes in the regulatory environment may have on our Company.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements appearing at the end of this Annual Report.