Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this report. Management’s discussion and analysis contains not only historical information, but also forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. Statements that are not historical are forward-looking and reflect expectations for future Company performance. For these statements, the Company claims the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
Forward-looking statements involve a number of risks and uncertainties, including but not limited to those discussed in the “Risk Factors” section contained in Item 1A. Given the risks and uncertainties, readers should not place undue reliance on any forward-looking statement and should recognize that the statements are predictions of future results which may not occur as anticipated. Many of the risks listed above have been, and may be further be, exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic, its impact on the cinema and entertainment industry, and the worsening economic environment. Actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements and from historical results, due to the risks and uncertainties described herein, as well as others not now anticipated. New risk factors emerge from time to time and it is not possible for management to predict all such risk factors, nor can it assess the impact of all such factors on our business or the extent to which any factor, or combination of factors, may cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. Except where required by law, the Company assumes no obligation to update forward-looking statements to reflect actual results or changes in factors or assumptions affecting such forward-looking statements.
Overview
Our Strong Entertainment segment includes one of the largest manufacturers of premium projection screens and customized screen support systems, and we also distribute other products and provide technical support services to the cinema, amusement park and other markets. We are focused on improving the operating performance as the United States and other countries recover from COVID-19 related business disruptions. We plan to manage the Strong Entertainment business segment to grow market share and organic revenue and improve operating results, with the intent of expanding the ultimate valuation of the business. The Company may seek to sell a minority, majority or all of its existing businesses as part of its strategic plans. In addition, we may invest in other public or private companies or acquire other businesses, which may be within or outside of the Company’s existing markets.
In connection with the sale of our Strong Outdoor operating business to Firefly in August 2020, we entered into a Master Services Agreement (the “Master Services Agreement”). Pursuant to the Master Services Agreement, we agreed to provide certain support services to Firefly, including remote equipment monitoring and diagnostics of screens until no later than December 31, 2022 and transition advertising instruction and integration services, content management services, ad-hoc reporting and analysis, wireless service, advertising content management services, and mapping data until no later than six months from closing. In addition, we use our facility in Alpharetta, Georgia for our Digital Ignition technology incubator and co-working facility. These business operations are included within “Other” when comparing our results of operations for 2020 to 2019.
Convergent Transaction in February 2021
As part of a transaction that closed on February 1, 2021, we divested our Convergent business segment. The Company’s Convergent business segment delivered digital signage solutions and related services to large multi-location organizations in the United States and Canada.
On February 1, 2021, we entered into an Equity Purchase Agreement (together with the other related documents defined therein, the “Purchase Agreement”), and closed the transactions contemplated by the Purchase Agreement, with SageNet LLC (“SageNet”). The purchase price (the “Purchase Price”) pursuant to the Purchase Agreement was (i) $15.0 million in cash and (ii) $2.5 million in the form of a subordinated promissory note delivered by SageNet in our favor. Additionally, a portion of the Purchase Price was placed in escrow by SageNet, the release of which is contingent upon certain events and conditions specified in the Purchase Agreement. The Purchase Price is also subject to adjustment based on closing working capital of Convergent. As further consideration, SageNet also assumed approximately $5.7 million of third-party debt of Convergent, bringing the total enterprise value for Convergent equity interests to approximately $23.2 million. We expect to record a gain of approximately $15.0 million during the first quarter of 2021 related to the sale of Convergent.
Firefly Transaction in August 2020
On August 3, 2020, Strong Digital Media, LLC (“SDM”) entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with Firefly, pursuant to which SDM agreed to sell certain assets primarily related to its Strong Outdoor operating business to Firefly and continue to make available 300 digital taxi tops to Firefly. SDM retained certain accounts receivable as well as liabilities other than executory obligations under transferred contracts to the extent such liabilities are required to be performed following closing or constitute certain deferred revenue. The transaction closed on the same day.
As a result of these divestitures, we have presented Convergent’s and Strong Outdoor’s operating results as discontinued operations for all periods presented. Note 3 contains additional information regarding these transactions.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
In December 2019, a novel coronavirus disease (“COVID-19”) was initially reported, and in March 2020, the World Health Organization characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic. COVID-19 has had a widespread and detrimental effect on the global economy as a result of the continued increase in the number of cases, particularly in the United States, and actions by public health and governmental authorities, businesses, other organizations and individuals to address the outbreak, including travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter in place, stay at home or total lock-down orders and business limitations and shutdowns. The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and results of operations remains unknown and will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, including repeat or cyclical outbreaks, and any additional preventative and protective actions that governments, or we or our customers, may direct, which may result in an extended period of continued business disruption and reduced operations. For instance, some areas of the United States are experiencing new surges in COVID-19 cases, which has, in some cases, led to the closure of recently re-opened businesses and further postponed opening other businesses, including movie theaters. Any resulting financial impact cannot be reasonably estimated at this time, but we expect it will continue to have a material impact on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
The repercussions of the COVID-19 global pandemic resulted in a significant impact to our customers, specifically those in the entertainment and advertising industries, and their ability and willingness to spend on our products and services, which continues to negatively impact us. A significant number of our customers temporarily ceased operations during the pandemic, some of which continue to be suspended; as such, we have experienced, and anticipate that we will continue to experience at least until our customers have resumed normal operations, a significant decline in our results of operations. For instance, during this time, many movie theaters and other entertainment centers were forced to close or curtail their hours and, correspondingly, have terminated or deferred their non-essential capital expenditures. While some movie theaters and chains have begun to re-open, or announced plans to re-open in the near future, theater operators may continue to experience reduced revenues for an extended period due to, among other things, consumer concerns over safety and social distancing, depressed consumer sentiment due to adverse economic conditions, including job losses, capacity restrictions, and postponed release dates, shortened “release windows” between the release of motion pictures in theaters and an alternative delivery method, or the release of motion pictures directly to alternative delivery methods, bypassing the theater entirely, for certain movies, and continued COVID-19 outbreaks could cause these theaters to suspend operations again. The COVID-19 pandemic has also adversely affected film production and may adversely affect the pipeline of feature films available in the short- or long-term. In addition to decreased business spending by our customers and prospective customers and reduced demand for our products, lower renewal rates by our customers, increased customer losses/churn, increased challenges in or cost of acquiring new customers and increased risk in collectability of accounts receivable may have a material adverse effect on our business and results of operations. We have also experienced other negative impacts; among other actions, we were required to temporarily close our screen manufacturing facility in Canada due to the governmental response to COVID-19, which we were able to re-open on May 11, 2020, and have experienced lower revenues from field services and a reduction in non-recurring time and materials-based services. The completion of our outsourced screen finishing facility in China was also delayed by the COVID-19 pandemic, and we are currently evaluating the timing of when we will be able to commence operations at the facility in light of current travel restrictions. We may also experience one or more of the following conditions that could have a material adverse impact on our business operations and financial condition: adverse effects on our strategic partners’ businesses or on the businesses of companies in which we hold investments; impairment charges; extreme currency exchange-rate fluctuations; inability to recover costs from insurance carriers; and business continuity concerns for us, our customers and our third-party vendors.
Results of Operations:
The following table sets forth our operating results for the periods indicated:
Compared to 2019
Revenues
Net revenues during 2020 decreased 42.3% to $21.5 million from $37.3 million in 2019. The decrease in consolidated net revenue was primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 on our Strong Entertainment business.
Revenue from Strong Entertainment decreased 44.1% to $20.6 million in 2020 from $36.9 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the government-mandated temporary closure of our screen manufacturing facility in Quebec and lower revenues from equipment sales and field service projects. Revenue during 2019 was impacted by roof damage that caused the screen facility to temporarily halt operations for a portion of 2019.
The impact of COVID-19 on Strong Entertainment was particularly acute in the second quarter of 2020 when most entertainment venues across the world were forced to close in response to the pandemic. In the second half of 2020, Strong Entertainment’s revenues recovered as many cinemas and theme parks began reopening. However, revenues continued to be lower than historical levels as those entertainment venues which were able to open continued to operate at reduced capacity limits and with limited theatrical releases. The Company expects the pace of recovery of its Strong Entertainment revenue to be dependent upon the pace of vaccinations and other measures to control COVID-19 and the related pace at which restrictions are removed from major cities and at which studios begin to market and distribute their backlog of new releases to the market.
Gross Profit
Consolidated gross profit decreased 56.6% to $5.4 million in 2020 from $12.5 million in 2019. As a percentage of revenue, gross profit declined to 25.2% during 2020 compared to 33.4% for 2019.
Gross profit in the Strong Entertainment segment was $4.6 million or 22.5% of revenues in 2020 compared to $12.2 million or 33.0% of revenues in 2019. The decrease in gross profit dollars was primarily attributable to the decline in screen, equipment and field service revenues related to COVID-19 and changes in product mix. The impact of significantly lower revenues was somewhat mitigated by actions taken to control costs, including the furlough of production employees and technicians, management salary reductions, payroll subsidies received from the Canadian government and other similar actions taken to manage costs.
Operating Loss
Consolidated operating loss was $6.7 million in 2020 compared to $2.7 million during 2019.
Strong Entertainment was breakeven on an operating income basis during 2020 compared to operating income of $6.7 million during 2019. The decrease in operating income was primarily due to the decline in revenues due to COVID-19 as discussed above, partially offset by actions taken to reduce compensation related expenses, including furloughs, headcount reductions, temporary salary cuts and wage subsidies, as well as lower travel and entertainment expenses. In addition, since many of Strong Entertainment’s customers have been negatively impacted by COVID-19, we recorded $0.6 million of bad debt expense during 2020 as a result of the increased uncertainty related to collection of trade accounts receivable.
Unallocated administrative expenses decreased to $6.6 million during 2020 compared to $8.6 million during 2019. The decrease was driven primarily by actions taken to reduce compensation expense, board fees, travel, information technology expenses, costs associated with contractors and consultants and audit and tax expenses, all of which were due to our initiatives to reduce overall administrative expenses.
Other Financial Items
Total other income of $2.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of a $3.1 million gain on our property and casualty and business interruption claims for the weather-related incident at our production facility in Quebec, partially offset by $0.5 million of interest expense and $0.3 million of foreign currency transaction adjustments. For the year ended December 31, 2019, total other expense of $1.8 million primarily consisted of a $2.9 million fair value adjustment to notes receivable, $0.3 million of foreign currency transaction adjustments and $0.3 million of interest expense, partially offset by a $1.2 million gain on our property and insurance claim for the weather-related incident at our production facility in Quebec.
Income tax expense was approximately $1.3 million during 2020 compared to $2.1 million during 2019. Our income tax expense consisted primarily of income tax on foreign earnings.
We recorded equity method investment loss of $2.7 million during 2020, consisting of $2.5 million from FGF and $0.2 million from GreenFirst. The year ended December 31, 2019 included equity method investment loss of $2.0 million, which consisted of $1.2 million from FGF and $0.8 million from GreenFirst. Although we recorded equity investment losses from FGF and GreenFirst during 2020, the market value of these investments, as estimated using their closing stock prices, was $12.8 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to a carrying value of $7.1 million.
As a result of the items outlined above, we generated a net loss from continuing operations of $8.3 million, or $0.56 per basic and diluted share, during 2020, compared to a net loss from continuing operations of $8.7 million, or $0.60 per basic and diluted share, during 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
During the past several years, we have primarily met our working capital and capital resource needs from our operating cash flows and credit facilities. Our primary cash requirements involve operating expenses, working capital, capital expenditures, investments, and other general corporate activities. Our capital expenditures during 2019 and 2020 included costs incurred in the construction of the Strong Entertainment production facility in Quebec that sustained damage as a result of inclement weather.
We ended 2020 with total cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash of $4.8 million compared to $5.3 million as of December 31, 2019. Of the $4.8 million as of December 31, 2020, $2.5 million was held by our Canadian subsidiary, Strong/MDI, and $0.4 million was restricted. Strong/MDI also makes intercompany loans to the U.S. parent company which do not trigger Canadian withholding taxes if they meet certain requirements. As of December 31, 2020, the parent company had outstanding intercompany loans from Strong/MDI of approximately $34.6 million. In the event those loans are not repaid, or are recharacterized as dividends to the U.S. parent company, we would be required to pay Canadian withholding taxes, which have been fully accrued as of December 31, 2020.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic and related closures of cinemas, theme parks and entertainment venues, we took decisive actions to conserve cash, reduce operating expenditures, delay capital expenditures, and to manage working capital. We also implemented targeted furloughs, headcount reductions and temporary salary cuts for our executive officers and certain other employees, and our board of directors waived its cash compensation for 2020 in order to reduce expenses. We were able to access liquidity during the second quarter of 2020 by drawing down on Strong/MDI’s revolving credit facility, all of which was repaid prior to December 31, 2020.
In February 2021, we entered into two transactions which further strengthened the Company’s balance sheet, increasing the Company’s cash position and reducing the Company’s debt and lease obligation.
On February 1, 2021, we entered into an Equity Purchase Agreement (together with the other related documents defined therein, the “Purchase Agreement”), and closed the transactions contemplated by the Purchase Agreement, with SageNet LLC (“SageNet”). The purchase price (the “Purchase Price”) pursuant to the Purchase Agreement was (i) $15.0 million in cash and (ii) $2.5 million in the form of a subordinated promissory note delivered by SageNet in our favor. A portion of the Purchase Price was placed in escrow by SageNet, the release of which is contingent upon certain events and conditions specified in the Purchase Agreement. The Purchase Price is also subject to adjustment based on closing working capital of Convergent. As further consideration, SageNet also assumed approximately $5.7 million of third-party debt of Convergent, bringing the total enterprise value for Convergent’s equity interests to approximately $23.2 million.
On February 3, 2021, we entered into an underwriting agreement (the “Underwriting Agreement”) in connection with a public offering (the “Offering”) pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell approximately 3.3 million shares of our common stock, at a public offering price of $2.30 per share. The Offering closed on February 8, 2021. The net proceeds from the Offering were approximately $6.7 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by us.
On March 2, 2021, we received a notice of default and demand (the “Default Notice”) from Huntington Technology Finance, Inc. (“Huntington”). The Default Notice alleges the occurrence of an event of default under the terms of the Master Equipment Lease Agreement dated May 19, 2017 (the “Lease Agreement”) pursuant to which our subsidiaries lease certain digital taxi top advertising signs.
We have made all required payments to Huntington during the term of the Lease Agreement and expect to continue to make monthly payments on a timely basis. The Default Notice does not allege that we have failed to make any payment or incurred any economic or payment default. Rather, the Default Notice alleges that we violated certain technical covenants in the Lease Agreement. Huntington has demanded accelerated payment of the outstanding principal balance plus lessor profit and a fair market value buyout of the assets under lease within ten days of the receipt of the Default Notice.
We dispute Huntington’s assertion that an event of default has occurred under the Lease Agreement and believe that many of the assertions made in the Default Notice are false and that the claims made in the Default Notice are therefore baseless. Accordingly, on March 3, 2021, we provided a written response to Huntington detailing our position that Huntington’s allegations of an event of default under the Lease Agreement are unfounded, asserting our good faith belief that we have abided by the terms, conditions and covenants of the Lease Agreement.
We believe that our existing sources of liquidity, including cash and cash equivalents, operating cash flow, credit facilities, equity investments, receivables and other assets will be sufficient to meet our projected capital needs for at least the next twelve months. However, our ability to continue to meet our cash requirements will depend on, among other things, the duration of COVID-19 related restrictions on cinemas, theme parks and other entertainment venues, our ability to achieve anticipated levels of revenues and cash flow from operations, our ability to manage costs and working capital successfully and the continued availability of financing, if needed. We cannot provide any assurance that our assumptions used to estimate our liquidity requirements will remain accurate due to the unprecedented nature of the disruption to our operations and the unpredictability of the COVID-19 global pandemic. As a consequence, our estimates of the duration of the pandemic and the severity of the impact on our future earnings and cash flows could change and have a material impact on our results of operations and financial condition. In the event of a sustained market deterioration, and continued declines in net sales, we may need additional liquidity, which would require us to evaluate available alternatives and take appropriate actions. We may, depending on a variety of factors, including market conditions for capital raises, the trading price of our common stock and opportunities for uses of any proceeds, engage in additional public or private offerings of equity or debt securities to increase our capital resources. However, financial and economic conditions, including those resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, could limit our access to credit and impair our ability to raise capital, if needed, on acceptable terms or at all, and we cannot provide any assurance that we will be able to obtain any additional sources of financing or liquidity on acceptable terms, or at all. See Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements for a description of our debt as of December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities from continuing operations was $1.1 million during 2020. Operating losses at Strong Entertainment and cash outflows for selling and administrative expenses were partially offset by changes in working capital. Net cash used in operating activities from continuing operations was $2.8 million in 2019. Cash flows generated by Strong Entertainment and improvements in working capital were offset by the cash outflows for selling and administrative expenses.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities from continuing operations was $4.5 million during 2020, which consisted of a $4.0 million investment in Firefly and capital expenditures of $0.5 million. Net cash used in investing activities from continuing operations was $1.8 million in 2019, consisting entirely of capital expenditures.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities from continuing operations was $1.2 million during 2020, consisting of $0.7 million of net principal payments on debt and capital lease obligations and $0.4 million of deferred stock issuance costs. Net cash used in financing activities from continuing operations was $0.8 million during 2019, primarily consisting of $0.4 million of principal payments on debt and capital lease obligations.
Use of Non-GAAP Measures
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). In addition to disclosing financial results prepared in accordance with GAAP, we disclose information regarding Adjusted EBITDA, which differs from the term EBITDA as it is commonly used. In addition to adjusting net income (loss) to exclude income taxes, interest, and depreciation and amortization, Adjusted EBITDA also excludes discontinued operations, share-based compensation, impairment charges, equity method income (loss), fair value adjustments, severance, foreign currency transaction gains (losses), transactional gains and expenses, gains on insurance recoveries and other cash and non-cash charges and gains.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not measures of performance defined in accordance with GAAP. However, Adjusted EBITDA is used internally in planning and evaluating our operating performance. Accordingly, management believes that disclosure of these metrics offers investors, bankers and other stakeholders an additional view of our operations that, when coupled with the GAAP results, provides a more complete understanding of our financial results.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to net income (loss) or to net cash from operating activities as measures of operating results or liquidity. Our calculation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies, and the measures exclude financial information that some may consider important in evaluating our performance.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation, or as substitutes for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are (i) they do not reflect our cash expenditures, or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments, (ii) they do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs, (iii) EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, on our debt, (iv) although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements, (v) they do not adjust for all non-cash income or expense items that are reflected in our statements of cash flows, (vi) they do not reflect the impact of earnings or charges resulting from matters we consider not to be indicative of our ongoing operations, and (vii) other companies in our industry may calculate these measures differently than we do, limiting their usefulness as comparative measures.
We believe EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA facilitate operating performance comparisons from period to period by isolating the effects of some items that vary from period to period without any correlation to core operating performance or that vary widely among similar companies. These potential differences may be caused by variations in capital structures (affecting interest expense), tax positions (such as the impact on periods or companies of changes in effective tax rates or net operating losses) and the age and book depreciation of facilities and equipment (affecting relative depreciation expense). We also present EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA because (i) we believe these measures are frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate companies in our industry, (ii) we believe investors will find these measures useful in assessing our ability to service or incur indebtedness, and (iii) we use EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA internally as benchmarks to evaluate our operating performance or compare our performance to that of our competitors.
The following table sets forth reconciliations of net income (loss) under GAAP to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA (in thousands):
Financial Instruments and Credit Risk Concentrations
Our top ten customers accounted for 54% of 2020 consolidated net revenues. Trade accounts receivable from these customers represented 53% of net consolidated receivables at December 31, 2020. None of our customers accounted for more than 10% of both our consolidated net revenues during 2020 and our net consolidated receivables as of December 31, 2020. While we believe our relationships with such customers are stable, most arrangements are made by purchase order and are terminable at will by either party. A significant decrease or interruption in business from our significant customers could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. We could also be adversely affected by such factors as changes in foreign currency rates and weak economic and political conditions in each of the countries in which we sell our products.
Financial instruments that potentially expose us to a concentration of credit risk principally consist of accounts receivable. We sell products to a large number of customers in many different geographic regions. To minimize credit concentration risk, we perform ongoing credit evaluations of our customers’ financial condition or use letters of credit.
Hedging and Trading Activities
Our primary exposure to foreign currency fluctuations pertains to our operations in Canada. In certain instances, we may enter into foreign exchange contracts to manage a portion of this risk. We do not have any trading activities that include non-exchange traded contracts at fair value.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Inflation
We believe that the relatively moderate rates of inflation in recent years have not had a significant impact on our net revenues or profitability. Historically, we have been able to offset any inflationary effects by either increasing prices or improving cost efficiencies.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the consolidated financial statements for a description of recently issued accounting pronouncements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
General
The following accounting policies involve judgments and estimates used in preparation of the consolidated financial statements. An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are uncertain at the time the estimate is made, and if different estimates that reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting estimates that are reasonably likely to occur periodically, could materially impact the consolidated financial statements.
Our accounting policies are discussed in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements in this report. Management believes the following critical accounting policies reflect its more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We account for revenue using the following steps:
● Identify the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
● Identify the performance obligations in the contract;
● Determine the transaction price;
● Allocate the transaction price to the identified performance obligations; and
● Recognize revenue when, or as, the Company satisfies the performance obligations.
We combine contracts with the same customer into a single contract for accounting purposes when the contracts are entered into at or near the same time and the contracts are negotiated as a single commercial package, consideration in one contract depends on the other contract, or the services are considered a single performance obligation. If an arrangement involves multiple performance obligations, the items are analyzed to determine the separate units of accounting, whether the items have value on a standalone basis and whether there is objective and reliable evidence of their standalone selling price. The total contract transaction price is allocated to the identified performance obligations based upon the relative standalone selling prices of the performance obligations. The standalone selling price is based on an observable price for services sold to other comparable customers, when available, or an estimated selling price using a cost plus margin approach. We estimate the amount of total contract consideration we expect to receive for variable arrangements by determining the most likely amount we expect to earn from the arrangement based on the expected quantities of services we expect to provide and the contractual pricing based on those quantities. We only include some or a portion of variable consideration in the transaction price when it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur or when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. We consider the sensitivity of the estimate, our relationship and experience with the client and variable services being performed, the range of possible revenue amounts and the magnitude of the variable consideration to the overall arrangement.
As discussed in more detail in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements, revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services under the terms of a contract and is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring goods or providing services. We do not have any material extended payment terms, as payment is due at or shortly after the time of the sale. Sales, value-added and other taxes collected concurrently with revenue producing activities are excluded from revenue.
Investments
We apply the equity method of accounting to investments when we have significant influence, but not controlling interest, in the investee. Judgment regarding the level of influence over each equity method investment includes considering key factors such as ownership interest, representation on the board of directors, participation in policy-making decisions and material intercompany transactions. We assess investments for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an investment may not be recoverable. For equity method investments in public companies that are actively traded, fair value would generally be determined based on the security’s trading price multiplied by the number of shares held. Determining fair value for investments in thinly traded public companies and privately held entities could require using a valuation model, which would include significant judgment and estimates.