Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in this section to the “we,” “us,” “our,” the “Company” or “SMMC” refer to SMMC prior to the consummation of the Business Combination. The following discussion and analysis provides information which our management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our results of operations and financial condition. This discussion and analysis should be read together with the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes of ours that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. See the sections entitled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Item 1A. “Risk Factors” elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Actual results and timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under Item 1A. “Risk Factors”. Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations to any forward looking information refers to BTRS Holdings Inc. following the Business Combination and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Certain figures, such as interest rates and other percentages, included in this section have been rounded for ease of presentation. Percentage figures included in this section have not in all cases been calculated on the basis of such rounded figures but on the basis of such amounts prior to rounding. For this reason, percentage amounts in this section may vary slightly from those obtained by performing the same calculations using the figures in our consolidated financial statements or in the associated text. Certain other amounts that appear in this section may similarly not sum due to rounding.
Overview
We are a former blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on February 28, 2019 for the purpose of effecting capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We completed the IPO on June 19, 2019 and the Business Combination on January 12, 2021.
Billtrust is a leading provider of cloud-based software and integrated payment processing solutions that simplify and automate B2B commerce. Accounts receivable (“AR”) is broken and relies on conventional processes that are outdated, inefficient, manual and largely paper-based. Billtrust is at the forefront of the digital transformation of AR, providing mission-critical solutions that span credit decisioning and monitoring, online ordering, invoicing, cash application and collections. Billtrust’s solutions integrate with a number of ecosystem players, including financial institutions, enterprise resource planning (“ERP”) systems, and accounts payable (“AP”) software platforms, to help customers accelerate cash flow and generate sales more quickly and efficiently. Customers use Billtrust’s platform to transition from expensive paper invoicing and check acceptance to efficient electronic billing and payments, which generates cost savings and provides a better user experience.
Billtrust is mission-critical to its customers’ AR operations, helping them convert from expensive paper invoicing and check acceptance to efficient electronic billing and payments. Billtrust’s proprietary technology platform offers Billtrust’s customers multiple ways to send invoices (print, fax, email, online, and AP portal) and receive payments (paper check, ACH, email, phone, and credit card). Billtrust has an electronic solutions (eSolutions) team that works closely with Billtrust’s customers to transition their users from paper invoices and payments to electronic, which results in accelerated savings, faster realization of cash, and a better user experience. Customers use Billtrust’s integrated AR platform to automate credit decisioning, online ordering, invoice delivery, payment capture, cash application, and collections. In addition to driving cost savings for customers, Billtrust benefits from margin expansion and incremental revenue through the monetization of electronic payments.
Billtrust’s customers have a daunting task of capturing and applying payments from hundreds or thousands of their buyer customers, all via different channels and payment types. Larger buyers, or their outsourced AP providers, offer their portals as a means for suppliers to be paid. Suppliers, on the other hand, prefer a single source of payments with clean remittance, or payment instructions. To address this large and increasingly growing pain point for suppliers, Billtrust created a leading two-sided B2B payments network, the Business Payments Network (BPN) that connects buyers and suppliers. Billtrust built integrations with leading ERP and accounting systems, banks, and AP software providers to offer an online supplier business directory, programmatic payment preferences, payment flexibility, and streamlined reconciliation of remittance data.
Our Business Model After the Business Combination
Billtrust’s business model focuses on maximizing the lifetime value of a customer relationship by providing measurable efficiencies along the entire order to cash process, and Billtrust continues to make significant investments in order to grow its customer base. Billtrust generates revenue from a hybrid subscription and transaction model. This model includes subscription, transaction and services from:
•
subscription fees that are recognized ratably as Billtrust’s obligations are delivered over the subscription term;
•
transaction fees that are recognized when transactions are processed, and in some cases ratably as Billtrust’s obligations are delivered, at contracted rates, for:
◦
processing of electronic invoices delivered, stored, or printed through its software platform and print operations; and
◦
payments based on a percentage of payment volume processed or per item processing fees; and
•
services revenue from contracted fees associated with implementation of new customers or products on its platform, generally recognized over five years, as well as consulting services provided to customers on a time and materials basis recognized as services are provided.
The profitability of any customer in a particular period depends upon the mix of revenue between the Software and Payments and Print segments, as well as, in part, upon the length of time they have been a customer. Billtrust believes that, over time, as its customer base grows and a relatively higher percentage of subscription, transaction and services revenue are attributable to a mature customer base versus new customers or upsells to existing customers, associated sales and marketing expenses and other allocated upfront costs as a percentage of revenues will decrease, subject to investments Billtrust plans to make in its business. Over the lifetime of the customer relationship, Billtrust also incurs sales and marketing costs to manage the account or upsell the customer to more products on its platform. These costs, however, are significantly less than the costs initially incurred to acquire the customer. Billtrust calculates the lifetime value of its customers and associated customer acquisition costs for a particular fiscal year by comparing (1) estimated gross profit from contracted revenues in the period, multiplied by one divided by the estimated customer cancellation rate to (2) total sales and marketing expense for the same period. On this basis, Billtrust estimates that for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, the calculated lifetime value of its customers exceeded six times the associated cost of acquiring them.
Impact of COVID-19 on Billtrust’s Business
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a “Public Health Emergency of International Concern” and on March 11, 2020, declared it to be a pandemic. Actions taken around the world to help mitigate the spread of COVID-19 include restrictions on travel, quarantines in certain areas and forced closures for certain types of public places and businesses. COVID-19 and actions taken to mitigate its spread have had and are expected to continue to have an adverse impact on the economies and financial markets of many countries. In March 2020, the United States declared a State of National Emergency due to the COVID-19 outbreak. In addition, many jurisdictions in the United States have limited, and are considering to further limit, social mobility and gathering. Many business establishments have closed due to restrictions imposed by the government and many governmental authorities have closed most public establishments.
Billtrust’s business continues to operate despite the disruption of many business operations in the United States and its decision to require employees to work from remote locations. The pandemic has served to increase the awareness and urgency around accelerating the digital transformation of AR through Billtrust’s products and platform. Although Billtrust has not experienced significant business disruptions thus far from the COVID-19 pandemic, Billtrust saw its transaction fees, including those in the print segment, decrease year over year for certain customers. This decrease was seen most acutely in the three months ended June 30, 2020. Billtrust is unable to predict the full impact that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on its future results of operations, liquidity and financial condition due to numerous uncertainties, including the duration of the pandemic, the actions that may be taken by government authorities across the United States, the impact to its customers, employees and suppliers, and other factors described in the section titled “Risk Factors” in the Original Report. These factors are beyond Billtrust’s knowledge and control and, as a result, at this time, Billtrust is unable to predict the ultimate impact, both in terms of severity and duration, that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on Billtrust’s business, operating results, cash flows and financial condition.
Some of Billtrust’s customers have been, and may continue to be, negatively impacted by the shelter-in-place and other similar state and local orders, the closure of manufacturing sites and country borders, and the increase in unemployment. The COVID-19 pandemic has caused Billtrust to modify its business practices (including employee travel and cancellation of physical participation in meetings, events and conferences), all of its employees are currently working remotely, and it may take further actions as may be required by government authorities or that Billtrust determines are in the best interests of its employees and customers. These modified business practices have led to expense reductions in personnel and marketing related costs. The extent of this business disruption on Billtrust’s operational and financial performance will depend on these developments and the duration and spread of the outbreak, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted.
Recent Developments
On January 12, 2021, we consummated the previously announced Business Combination pursuant to the BCA dated October 18, 2020, amended on December 13, 2020, between SMMC, First Merger Sub, Second Merger Sub and Legacy Billtrust, under the terms of which: (i) First Merger Sub merged with and into Legacy Billtrust, with Legacy Billtrust being the surviving company of the First Merger and (ii) immediately following the First Merger, Legacy Billtrust merged with and into Second Merger Sub, with Second Merger Sub being the surviving entity of the Second Merger.
In connection with the Closing, we changed our name from South Mountain Merger Corp. to BTRS Holdings Inc.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Billtrust believes that its performance and future growth depends on a number of factors that present significant opportunities but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in the section titled “Risk Factors” in the Original Report. Billtrust believes that the most significant factors affecting its results of operations include:
Investment in Technology
Billtrust’s goal is to transform the way businesses send and capture payments in order to be the leader in the order-to-cash process. Billtrust continues to invest in technology and the digitizing of its platform. Billtrust’s investment in technology is aimed at upgrading the conventional (largely paper based) AR and order-to-cash processes. Billtrust’s model is digitizing the order-to-cash process in areas such as credit, ordering, invoicing, payments, cash application and collections.
Billtrust continues to invest in improving each product and offering more digital capability to its customers. Further, Billtrust is continuing to invest in certain initiatives targeted to improve internal processes and enhance the efficiency, security and scalability of its platform. Billtrust’s investment in technology is expected to have a positive impact on its long-term profitability and operations. Billtrust also intends to continue to evaluate strategic acquisitions and investments in businesses and technologies to drive product and market expansion. Billtrust’s future success is dependent on its ability to successfully develop, market and sell existing and new products to both new and existing customers.
Acquisition of New Customers
Billtrust efficiently reaches B2B customers through its proven go-to-market strategies. Billtrust acquires customers directly through digital marketing campaigns, its direct sales force and indirectly by partnering with financial institutions and other complementary companies. Billtrust’s growth largely depends on its ability to acquire new customers.
As of December 31, 2020, Billtrust had over 1,800 customers across a wide variety of industries and geographies, including distributors of building materials, electrical, plumbing and technology equipment, healthcare, construction and consumer products among others, primarily domiciled in North America. Billtrust continues to invest in its sales, marketing and go-to market strategy in order to acquire customers in its target market. Billtrust’s marketing efforts are campaign and content driven and targeted depending on the size and industry of the customer. Marketing initiatives are focused on demand generation and include promotional activity and emphasis on online digital marketing programs (e.g. webinars, virtual events). There is a long-term opportunity to expand into large, new markets with compatible trends.
Billtrust’s customers require professional implementation services to configure its products, which may take several months, or longer, for some products. As a result of the upfront investment, Billtrust believes its customer retention is strong, as evidenced by the 104% net dollar retention rate for the year ended December 31, 2020. Please see the section entitled “--Key Performance Metrics” for more information on this metric. Billtrust intends to continue to invest in its efficient go-to market strategy as it further penetrates its addressable markets.
Billtrust’s ability to attract new customers will depend on a number of factors, including the effectiveness and pricing of its products, offerings of Billtrust’s competitors, and the effectiveness of its marketing efforts. Billtrust’s financial performance will depend in large part on the overall demand for its platform, and acquisition of new customers is expected to have a positive impact on Billtrust’s long-term profitability and operations.
Expansion of Relationships with Existing Customers
Billtrust’s revenue growth depends on its customers’ usage of its range of products. Billtrust’s ability to monetize transactions and payments is an important part of its business model. As Billtrust solves customers’ problems and becomes more integrated into their daily businesses, it sees an increased opportunity to cross-sell to these existing customers. This strategy is achieved by driving adoption of an existing Billtrust solution across different divisions and / or subsidiaries of an existing customer and expanding the scope of service with additional solutions. Billtrust’s ability to influence customers to process more transactions and payments on its platform will have a direct impact on Billtrust’s revenue.
Billtrust’s revenue from existing customers is generally reliable due to both the pricing structure and the business-critical nature of functions Billtrust products support for customers. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, 95% or more of Billtrust’s subscription and transaction fees came from customers who had entered into contracts prior to the start of the calendar year. Billtrust expands within its existing customer base by selling additional products on its platform, adding divisions, increasing transactions per customer through proven e-solutions, as well as through pricing and packaging its services. Billtrust’s ability to increase sales to existing customers will depend on a number of factors, including its customers’ satisfaction with its solution, competition, pricing and overall changes in Billtrust’s customers’ spending levels with Billtrust. For a full definition of subscription and transaction fees, please see the section entitled “--Components of Results of Operations.”
Key Performance Metrics After the Business Combination
Billtrust monitors the following key metrics to help it evaluate the health of its business, identify trends affecting its growth, formulate goals and objectives and make strategic decisions.
Total Payment Volume
Total Payment Volume (“TPV”) is the dollar value of customer payment transactions that Billtrust processes on its platform during a particular period. TPV is further disaggregated between “TPV - Card”, which includes payments through our software, portals, gateways, and third party processors, and includes our Payment Facilitator (“PayFac”) customers. “TPV - ACH” includes payments made via our software, portals, gateways, and our business payments network that are processed via the automated clearing house (ACH) or wire transfers. To grow payments revenue from customers, Billtrust must deliver a software platform that both simplifies the process of accepting electronic payments and streamlines the reconciliation of remittance data. Additionally, as Billtrust increases the digital delivery of invoices, it increases the probability that they will be paid electronically by Billtrust’s customers’ end customers. The more customers use the Billtrust software platform, the more payments transactions they are likely to process through Billtrust’s various products. This metric provides an important indication of the dollar value of transactions that customers are completing on the platform and is helpful to investors as an indicator of Billtrust’s ability to generate revenue from its customers.
TPV for 2020 was $54.7 billion compared to $43.9 billion in 2019, 25% growth year over year, while comparing years 2019 and 2018, TPV growth was 40% year over year. TPV - ACH for 2020 was $37.0 billion compared to $30.9 billion in 2019, 20% growth year over year, while comparing years 2019 and 2018, TPV - ACH growth was 40% year over year. TPV - Card for 2020 was $17.7 billion compared to $13.0 billion in 2019, 36% growth year over year, while comparing years 2019 and 2018, TPV - Card growth was 39% year over year, reflecting a higher absolute dollar growth, partially moderated by lower growth in the first half of the year. The growth in TPV was driven by the increase in TPV - ACH which was primarily due to the addition of new customers and an increase in existing customer transactions.
Total Net Dollar Retention
Total net dollar retention is a measure of retention and growth of existing customers. Net dollar retention is an important indicator of customer satisfaction and usage of Billtrust’s platform, as well as an indicator of potential revenue for future periods. This metric is helpful for investors in evaluating Billtrust’s growth. Management uses this metric in evaluating performance of the Billtrust platform. Billtrust calculates net dollar retention at the end of each period by taking the average of the retention rates for the trailing four quarters. For each quarter, (i) a denominator consisting of revenues from subscription and transaction fees for all billing accounts that had subscription and transaction fees for in the corresponding quarter of the prior year, is divided into (ii) a numerator consisting of revenues from subscription and transaction fees for those same billing accounts in the given quarter. The calculation includes additional solutions purchased, pricing changes, transaction volume changes, and cancellations, but excludes new billing accounts added between those periods. For a full definition of subscription and transaction fees, please see the section entitled “--Components of Results of Operations.”
Software and Payments net dollar retention is a measure of retention and growth of existing customers in the Software and Payments segment. Billtrust calculates Software and Payments net dollar retention at the end of each period by taking the average of the retention rates for the trailing four quarters for the segment. For each quarter, (i) a denominator consisting of segment revenues from subscription and transaction fees for all billing accounts that had subscription and transaction fees in the corresponding quarter of the prior year, is divided into (ii) a numerator consisting of segment revenues from subscription and transaction fees for those same billing accounts in the given quarter. The calculation includes additional solutions purchased, pricing changes, transaction volume changes, and cancellations, but excludes new billing accounts added between those periods.
Billtrust’s total net dollar retention was 104% for 2020 and was 106% for 2018 and 2019. The decline in total net dollar retention was due primarily to the impact of COVID-19 on customer transaction volumes, particularly for the quarter ended June 30, 2020 for Print segment volumes, which continue to remain at or below prior year levels. The decline in total net dollar retention was offset by Software and Payments net dollar retention which was 110% for 2020, trending in line with 2018 and 2019 Software and Payments net dollar retention of 110% and 111%, respectively. In any period, the primary drivers that can be attributed to changes in the total net dollar retention rate are customer transaction volumes, customer cancellations and the mix of revenues by segment. Additionally, total net dollar retention is adversely impacted by decreases in Print segment revenue due to average transaction rates exceeding those in the Software and Payments segment. For Software and Payments net dollar retention rates, the primary drivers are customer transaction volumes, and customer cancellations, particularly from legacy agreements.
Number of Electronic Invoices Presented
Electronic invoices presented tracks the number of invoices sent via email, fax, or loaded to a presentment or AP portal and includes volumes from acquired platforms, where volumes are normalized to best match equivalents on the Billtrust platform. It includes invoices that are charged on a per transaction basis for certain legacy customer agreements, as well as for the current pricing model which includes subscriptions with defined tiers of electronic transactions for a fixed price. Electronic invoices presented is a key indicator as it contributes to the growth of Billtrust’s Software and Payments segment revenues, and is a helpful indicator of the future opportunity for an electronic payment on those invoices.
Billtrust’s number of electronic invoices presented for 2020 was 273 million compared to 243 million in 2019, an increase of 13% year over year, while the comparison of 2019 and 2018 represents a growth of 13% year over year. These growth rates are primarily driven by increased adoption for existing customers as well as the addition of new customers, and are moderated by flat or declining business to consumer customers on legacy platforms as they attrite off of those platforms.
Results of Operations
Our only activities from inception to December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the IPO, described below, identifying a target company for a business combination and consummating the acquisition of Legacy Billtrust. We generated non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in a trust account (the “Trust Account”). We incurred expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence and merger and acquisition expenses in connection with completing a business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $4,452,960, which consists of operating costs of $5,359,676 and a provision for income taxes of $2,645 offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $909,361.
For the period from February 28, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, we had net income of $1,403,487, which consists of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $2,338,057, offset by operating costs of $561,491 and a provision for income taxes of $373,079.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On June 24, 2019, we consummated the IPO of 25,000,000 units (the “Units), which includes a partial exercise by the underwriter of the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 2,500,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $250,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 6,954,500 warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”), at $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, to our sponsor, South Mountain, LLC (the “Sponsor”), generating gross proceeds of $6,954,500.
As of December 31, 2020, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $252,292,955 (including approximately $2,293,000 of interest income) consisting of money market funds, which primarily invest in U.S. Treasury securities. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2020, we withdrew $954,463 of interest earned on the Trust Account, of which $482,347 was withdrawn during the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $1,071,206. Net loss of $4,452,960 was offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $909,361. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $4,291,115 of cash from operating activities.
For the period from February 28, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $712,642. Net income of $1,403,487 was offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $2,338,057. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $221,928 of cash from operating activities.
In connection with the Business Combination, Legacy Billtrust stockholders received aggregate consideration with a value equal to $1,189,502,229, which consists of (i) $90,061,329 in cash at Closing of the Business Combination and (ii) $1,099,440,900 in South Mountain Class A Common Stock and South Mountain Class C Common Stock at Closing of the Business Combination, or 109,944,090 shares based on an assumed share price of $10 per share.
In connection with the Business Combination, Legacy Billtrust stockholders will receive contingent consideration of up to 12,000,000 Earnout Shares contingent upon achieving certain market share price milestones within a period of five years post Business Combination. The market share price milestones were achieved in February 2021 and released from the lock-up. An additional 500,000 shares of Class 1 Common Stock were issued as part of the earn-out in connection with the Business Combination in February 2021.
In connection with the Business Combination, 1,875,000 shares of South Mountain Class A Common Stock previously issued to the Sponsor and its affiliates in exchange of the founder shares were placed in a lock-up and will be released from a lock-up upon achieving certain market share price milestones within a period of five years post-Closing. These shares will be forfeited if the set milestones are not reached.
On October 18, 2020, the Subscribers agreed to purchase from the Company an aggregate of 20,000,000 PIPE Shares, for a purchase price of $10.00 per share and an aggregate purchase price of $200,000,000, pursuant to the Subscription Agreements entered into effective as of October 18, 2020. Pursuant to the Subscription Agreements, the Company gave certain registration rights to the Subscribers with respect to the PIPE Shares. The sale of PIPE Shares was consummated concurrently with the Closing.
At the Closing, the Sponsor forfeited 1,250,000 shares of its South Mountain Class B common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (the “South Mountain Class B Common Stock”) that it owned as of the Closing.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $25,000 for office space, administrative and support services, provided to the Company (the “Administrative Support Agreement”). We began incurring these fees on June 19, 2019. The Administrative Support Agreement was terminated upon the Closing of the Business Combination.
The underwriter was entitled to a deferred fee of 3.5% of the gross proceeds from the Units sold in the IPO, or $7,970,375. The deferred fee was paid upon the closing of the Business Combination from the amounts held in the Trust Account.
Critical Accounting Policies Before the Business Combination
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for the South Mountain Class A Common Stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of South Mountain Class A Common Stock subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Common Stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Common Stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Loss Per Common Share
The Company’s statement of operations includes a presentation of income (loss) per share for common shares subject to possible redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income (loss) per share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted, for Common Stock subject to possible redemption is calculated by dividing the proportionate share of income or loss on marketable securities held by the Trust Account, net of applicable franchise and income taxes, by the weighted average number of Common Stock subject to possible redemption outstanding since original issuance.
Net loss per share, basic and diluted, for non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the net loss, adjusted for income or loss on marketable securities attributable to Common Stock subject to possible redemption, by the weighted average number of non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period.
Non-redeemable common stock includes Founder Shares and non-redeemable shares of Common Stock as these shares do not have any redemption features. Non-redeemable common stock participates in the income or loss on marketable securities based on non-redeemable common stock shares’ proportionate interest.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies After the Business Combination
Revenue Recognition
Billtrust’s revenues are primarily subscription and transaction fees which are recurring in nature, services and other, and reimbursable costs. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that Billtrust determines are within the scope of the revenue standard, Billtrust performs the following five steps:
1.
Identify the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
2.
Identify the performance obligations in the contract;
3.
Determine the transaction price;
4.
Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
5.
Recognize revenue when, or as, Billtrust satisfies a performance obligation.
Subscription and transaction fees revenue
Subscription and transaction fees are derived primarily from a hosted software as a service (SaaS) platform that enables billings and payment processing on behalf of customers. Billtrust’s transaction fees for certain services are billed monthly based on the volume of items processed each month at a contractual rate per item processed.
Hosted solutions are provided without licensing perpetual rights to the software. These solutions are integral to the overall service arrangement and are billed as a subscription fee as part of the overall service agreement with the customer. Subscription fees from hosted solutions are recognized monthly over the customer agreement term beginning on the date Billtrust’s solution is made available to the customer.
Transaction revenue is recognized concurrent with processing of the related transactions, which is when revenue is earned. The customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits as Billtrust performs. Transaction fees include per-item processing fees charged at contracted rates based on the number of envelopes, invoices delivered or payments processed.
Services and other
Revenues related to upfront implementation services for new customers or new products for existing customers are recognized ratably over the estimated period of the customer relationship, which is estimated to be five years other than for customer relationships from acquisitions which range from two to four years.
In addition to implementation fees, professional services fees also include consulting services provided to customers on a time and materials basis. Revenues from consulting services are recognized as the services are completed based on their standalone value.
Significant judgements
Billtrust determines standalone selling price for all material performance obligations using observable inputs, such as the price of subsequent years of the contract, standalone sales and historical contract pricing. Some customers have the option to purchase additional subscription or transaction services at a stated price. These options are evaluated on a case-by-case basis but generally do not provide a material right as they are priced within a range of prices provided to other customers for the same products and, as such, would not result in a separate performance obligation.
When the timing of revenue recognition differs from the timing of invoicing, i.e. implementation services, Billtrust uses judgment to determine whether the contract includes a significant financing component requiring adjustment to the transaction price. Various factors are considered in this determination including the duration of the contract, payment terms, and other circumstances. Generally, Billtrust determined that contracts related to upfront implementation services do not include a significant financing component. Billtrust applies the practical expedient for instances where, at contract inception, the expected timing difference between when promised goods or services are transferred and associated payment will be one year or less.
Reimbursable costs
Billtrust records reimbursable costs, such as postage, on a gross basis as revenue as well as corresponding expense on an accrual basis as it allocates the costs based on specific types of postage and related savings to customers, but cannot specifically identify each postage invoice to specific customers. In cases where customer specific expenses are directly identifiable, they are shown on a net basis. Because the cost of such revenue is equal to the revenue, it does not impact loss from operations or net loss.
Deferred revenue
Deferred revenue relates primarily to implementation fees for new customers or new services, which are being recognized ratably over the estimated term of the customer relationship, which is generally five years for Billtrust’s core billing and payments and cash application services, and two to four years for other services related to acquisitions in 2018 and 2019.
Deferred commissions
Prior to the adoption of ASC 606 and the related ASC 340-40, commissions were generally expensed over the first year of services commencing with the date a customer’s contracted revenue was invoiced. Upon adoption of ASC 606, commission costs are deferred and then amortized over a period of benefit of four to five years. Billtrust determined the period of benefit by taking into consideration its past experience with customers and the average customer life of acquired customers (four years, compared to five years for all remaining customers), future cash flows expected from customers, industry peers and other available information.
Business combinations and intangible assets
Business combinations are accounted for in accordance with the acquisition method. Billtrust recognizes separately from goodwill the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed at its acquisition date fair values. In connection with acquisitions the identifiable intangible assets purchased typically consist of customer relationships, technology, trade names and non-compete agreements. While Billtrust uses its best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date, its estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, Billtrust records adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill.
Critical estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include but are not limited to future expected cash flows from customer relationships, covenants not to compete and acquired developed technologies, and discount rates. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates.
Goodwill and intangible assets acquired in a purchase business combination and determined to have an indefinite useful life are not amortized, but instead are tested for impairment at least annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value amount of these assets might not be fully recoverable. Billtrust has determined that such businesses constitute a single reporting unit. Besides goodwill, Billtrust has no other intangible assets with indefinite lives.
Billtrust performs its annual impairment test as of October 1. During Billtrust’s annual impairment tests of goodwill in 2020, 2019 and 2018, management did not identify any indications of impairment, and no adverse events have occurred since the measurement date. Although Billtrust has made its best estimates based upon current information, actual results could materially differ from the estimates and assumptions developed by management. Accordingly, it is reasonably possible that the estimates made in Billtrust’s financial statements have been, or will be, materially and adversely impacted in the near term as a result of these conditions, and if so, Billtrust may be subject to future impairment losses related to long-lived assets as well as changes to valuations.
Stock based compensation
Billtrust recognizes expense for the estimated fair value of stock based compensation awards on a straight-line basis over the award’s vesting period. Billtrust determines the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes model, which requires Billtrust to estimate key assumptions such as stock price volatility, expected terms, risk-free interest rates and dividend yield. Calculating the fair value of the stock-based options requires the input of subjective assumptions. These assumptions include:
•
Expected term - Billtrust estimates the expected life of stock options granted based on its historical experience, which Billtrust believes is representative of the actual characteristics of the awards.
•
Expected volatility - Billtrust estimates the volatility of the common stock of Billtrust (“Billtrust Common Stock”) on the date of grant based on the historic volatility of comparable companies in its industry.
•
Risk-free interest rate - Billtrust selected the risk-free interest rate based on yields from United States Treasury zero-coupon issues with a term consistent with the expected life of the awards in effect at the time of grant.
•
Expected dividend yield - Billtrust has never declared nor paid any cash dividends on Billtrust Common Stock and has no plan to do so. Consequently, it used an expected dividend yield of zero.
Contingencies
During the normal course of business, Billtrust is occasionally involved with various claims and litigation. Reserves are established in connection with such matters when a loss is probable and the amount of such loss can be reasonably estimated, including for indemnifications with customers or other parties as a result of contractual agreements.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 no material reserves were recorded. No reserves are established for losses which are only reasonably possible. The determination of probability and the estimation of the actual amount of any such loss is inherently unpredictable, and it is therefore possible that the eventual outcome of such claims and litigation could exceed the estimated reserves, if any. Based upon Billtrust’s experience, current information and applicable law, it does not believe it is reasonably possible that any proceedings or possible related claims will have a material effect on its financial statements.