Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition. This MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements (Notes).
Our fiscal year ends on April 30. Fiscal years 2021 and 2020 consisted of 52 weeks and ended on April 30, 2021 and April 30, 2020, respectively. All references to years in this MD&A represent fiscal years unless otherwise noted.
Management Overview
Management is focused on increasing long-term shareholder value from increased cash generation, earnings growth, and prudently managing capital expenditures. We plan to do this by continuing to drive increased revenues from product and service innovations, strategic acquisitions, and targeted marketing programs.
We have two separate reporting segments: Aerospace Products and Professional Services. Aerospace Products and Professional Services do not share the same customers and suppliers and have substantially distinct businesses. The Aerospace Products operating segment provides products and services in the aerospace industry. Companies in Aerospace Products derive their revenue from system design, engineering, manufacturing, integration, installation, repairing, overhauling, servicing and distribution of aerostructures, avionics, aircraft components, accessories, subassemblies and systems. The Professional Services operating segment provides services in the gaming industry. Professional Services companies manage a gaming and entertainment facility and provide architectural and engineering services. These reporting segments operate through various subsidiaries and affiliates listed on Exhibit 21 to this Form 10-K.
COVID-19 Overview:
The pandemic caused by the disease COVID-19 was first reported in Wuhan, China in December 2019 and has since spread throughout the world. Financial markets have been volatile in 2020 and 2021, primarily due to uncertainty with respect to the severity and duration of the pandemic.
The pandemic resulted in federal, state and local governments around the world implementing increasingly stringent measures to help control the spread of the virus, including quarantines, “shelter in place” and “stay at home” orders, travel restrictions or bans, business curtailments, school closures, and other protective measures.
Our aerospace segment qualified as “essential” under applicable federal guidance and state orders. The facilities have continued operations. We are enforcing social distancing and enhanced health, safety and sanitization measures in accordance with guidelines from the Center for Disease Control (the “CDC”).
Our professional services operations at the Boot Hill Casino & Resort was forced to close from March 18, 2020 thru May 21, 2020. The casino reopened to the public on May 22, with reduced hours to allow for extra time for cleaning and sanitizing in accordance with CDC guidelines and limited number of games and food offerings. We are also continuing to enforce social distancing measures throughout the casinos. Since reopening the Boot Hill Casino & Resort we have experienced lower customer headcount, which has been partially off-set by a larger net revenue per customer. We are experiencing, and expect to continue experiencing, lower demand for our professional services and increased costs and other challenges related to COVID-19 that adversely affects our business.
BHCMC, LLC, a subsidiary in the professional services segment, received a loan in the principal amount of $2,001,000 (the “SBA Loan”) under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”), which was established under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). The intent and purpose of the PPP is to support companies during the COVID-19 pandemic by providing funds for certain specified business expenses, with a focus on payroll. We have used the proceeds from the SBA Loan to maintain our payroll and retain casino staff. With the assistance of the SBA Loan, we believe we have sufficient liquidity at this time to maintain our business operations during this difficult time. In June 2021, the Company received notice of forgiveness from the Small Business Administration for its loan.
The COVID-19 pandemic impacted our business operations and financial results beginning in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 and continues to impact us in fiscal 2021. We face numerous uncertainties in estimating the direct and indirect effects on our present and future business operations, financial condition, results of operations, and liquidity. Due to several rapidly changing variables related to the COVID-19 pandemic, we cannot reasonably estimate future economic trends and the timing of when stability will return. Refer to Item 1A. “Risk Factors” for a disclosure of risk factors related to COVID-19.
As schools, businesses and the economy in general have slowly reopened, and vaccinations rates in our operating territory improve and new infections decline, we have continued to see improvements in customer headcount. However, the unpredictable nature of the pandemic could again lead to closures, decreased traffic and demand, and increased COVID-19- related operating expenses, for the foreseeable future. While COVID-19 has resulted in, and will continue to bring, significant challenges and uncertainty to our operating environment, we believe that our resilient business model and the strength of our brand and balance sheet position us well to emerge from the pandemic.
Results Overview
Our fiscal 2021 revenue decreased 7% to $61.5 million compared to $65.9 million in fiscal 2020. In fiscal 2021 the Professional Services revenue increased 7%. There was a decrease of 17% in the Aerospace Products revenue in fiscal 2021.
Our fiscal 2021 net income was $2.5 million compared to net income of $3.2 million in fiscal 2020. Earnings per share was $0.02 for fiscal 2021 compared to $0.06 in fiscal 2020. We continue focusing on our margin expansion initiatives, including efficiencies in our implementation and operational processes and controlling general and administrative expenses. The fiscal 2021 operating income was 10%, a decrease from 13% in fiscal 2020.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020
Revenue:
Revenue decreased to $61.5 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $65.9 million in fiscal 2020. See "Operations by Segment" below for a discussion of the primary reasons for the increase in revenue.
Professional Services derives its revenue from (a) professional management services in the gaming industry through Butler National Service Corporation ("BNSC") and BHCMC, LLC ("BHCMC"), and (b) professional architectural, engineering and management support services through BCS Design, Inc. ("BCS"). Revenue from Professional Services increased 7% to $30.2 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $28.3 million in fiscal 2020.
Aerospace Products derives its revenue by designing, engineering, manufacturing, installing, servicing and repairing products for classic and current production aircraft. Aerospace Products revenue decreased 17% to $31.3 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $37.6 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease in revenue is primarily due to a decrease in aircraft avionics and special mission electronics business of $9.9 million and an increase in aircraft modification business of $3.6 million.
Costs and expenses:
Costs and expenses related to Professional Services and Aerospace Products include the cost of engineering, labor, materials, equipment utilization, control systems, security and occupancy.
Costs and expenses decreased 3% in fiscal 2021 to $55.6 million compared to $57.6 million in fiscal 2020. Costs and expenses were 90% of total revenue in fiscal 2021, compared to 87% of total revenue in fiscal 2020.
Marketing and advertising expenses as a percent of total revenue was 6% in fiscal 2021, as compared to 6% in fiscal 2020. These expenses decreased 8% to $3.8 million in fiscal 2021, from $4.1 million in fiscal 2020. Marketing and advertising expenses include advertising, sales and marketing labor, gaming development costs, and casino and product promotions.
Employee benefits expenses as a percent of total revenue was 4% in fiscal 2021, compared to 4% in fiscal 2020. These expenses decreased 1% to $2.6 million in fiscal 2021, from $2.6 million in fiscal 2020. These expenses include the employers' share of all federal, state and local taxes, paid time off for vacation, holidays and illness, employee health and life insurance programs and employer matching contributions to retirement plans.
Depreciation and amortization as a percent of total revenue was 6% in fiscal 2021, compared to 6% in fiscal 2020. These expenses decreased to $3.5 million in fiscal 2021, from $4.2 million in fiscal 2020. These expenses include depreciation related to owned assets being depreciated over various useful lives and amortization of intangible items including the Kansas privilege fee related to the Boot Hill Casino being expensed over the term of the gaming contract with the State of Kansas. BHCMC, LLC depreciation and amortization expense for fiscal 2021 was $3.1 million compared to $3.7 million in fiscal 2020.
General, administrative and other expenses as a percent of total revenue was 13% in fiscal 2021, compared to 13% in fiscal 2020. These expenses decreased 1% to $8.2 million in fiscal 2021, from $8.3 million in fiscal 2020.
Other income (expense):
Interest and other income (expense) were ($3.1) million in fiscal 2021 compared with interest and other income (expense) of ($3.7)million in fiscal 2020, a decrease of $595, from fiscal 2020 to fiscal 2021.
Operations by Segment
We have two operating segments, Professional Services and Aerospace Products. The Professional Services segment includes revenue contributions and expenditures associated with casino management services and professional architectural, engineering and management support services. Aerospace Products derives its revenue by designing, engineering, manufacturing, installing, servicing and repairing products for classic and current production aircraft.
The following table presents a summary of our operating segment information for fiscal years 2021 and 2020:
Professional Services
●
Revenue from Professional Services increased 7% to $30.2 million in fiscal 2021 from $28.3 million in fiscal 2020.
In fiscal 2021 Boot Hill Casino received gross receipts for the State of Kansas of $39.3 million compared to $35.9 million in fiscal 2020. Mandated fees, taxes and distributions reduced gross receipts by $12.5 million resulting in gaming revenue of $26.8 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $24.3 million in fiscal 2020, a decrease of 13%. Non-gaming revenue at Boot Hill Casino was $3.1 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $3.7 million in fiscal 2020.
The remaining management and Professional Services revenue includes professional management services in the gaming industry, and licensed architectural services. Professional Services revenue excluding Boot Hill Casino decreased 20% to $254 in fiscal 2021 compared to $316 in fiscal 2020.
●
Costs decreased 8% in fiscal 2021 to $14.2 million compared to $15.5 million in fiscal 2020. Costs were 47% of segment total revenue in fiscal 2021, compared to 55% of segment total revenue in fiscal 2020.
●
Expenses decreased 5% in fiscal 2021 to $10.9 million compared to $11.5 million in fiscal 2020. Expenses were 36% of segment total revenue in fiscal 2021, compared to 41% of segment total revenue in fiscal 2020.
Aerospace Products
●
Revenue decreased 17% to $31.3 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $37.6 million in fiscal 2020. This $6.3 million decrease was due to a decrease in our aircraft avionics and special mission electronics business of $9.9 million and an increase in our aircraft modification business of $3.6 million. We have invested in the development of several STCs. These STCs are state of the art avionics and we are aggressively marketing both domestically and internationally.
●
Costs increased 2% to $23.3 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $22.9 million in fiscal 2020. Costs were 74% of segment total revenue in fiscal 2021, compared to 61% of segment total revenue in fiscal 2020.
●
Expenses decreased 7% in fiscal 2021 to $7.1 million compared to $7.7 million in fiscal 2020. Expenses were 23% of segment total revenue in fiscal 2021, compared to 20% of segment total revenue in fiscal 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources (in thousands)
At April 30, 2021, the Company has a line of credit in the form of a promissory note totaling $2,000. The unused line at April 30, 2021 was $2,000. There were no advances made on the line of credit during the year ended April 30, 2021. The line of credit is due on demand and is collateralized by a first and second position on all assets of the Company.
At April 30, 2021, there is one note with an interest rate of 6.25% collateralized by an aircraft security agreement totaling $1,138. This note was used to purchase an aircraft. This note matures in January 2023.
At April 30, 2021, there is one note collateralized by equipment with a balance of $21. The interest rate on this note is 4.50%. This note matures in April 2022.
One note for $202 remains for real estate purchased in Dodge City, Kansas. The interest rate on this note is 6.25%. This note matures in June 2024.
One note with Academy Bank, N.A. for $34.417 collateralized by all of BHCMC's assets and compensation under the State management contract with an interest rate of 5.25% payable over seven years with an initial twenty-year amortization and a balloon payment of approximately $19,250 at the end of seven years. The second note with Academy Bank, N.A. for $6,533 collateralized by all of BHCMC's assets and compensation under the State management contract with an interest rate of 5.75% payable in full over five years.
At April 30, 2021, there is a note payable collateralized by real estate with a balance of $1,267. The interest rate on this note is at LIBOR plus 1.75%. This note matures in March 2029.
At April 30, 2021, there is a note payable collateralized by real estate with a balance of $581. The interest rate on this note is at LIBOR plus 1.75%. This note matures in March 2029.
In May 2020, the Company received a Paycheck Protection Program loan for $2,001 for the professional services segment. In June 2021, the Company received notice of forgiveness from the Small Business Administration.
We are not in default of any of our notes as of April 30, 2021 or July 9, 2021.
We believe that our current banks will provide the necessary capital for our business operations. However, we continue to maintain contact with other banks that have an interest in funding our working capital needs to continue our growth in operations in 2021 and beyond.
Our wholly owned subsidiary, Butler National Service Corporation continues friendly discussions with the other member of BHCMC, LLC to explore the possible acquisition by Butler National Service Corporation of the other member's 20% equity interest in BHCMC, LLC. If and when a definitive agreement is reached, such definitive agreement and a press release concerning the acquisition will be issued to describe the terms of the agreement and the intentions of the members. We have not set a definitive timetable for our discussions and there can be no assurances that the process will result in any transaction being announced or completed. At present there is no disagreement between the members of BHCMC, LLC. We do not plan to disclose or comment on developments until further disclosure is deemed appropriate.
Analysis and Discussion of Cash Flow
During fiscal 2021 our cash position increased by $5.2 million. Net income was $2.5 million. Cash flows from operating activities provided $13.5 million. Non-cash activities consisting of depreciation and amortization contributed $5.9 million, 401(k) stock issues contributed $721 and deferred compensation contributed $592. Deferred income taxes decreased our cash position by $225. Accounts receivable increased our cash position by $823. Inventories decreased our cash position by $47. Accounts payable and contract liability increased our cash position by $4.5 million. Contract assets decreased our cash position by $226. Prepaid expenses and other assets increased our cash by $123, while gaming facility mandated payments increased our cash by an additional $120. Accrued liabilities, other liabilities and income tax payable decreased our cash position by $712. Lease liability decreased our cash position by $659.
Cash used in investing activities was $7.0 million. We invested $627 to purchase aircraft, $2.7 million towards STCs, $1.2 million in construction of a new hangar, and $2.3 million on equipment and furnishings.
Cash used in financing activities was $1.2 million. We increased our debt by $2.5 million. We made repayments on our debt of $3.4 million. We reduced our lease liability by $140. We purchased company stock of $196. The stock acquired was placed in treasury.
Critical Accounting Estimates:
We believe that there are several accounting policies that are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies affect the reported amount of revenue and other significant areas involving management judgments and estimates. These significant accounting policies relate to revenue recognition, the use of estimates, long-lived assets, and Supplemental Type Certificates. These policies and our procedures related to these policies are described in detail below and under specific areas within this "Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations." In addition, Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements expands upon discussion of our accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition: Revenue Recognition: ASC Topic 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers”
Under ASC 606, revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised services in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those services. To achieve this core principal, the Company applies the following five steps:
1)
Identify the contract, or contracts, with a customer
A contract with a customer exists when (i) the Company enters into an enforceable contract with a customer that defines each party’s rights regarding the services to be transferred and identifies the payment terms related to these services, (ii) the contract has commercial substance and (iii) the Company determines that collection of substantially all consideration for services that are transferred is probable based on the customer’s intent and ability to pay the promised consideration.
2)
Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
At contract inception, an entity shall assess the goods or services promised in a contract with a customer and shall identify as a performance obligation each promise to transfer to the customer. Performance obligations promised in a contract are identified based on the services that will be transferred to the customer that are both capable of being distinct, whereby the customer can benefit from the service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available from third parties or from the Company, and are distinct in the context of the contract, whereby the transfer of the services is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract. To the extent a contract includes multiple promised services, the Company must apply judgment to determine whether promised services are capable of being distinct and distinct in the context of the contract. If these criteria are not met the promised services are accounted for as a combined performance obligation.
3)
Determination of the transaction price
The transaction price is the amount that an entity allocates to the performance obligations identified in the contract and, therefore, represents the amount of revenue recognized as those performance obligations are satisfied. The transaction price is the amount of consideration to which an entity expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring promised goods or services to a customer.
4)
Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
Once a contract and associated performance obligations have been identified and the transaction price has been determined, ASC 606 requires an entity to allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation identified. This is generally done in proportion to the standalone selling prices of each performance obligation (i.e., on a relative standalone selling price basis). As a result, any discount within the contract generally is allocated proportionally to all the separate performance obligations in the contract. The Company is applying the right to invoice practical expedient to recognize revenue. As a result, the entity bypasses the steps of determining the transaction price, allocating that transaction price and determining when to recognize revenue as it will recognize revenue as billed by multiplying the price assigned to the good or service, by the units.
5)
Recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation
Revenue is recognized when or as performance obligations are satisfied by transferring control of a promised good or service to a customer. Control transfers either over time or at a point in time. Revenue is recognized when control of the promised services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services.
Aircraft modifications are performed under fixed-price contracts. Revenue from fixed-priced contracts are recognized on the percentage-of-completion method, measured by the direct labor incurred compared to total estimated direct labor.
Revenue from Avionics products are recognized when shipped. Payment for these Avionics products is due within 30 days of the invoice date after shipment. Revenue from Gaming Management and other Corporate/Professional Services is recognized as the service is rendered.
Regarding warranties and returns, our products are special order and are not suitable for return. Our products are unique upon installation and tested prior to their release to the customer and acceptance by the customer. In the rare event of a warranty claim, the claim is processed through the normal course of business and may include additional charges to the customer. In our opinion, any future warranty work would not be material to the consolidated financial statements.
Gaming revenue is the gross gaming win as reported by the Kansas Lottery casino reporting systems, less the mandated payments by and for the State of Kansas. Electronic games-slots and table games revenue is the aggregate of gaming wins and losses. Liabilities are recognized for chips and "ticket-in, ticket-out" coupons in the customers' possession, and for accruals related to anticipated payout of progressive jackpots. Progressive gaming machines, which contain base jackpots that increase at a progressive rate based on the number of coins played, are deducted from revenue as the value of jackpots increase. Food, beverage, and other revenue is recorded when the service is received and paid.
Use of Estimates: The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty. Therefore, the determination of estimates requires the exercise of judgment. Actual results could differ from those estimates, and any such differences may be material to our consolidated financial statements. Significant estimates include assumptions about collection of accounts receivable, the valuation, and recognition of stock-based compensation expense, valuation for deferred tax assets and useful life of fixed assets.
Long-lived Assets: The Company accounts for its long-lived assets in accordance with ASC Topic 360-10, "Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets." ASC Topic 360-10 requires that long-lived assets be reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the historical cost carrying value of an asset may no longer be appropriate. The Company assesses recoverability of the carrying value of an asset by estimating the future net cash flows expected to result from the asset, including eventual disposition. If the future net cash flows are less than the carrying value of the asset, an impairment loss is recorded equal to the difference between the asset's carrying value and fair value or disposable value.
Supplemental Type Certificates: Supplemental Type Certificates (STCs) are authorizations granted by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) for specific modification of a certain aircraft. The STC authorizes us to perform modifications, installations, and assemblies on applicable customer-owned aircraft. Costs incurred to obtain STCs are capitalized and subsequently amortized over a seven year life. The legal life of an STC is indefinite.
Changing Prices and Inflation
We have experienced upward pressure from inflation in fiscal year 2021. From fiscal year 2020 to fiscal year 2021 a majority of the increases we experienced were in material costs. This additional cost may not be transferable to our customers resulting in lower income in the future. We anticipate labor rates, fuel costs and possibly interest rates to rise in fiscal years 2021 and 2022.
Contractual Obligations
Not applicable.