Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following is management’s discussion and analysis of the financial condition as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, of First Busey and its subsidiaries. It should be read in conjunction with “Item 1. Business,” “Item 6. Selected Financial Data,” the Consolidated Financial Statements and the related Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report.
Detailed discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operation for 2020 as compared to 2019 can be found below. Comparison of 2019 to 2018 can be found in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of the 2019 Annual Report.
Impact of COVID-19
In the face of the challenges and risks posed by COVID-19, the Company remains resolute in its focus on protecting the strength and flexibility of its balance sheet. The progression of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States began to negatively impact the Company’s results of operations during the first quarter of 2020. In future quarters, COVID-19 is expected to have a complex and continued adverse impact on the economy, the banking industry and First Busey, all subject to a high degree of uncertainty as it relates to both duration and severity. Primary areas of potential future impact to the Company may include further margin compression, increased provision expense, a deterioration in credit quality and lower fees for customer services.
Effects on Our Market Areas.
Our commercial and consumer banking products and services are delivered in Illinois, Missouri, Indiana, and Florida. Each state has experienced a dramatic increase in unemployment claims as a result of the curtailment of business activities. Each state has taken different steps to reopen after COVID-19 thrust the country into lockdown starting in March 2020, and these efforts are subject to changes and delays based on case monitoring in each state.
Policy and Regulatory Developments
Federal, state, and local governments, and regulatory authorities have enacted and issued a range of policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the following:
● The Federal Reserve decreased the Federal Funds Target Rate by 50 basis points on March 3, 2020, and by another 100 basis points on March 15, 2020.
● On March 27, 2020, President Trump signed the CARES Act, which established a $2 trillion economic stimulus package, including cash payments to individuals, supplemental unemployment insurance benefits and a $349 billion loan program administered through the SBA, referred to as PPP. Under the PPP, small businesses, sole proprietorships, independent contractors, and self-employed individuals could apply for loans from existing SBA lenders and other approved regulated lenders that enroll in the program, subject to limitations and eligibility criteria. On April 24, 2020, President Trump signed the Paycheck Protection Program and Health Care Enhancement Act, which authorized an additional $310 billion of PPP loans. The Bank participated as a lender in this program. In addition, the CARES Act provides financial institutions the option to temporarily suspend certain requirements under GAAP related to TDRs for a limited period of time to account for the effects of COVID-19.
● On April 7, 2020, federal banking regulators issued a revised Interagency Statement which, among other things, encouraged financial institutions to work prudently with borrowers who are or may be unable to meet their contractual payment obligations because of the effects of COVID-19. Further, the statement made it clear that institutions generally do not need to categorize COVID-19-related modifications as TDRs if certain requirements are met and that the agencies will not direct supervised institutions to automatically categorize all COVID-19 related loan modifications as TDRs.
● On April 9, 2020, the Federal Reserve announced additional measures aimed at supporting small and midsized business, as well as state and local governments impacted by COVID-19. The Federal Reserve announced the Main Street Business Lending Program, which provides for five loan facilities with total potential funding of up to $600 billion. The Main Street New Loan Facility, the Main Street Priority Loan Facility, and the Main Street Expanded Loan Facility are three credit facilities that provide eligible business borrowers impacted by COVID-19 with financing in amounts of $250 thousand to $300 million depending on the facility. Similarly, the Nonprofit Organization New Loan Facility and the Nonprofit Organization Expanded Loan Facility provide eligible not-for-profit organizations with financing in amounts of $250 thousand to $10 million. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had minimal participation in the Main Street Business Lending Program.
● On November 20, 2020, federal bank regulatory agencies issued an Interim Final Rule that provided temporary relief for certain community banking organizations as a result of growth in size from the COVID-19 response. Under the Interim Final Rule, which applies to financial institutions with less than $10.0 billion in total assets as of December 31, 2019, the asset growth of such banks in 2020 and 2021 will not trigger some of the new regulatory requirements until January 1, 2022.
● On December 27, 2020, President Trump signed the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, a $900 billion COVID-19 relief package that included an additional $285 billion in PPP funding, and further extended TDR relief from the CARES Act. On January 6, 2021, the SBA issued Interim Final Rules related to first and second draw loans under the PPP. The Company is actively assisting customers under the extended PPP programs.
Effects on Our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic will continue to have a significant impact on our business. In particular, we anticipate that a significant portion of the Bank’s borrowers in the hotel, restaurant, transportation, long-term healthcare, and retail industries will continue to endure significant economic distress. This will adversely affect their ability to repay existing indebtedness and could adversely impact the value of collateral pledged to Busey Bank. These developments, together with economic conditions generally, are also expected to impact our commercial real estate portfolio, particularly with respect to real estate with exposure to these industries, our consumer loan business and loan portfolio, and the value of certain collateral securing our loans. As a result, we anticipate that our financial condition, capital levels and results of operations could be significantly adversely affected.
Our Response
We have taken, and continue to take, numerous steps in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the following:
● First Busey offered a Financial Relief Program to qualifying customers designed to alleviate some of the financial hardships that they faced as a result of COVID-19. This program offered solutions for all types of customers-including retail, personal loan, and mortgage-as well as commercial clients and small businesses. The program included options for loan payment deferrals as well as certain fee waivers. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had 98 commercial loans on payment deferrals representing $208.6 million in loans, consisting of $37.1 million in full payment deferrals, $85.3 million in interest only deferrals, and $86.2 million in blended deferrals. In addition, as of December 31, 2020 the Company had 351 mortgage/personal loans on payment deferrals representing $47.7 million in loans and an additional loan for $0.1 million related to a purchased home equity lines of credit pool.
● First Busey has served as a bridge for the PPP, actively helping existing and new business clients sign up for this important financial resource, and originated a total of $749.4 million in PPP loans representing 4,569 new and existing customers. At December 31, 2020, First Busey had $451.5 million in PPP loans outstanding, with an amortized cost of $446.4 million, representing 2,922 customers. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had received approximately $287.8 million in borrower loan forgiveness from the SBA and had submitted forgiveness applications to the SBA on behalf of borrowers for another $167.4 million.
● First Busey initiated its pandemic response plan, expanding social-distancing practices and remote work capabilities to ensure the safety of its associates. The Company has also instituted a new Emergency Sick Leave policy for all full-time and part-time associates.
● First Busey suspended open-market share repurchases under its share repurchase plan on March 16, 2020. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company repurchased 123,264 shares in a private transaction in connection with the termination of the ESOP.
● First Busey completed a successful public offering on June 1, 2020 of $125.0 million of 5.25% fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes maturing in 2030. This enhanced the Company’s strong liquidity position and qualifies as Tier 2 capital for regulatory purposes.
Critical Accounting Estimates
First Busey has established various accounting policies that govern the application of GAAP in the preparation of its Consolidated Financial Statements. Significant accounting policies are described in “Note 1. Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Critical accounting estimates are those that are critical to the portrayal and understanding of First Busey’s financial condition and results of operations and require management to make assumptions that are difficult, subjective, or complex. These estimates involve judgments, assumptions, and uncertainties that are susceptible to change. In the event that different assumptions or conditions were to prevail, and depending on the severity of such changes, the possibility of a materially different financial condition or materially different results of operations is a reasonable likelihood. Further, changes in accounting standards could impact the Company’s critical accounting estimates. The following policies could be deemed critical:
Fair Value of Debt Securities Available for Sale. The fair values of debt securities available for sale are measurements from an independent pricing service and are based on observable data that may include dealer quotes, market spreads, cash flows, the U.S. Treasury yield curve, live trading levels, trade execution data, market consensus prepayment speeds, credit information, and the security’s terms and conditions, among other things. The use of different judgments and estimates to determine the fair value of securities could result in a different fair value estimate.
Realized securities gains or losses are reported in the Consolidated Statements of Income. The cost of securities sold is based on the specific identification method.
Debt securities available for sale are not within the scope of CECL, however, the accounting for credit losses on these securities is affected by ASC 326-30. A debt security available for sale is impaired if the fair value of the security declines below its amortized cost basis. To determine the appropriate accounting, the Company must first determine if it intends to sell the security or if it is more likely than not that it will be required to sell the security before the fair value increases to at least the amortized cost basis. If either of those selling events is expected, the Company will write down the amortized cost basis of the security to its fair value. This is achieved by writing off any previously recorded allowance, if applicable, and recognizing any incremental impairment through earnings. If the Company does not intend to sell the security nor believes it more likely than not will be required to sell the security before the fair value recovers to the amortized cost basis, the Company must determine whether any of the decline in fair value has resulted from a credit loss, or if it is entirely the result of noncredit factors.
The Company considers the following factors in assessing whether the decline is due to a credit loss:
● Extent to which the fair value is less than the amortized cost basis.
● Adverse conditions specifically related to the security, an industry, or a geographic area (for example, changes in the financial condition of the issuer of the security, or in the case of an asset-backed debt security, in the financial condition of the underlying loan obligors).
● Payment structure of the debt security and the likelihood of the issuer being able to make payments that increase in the future.
● Failure of the issuer of the security to make scheduled interest or principal payments.
● Any changes to the rating of the security by a rating agency.
Impairment related to a credit loss must be measured using the discounted cash flow method. Credit loss recognition is limited to the fair value of the security. The impairment is recognized by establishing an allowance through provision for credit losses. Impairment related to noncredit factors is recognized in accumulated other comprehensive income, net of applicable taxes.
Fair Value of Assets Acquired and Liabilities Assumed in Business Combinations. Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting. Under the acquisition method of accounting, assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their estimated fair value on the date of acquisition. Fair values are determined based on the definition of “fair value” defined in ASC 820 as “the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.”
The fair value of a loan portfolio acquired in a business combination generally requires greater levels of management estimates and judgment than other assets acquired or liabilities assumed. Acquired loans are in the scope of ASC 326. However, the offset to record the allowance at the date of acquisition on acquired loans depends on whether or not the loan is classified as PCD. The allowance for PCD loans is recorded through a gross-up effect, while the allowance for acquired non-PCD loans is recorded through provision expense, consistent with originated loans. Thus, the determination of which loans are PCD and non-PCD can have a significant effect on the accounting for these loans.
Goodwill. Goodwill represents the excess of purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired using the acquisition method of accounting. Determining the fair value often involves estimates based on third-party valuations, such as appraisals, or internal valuations based on discounted cash flow analyses or other valuation techniques. Goodwill is not amortized, instead, the Company assess the potential for impairment on an annual basis or more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired. The Company will continue to monitor events around COVID-19 and its potential impact on goodwill.
Income Taxes. The Company estimates income tax expense based on amounts expected to be owed to federal and state tax jurisdictions. Estimated income tax expense is reported in the Consolidated Statements of Income. Accrued and deferred taxes, as reported in other assets or other liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets, represent the net estimated amount due to or to be received from taxing jurisdictions either currently or in the future. Management judgment is involved in estimating accrued and deferred taxes, as it may be necessary to evaluate the risks and merits of the tax treatment of transactions, filing positions, and taxable income calculations after considering tax-related statutes, regulations, and other relevant factors. Because of the complexity of tax laws and interpretations, interpretation is subject to judgment.
Allowance for Credit Losses. The Company calculates the allowance for credit losses at each reporting date. The Company recognizes an allowance for the lifetime expected credit losses for the amount the Company does not expect to collect. The measurement of expected credit losses is based on relevant information about past events, including historical experience, current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts that affect the collectability of the reported book value. The calculation also contemplates that the Company may not be able to make or obtain such forecasts for the entire life of the financial assets and requires a reversion to historical credit loss information.
In determining the allowance, management relies predominantly on a disciplined credit review and approval process that extends to the full range of the Company’s credit exposure. The allowance for credit losses must be determined on a collective (pool) basis when similar risk characteristics exists. On a case-by-case basis, the Company may conclude a loan should be evaluated on an individual basis based on the disparate risk characteristics.
Loans deemed uncollectible are charged against and reduce the allowance. A provision for credit losses is charged to current expense and acts to replenish the allowance for credit losses in order to maintain the allowance at a level that management deems adequate. Determining the allowance involves significant judgments and assumptions by
management. Because of the nature of the judgments and assumptions made by management, actual results may differ from these judgments and assumptions.
Executive Summary
Operating Results (dollars in thousands)
Operating Performance
Operating performance metrics presented in the table below have been derived from information used by management to monitor and manage the financial performance of the Company (dollars in thousands, except per share amounts):
(1) See Non-GAAP Financial Information.
In accordance with the Company’s previously announced plans, 12 banking centers were closed on October 23, 2020, as part of the Company’s efforts to ensure a balance between its physical banking center network and robust digital banking services while also optimizing operating efficiency. These actions reduced the Company’s banking centers in operation from 80 to 68.
The Company views certain non-operating items, including acquisition-related and restructuring charges, as adjustments to net income reported under GAAP. Non-operating pretax adjustments for 2020 were $1.4 million of expenses related to acquisitions and $9.3 million of expenses related to other restructuring costs. The reconciliation of non-GAAP measures (including adjusted pre-provision net revenue, adjusted net income, adjusted earnings per share, adjusted return on average assets, adjusted net interest margin, adjusted efficiency ratio, tangible common equity, tangible common equity to tangible assets, tangible book value per share, and return on average tangible common equity), which the Company believes facilitates the assessment of its financial results and peer comparability, is included in tabular form in this Annual Report. See Non-GAAP Financial Information.
Revenues from trust fees, commissions and brokers’ fees, and remittance processing activities represented 49.3% of the Company’s non-interest income in 2020, providing a balance to spread-based revenue from traditional banking
activities. Further, non-interest income, excluding net securities gains (losses) represented 29.2% of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company continues to navigate the economic environment caused by COVID-19 effectively and prudently. The Company entered this crisis from a position of strength and remains resolute in its focus on serving its customers, communities and associates while protecting its balance sheet. Nevertheless, the Company remains vigilant, given that the negative impacts of COVID-19 are expected to continue in future quarters as the course of the economic recovery remains unclear. These negative impacts may include further margin compression, increased provision expense, lower customer service fees and a deterioration in asset quality.
Results of Operation - Three Years Ended December 31, 2020
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is the difference between interest income and fees earned on earning assets and interest expense incurred on interest-bearing liabilities. Interest rate levels and volume fluctuations within earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities impact net interest income. Net interest margin is tax-equivalent net interest income as a percent of average earning assets.
Certain assets with tax favorable treatment are evaluated on a tax-equivalent basis. Tax-equivalent basis assumes an income tax rate of 21%. Tax favorable assets generally have lower contractual pre-tax yields than fully taxable assets. A tax-equivalent analysis is performed by adding the tax savings to the earnings on tax favorable assets. After factoring in the tax favorable effects of these assets, the yields may be more appropriately evaluated against alternative earning assets. In addition to yield, various other risks are factored into the evaluation process.
The following tables (dollars in thousands) show our Consolidated Average Balance Sheets, detailing the major categories of assets and liabilities, the interest income earned on interest-earning assets, the interest expense paid for the interest-bearing liabilities, and the related interest rates for the periods shown. The tables also show, for the periods indicated, a summary of the changes in interest earned and interest expense resulting from changes in volume and rates for the major components of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume, which cannot be segregated, have been allocated proportionately, based on changes due to rate and changes due to volume. All average information is provided on a daily average basis.
Average Balance Sheets and Interest Rates
(1) On a tax-equivalent basis, assuming a federal income tax rate of 21%.
(2) Non-accrual loans have been included in average portfolio loans.
(3) Interest income includes a tax-equivalent adjustment of $2.7 million, $3.0 million, and $2.3 million for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. For 2020, interest income includes $15.2 million of fees, net of deferred costs related to PPP loans.
(4) Includes short-term borrowings, long-term debt, senior and subordinated notes. Interest expense includes a non-usage fee on our revolving credit facility.
Average Balance Sheets and Interest Rates (continued)
Changes in Net Interest Income are presented in the table below:
Earning Assets, Sources of Funds, and Net Interest Margin
The Consolidated Average Balance Sheets and interest rates were impacted in 2020 by numerous factors surrounding COVID-19. The FOMC lowered Federal Funds Target Rates for the first time in 11 years on July 31, 2019, and then again on September 18, 2019 and October 30, 2019, for a combined decrease of 75 basis points during 2019. In response to the potential economic risks posed by COVID-19, the FOMC took further action during the first quarter of 2020 by lowering the Federal Funds Target Rate by 50 basis points on March 3, 2020, followed by an additional 100 basis point reduction on March 15, 2020. These rate cuts contributed to the reported decline in net interest margin, as assets, in particular commercial loans, repriced more quickly and to a greater extent than liabilities.
Net interest margin was also negatively impacted by the sizeable balance of lower-yielding PPP loans, the Company’s significant liquidity position, and the issuance of subordinated debt completed during the second quarter. Those impacts were partially offset by the Company’s efforts to lower deposit funding costs as well as the fees recognized related to the PPP loans.
The Company remains substantially core deposit funded, with solid liquidity and significant market share in the communities we serve.
Net interest spread, which represents the difference between the average rate earned on earning assets and the average rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities, was 2.83% in 2020 compared to 3.10% in 2019 and 3.23% in 2018, each on a tax equivalent basis.
Changes in average earning assets, sources of funds, and net interest margin are presented in the tables below (dollars in thousands):
Annualized net interest margins for the quarterly periods indicated were as follows:
The increase in the fourth quarter 2020 margin over the third quarter 2020 margin includes 17 basis points related to accelerated fee recognition on PPP loan forgiveness. Management attempts to mitigate the effects of an unpredictable interest-rate environment through effective portfolio management, prudent loan underwriting and operational efficiencies.
Non-interest Income
Changes in non-interest income are summarized in the tables below for the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
Total non-interest income of $118.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased $1.9 million from $116.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Wealth management fees increased to $42.9 million, or 11.3%, in 2020 compared to $38.6 million in 2019. As of December 31, 2020, assets under care were $10.2 billion compared to $9.7 billion at December 31, 2019. The Wealth Management division experienced strong new account activity in 2020. Market volatility related to COVID-19 and general economic conditions may impact fees in future quarters.
Fees for customer services decreased to $31.6 million in 2020 as compared to $36.7 million in 2019. Fees for customer services have been impacted in 2020 due to changing customer behaviors resulting from COVID-19, and to a lesser extent from fee waivers provided in connection with the Company’s Financial Relief Program.
Remittance processing revenue relates to our payment processing company, FirsTech. Remittance processing revenue of $15.4 million in 2020 increased compared to $15.0 million in 2019. Remittance processing adds important diversity to our revenue stream while widening our array of service offerings to larger commercial clients within our footprint and nationally. The Company is currently making strategic investments in FirsTech to enhance future growth.
Mortgage revenue of $13.0 million in 2020 increased $1.3 million compared to $11.7 million in 2019. A decline in prevailing market rates for mortgages contributed to increased production and associated gain on sales in recent periods. General economic conditions and interest rate volatility may impact fees in future quarters.
Income on bank owned life insurance decreased $0.4 million, or 7.2%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily as a result of a decrease in life insurance proceeds.
Other income primarily includes commercial loan sale gains, card-based incentive income, program fee income, and swap origination fee income. Other income of $8.6 million in 2020 was comparable to 2019.
Non-interest Expense (dollars in thousands)
Changes in non-interest expense are summarized in the tables below for the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
Total non-interest expense of $234.2 million in 2020 decreased by $24.6 million as compared to $258.8 million in 2019. The Company remains focused on expense discipline and has seen expense reductions as a result of its branch closures, strategic actions in response to COVID-19, and the realization of remaining expense savings from prior acquisitions.
Salaries, wages, and employee benefits were $126.7 million in 2020 compared to $140.5 million for the same period of 2019. Total full-time equivalents at December 31, 2020, was 1,346 compared to 1,531 at December 31, 2019, a decline of 12.1% year-over-year.
Data processing expense in 2020 decreased to $16.4 million compared to $21.5 million for the same period of 2019. The 2019 data processing included $2.4 million of non-operating expenses, related to the payment of merger and conversion expenses. Data processing for 2019 also includes data processing related to TheBANK from January 31, 2019, until merged with Busey Bank on October 4, 2019.
Combined net occupancy expense of premises and furniture and equipment expenses of $27.2 million in 2020 decreased as compared to $27.7 million in 2019. The Company closed 12 banking centers in October 2020. The full benefit of reduction in expenses related to these locations will be realized in future periods as those properties are divested. The Company opened four banking centers and closed six banking centers in 2019.
Professional fees of $8.4 million in 2020 decreased by $2.7 million as compared to $11.1 million in 2019. Professional fees were influenced in 2019 primarily by acquisition expenses.
Amortization of intangible assets was $10.0 million in 2020 as compared to $9.5 million in 2019 as a result of increases in intangible asset balances from acquisitions made in 2019.
Interchange expense increased $0.7 million, or 16.2%, to $4.8 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $4.1 million as of December 31, 2019, as a result of increased payment and volume activity at FirsTech.
Other expense of $40.7 million in 2020 decreased as compared to $44.3 million in 2019. Variances are across multiple expense categories, including business development and marketing expenses, fixed asset and lease impairment, and acquisition-related check card service expense.
The efficiency ratio is calculated as total non-interest expense, less amortization charges, as a percentage of tax-equivalent net interest income plus non-interest income, less security gains and losses. The efficiency ratio, which is a measure commonly used by management and the banking industry, measures the amount of expense incurred to generate a dollar of revenue. The efficiency ratio was 55.7% in 2020 as compared to 61.3% in 2019. Operating costs have been influenced by acquisition expenses and other restructuring costs and the adjusted efficiency ratio1 was 53.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with 56.4% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income Taxes
The effective income tax rate, or income taxes divided by income before taxes, was 21.7%, 23.4%, and 26.1% for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The decrease in the effective tax rate was primarily driven by an increase in tax exempt income combined with the benefits received from tax credit investments. The Company continues to monitor evolving federal and state tax legislation and its potential impact on operations on an ongoing basis.
1 For a reconciliation of efficiency ratio and adjusted efficiency ratio, non-GAAP financial measures, see Non-GAAP Financial Information.
Balance Sheet
Changes in significant Balance Sheet items are presented in the table below (dollars in thousands):
Investment Securities
Debt securities available for sale are carried at fair value. Debt securities held to maturity are carried at amortized cost. Equity securities are carried at fair value. As of December 31, 2020, the fair value of debt securities available for sale was $2.3 billion, and the amortized cost was $2.2 billion. There were $50.3 million of gross unrealized gains and $0.7 million of gross unrealized losses for a net unrealized gain of $49.6 million. The net unrealized gain, net of tax, is recorded in stockholders’ equity. As of December 31, 2020, the Company did not have any debt securities held to maturity. As of December 31, 2020, the fair value of equity securities was $5.5 million.
The composition of debt securities available for sale was as follows (dollars in thousands):
The composition of debt securities held to maturity was as follows (dollars in thousands):
Primary purposes of our investment securities portfolio are to provide a source of liquidity; to provide collateral for pledging purposes against public monies and repurchase agreements; to serve as a tool for interest rate risk positioning; and to provide a source of earnings by deploying funds which are not needed to fulfill loan demand, deposit redemptions, or other liquidity purposes. Pledged securities totaled $628.0 million, or 27.8% of total securities, and $704.7 million, or 42.8% of total securities, at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Maturities, fair values, and weighted average yields of debt securities available for sale as of December 31, 2020, were (dollars in thousands):
(1) Securities are presented based upon final contractual maturity or pre-refunded date.
(2) Weighted average yield calculated on a tax-equivalent basis, assuming a federal income tax rate of 21%.
We consider many factors in determining the composition of our investment portfolio including, but not limited to, credit quality, duration, interest rate risk, liquidity, tax-equivalent yield, regulatory, and overall portfolio allocation. As of December 31, 2020, the Company did not have any non-U.S. Treasury securities or obligations of U.S. government corporations and agencies issued securities that exceeded 10% of the Company’s total stockholders’ equity.
Portfolio Loans
The Company believes that making sound and profitable loans is a necessary and desirable means of employing funds available for investment. The Company maintains lending policies and procedures designed to focus lending efforts on the types, locations, and duration of loans most appropriate for its business model and markets. While not specifically limited, the Company attempts to focus its lending on short to intermediate-term (0-7 years) loans in geographic areas within 125 miles of its lending offices. Loans originated outside of these areas are generally residential mortgage loans originated for sale in the secondary market or loans to existing customers of the bank. The Company attempts to utilize government-assisted lending programs, such as the SBA and U.S. Department of Agriculture lending programs, when prudent. Generally, loans are collateralized by assets, primarily real estate, and guaranteed by individuals. Loans are expected to be repaid primarily from cash flows of the borrowers or from proceeds from the sale of selected assets of the borrowers.
Management reviews and approves the Company’s lending policies and procedures on a regular basis. Management routinely (at least quarterly) reviews the Company’s allowance for credit losses in conjunction with reports related to loan production, loan quality, concentrations of credit, loan delinquencies, and non-performing and potential problem loans. The Company’s underwriting standards are designed to encourage relationship banking rather than transactional banking. Relationship banking implies a primary banking relationship with the borrower that includes, at a minimum, an active deposit banking relationship in addition to the lending relationship. Significant underwriting factors in addition to location, duration, a sound and profitable cash flow basis, and the borrower’s character include the quality of the borrower’s financial history, the liquidity of the underlying collateral, and the reliability of the valuation of the underlying collateral.
At no time is a borrower’s total borrowing relationship permitted to exceed the Company’s regulatory lending limit. The Company generally limits such relationships to amounts substantially less than the regulatory limit. Loans to related parties, including executive officers and directors of the Company and its subsidiaries, are reviewed for compliance with regulatory guidelines by the Company’s board of directors at least annually.
The Company maintains an independent loan review department that reviews loans for compliance with the Company’s loan policy on a periodic basis. In addition, the loan review department reviews the risk assessments made by the Company’s credit department, lenders, and loan committees. Results of these reviews are presented to management and the audit committee at least quarterly.
The Company’s lending can be summarized into five primary areas: commercial loans, commercial real estate loans, real estate construction loans, retail real estate loans, and retail other loans.
Commercial Loans
Commercial loans typically comprise working capital loans or business expansion loans, including loans for asset purchases and other business loans. Commercial loans will generally be guaranteed, in full or a significant amount, by the primary owners of the business. Commercial loans are made based primarily on the historical and projected cash flow of the underlying borrower and secondarily on the underlying assets pledged as collateral by the borrower. Cash flows of the underlying borrower, however, may not perform consistently with historical or projected information. Further, collateral securing loans may fluctuate in value due to individual economic or other factors. The Company has established minimum standards and underwriting guidelines for all commercial loan types.
Commercial Real Estate Loans
The commercial environment, along with the academic presence in some of the Company’s markets, provides for the majority of the Company’s commercial lending opportunities to be commercial real estate related, including multi-unit housing. As the majority of the Company’s loan portfolio is within the commercial real estate class, the Company’s goal is to maintain a high quality, geographically diverse portfolio of commercial real estate loans. Commercial real estate loans are subject to underwriting standards and guidelines similar to commercial loans. Commercial real estate loans are generally guaranteed, in full or a significant amount, by the primary owners of the business. Repayment of these loans is
primarily dependent on the cash flows of the underlying property. However, commercial real estate loans generally must be supported by an adequate underlying collateral value. The performance and the value of the underlying property may be adversely affected by economic factors or geographical and/or industry specific factors. These loans are subject to other industry guidelines that are closely monitored by the Company.
Real Estate Construction Loans
Real estate construction loans are primarily commercial in nature. Loan proceeds are monitored by the Company and advanced for the improvement of real estate in which the Company holds a mortgage. Real estate construction loans will generally be guaranteed, in full or a significant amount, by the developer or primary owners of the business. These loans are subject to underwriting standards and guidelines similar to commercial loans. The loan generally must be supported by an adequate “as completed” value of the underlying project. In addition to the underlying project, the financial history of the developer and business owners weighs significantly in determining approval. Repayment of these loans is typically through permanent financing following completion of the construction. Real estate construction loans are inherently more risky than loans on completed properties as the unimproved nature and the financial risks of construction significantly enhance the risks of commercial real estate loans. These loans are closely monitored and subject to other industry guidelines.
Retail Real Estate Loans
Retail real estate loans are comprised of direct consumer loans that include residential real estate, home equity lines of credit, and home equity loans. In 2020, the Company sold the majority of its newly originated fixed rate retail real estate loans to secondary market purchasers. As retail real estate loan underwriting is subject to specific regulations, the Company typically underwrites its retail real estate loans to conform to widely accepted standards. Several factors are considered in underwriting including the value of the underlying real estate and the debt to income ratio and credit history of the borrower.
Retail Other Loans
Retail other loans consist of installment loans to individuals, including automotive loans. These loans are centrally underwritten utilizing the borrower’s financial history, including the FICO credit scoring and information as to the underlying collateral. Repayment is expected from the cash flow of the borrower.
The composition of our portfolio loans as of the dates indicated was as follows (dollars in thousands):
Geographic distributions of portfolio loans, based on origination, by category were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Portfolio loans increased $126.9 million, or 1.9%, as of December 31, 2020, compared to December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of PPP loans in our Commercial loans category. Commercial balances (consisting of commercial, commercial real estate and real estate construction loans), excluding PPP loans, decreased $21.2 million from December 31, 2019. Retail real estate and retail other loans decreased $298.3 million from December 31, 2019.
Commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit totaled $1.8 billion and $1.7 billion as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following table sets forth remaining maturities of selected loans (excluding deferred loan fees and costs, purchase premiums and discounts, and certain real estate-mortgage loans and installment loans to individuals) at December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
Allowance for Credit Losses
The following table shows activity affecting the allowance for credit losses (dollars in thousands):
The allowance as a percentage of portfolio loans was 1.48% at December 31, 2020, compared to 0.80% of portfolio loans, at December 31, 2019. Excluding PPP loans, the allowance for credit losses as a percentage of loans outstanding was 1.59% at December 31, 2020. The ongoing impacts of CECL will be dependent upon changes in economic conditions and forecasts, originated and acquired loan portfolio composition, credit performance trends, portfolio duration, and other factors. If economic conditions deteriorate further than current forecast factors as a result of COVID-19, the Company would expect the provision for credit losses to increase in future periods.
The following table sets forth the allowance for credit losses by loan categories and percentage of loans to total loans as of December 31 for each of the years indicated (dollars in thousands):
As of December 31, 2020, management believed the level of the allowance to be appropriate based upon the information available. However, additional losses may be identified in our loan portfolio as new information is obtained.
Provision for Credit Losses
The allowance for credit losses is a significant estimate in the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheet, affecting both earnings and capital. The methodology adopted influences, and is influenced by, Busey Bank’s overall credit risk management processes. The allowance for credit losses is recorded in accordance with GAAP to provide an adequate reserve for expected credit losses that is reflective of management’s best estimate of what is expected to be collected. All estimates of credit losses should be based on a careful consideration of all significant factors affecting the collectability as of the evaluation date. The allowance for credit losses is established through provision for credit loss expense charged to income. The provision for credit losses was $38.8 million, $10.4 million, and $4.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The increase in provision expense in 2020 can be attributed to the adoption of CECL in combination with the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy.
Non-performing Loans and Non-performing Assets
Loans are considered past due if the required principal and interest payments have not been received as of the date such payments were due. Loans are placed on non-accrual status when, in management’s opinion, the borrower may be unable to meet payment obligations as they become due, as well as when required by regulatory guidelines. Loans may be placed on non-accrual status regardless of whether or not such loans are considered past due. Loans are returned to accrual status when all the principal and interest amounts contractually due are brought current and future payments are reasonably assured.
Typically, loans are secured by collateral. When a loan is classified as non-accrual and determined to be collateral dependent, it is appropriately reserved or charged down through the allowance for credit losses to the fair value of our interest in the underlying collateral less estimated costs to sell. Our loan portfolio is collateralized primarily by real estate.
The following table sets forth information concerning non-performing loans and performing restructured loans as of December 31 for each of the years indicated (dollars in thousands):
Total non-performing assets were $28.9 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $32.6 million at December 31, 2019. Asset quality metrics remain dependent upon market-specific economic conditions, and specific measures may fluctuate from period to period. Continued disciplined credit management resulted in non-performing loans as a percentage of portfolio loans of 0.36% at December 31, 2020, compared with 0.44% at December 31, 2019. If economic conditions deteriorate further as a result of COVID-19, the Company would expect the credit quality of our loan portfolio to decline and loan defaults to increase. Allowance coverage of non-performing loans has increased significantly from 182.15% at December 31, 2019, to 415.82% at December 31, 2020.
Potential Problem Loans
Potential problem loans are those loans which are not categorized as impaired, restructured, non-accrual, or 90+ days past due, but where current information indicates that the borrower may not be able to comply with loan repayment terms. Management assesses the potential for loss on such loans and considers the effect of any potential loss in determining its provision for probable credit losses. Potential problem loans totaled $68.8 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $74.6 million at December 31, 2019. Management continues to monitor these credits and anticipates that restructurings, guarantees, additional collateral, or other planned actions will result in full repayment of the debts. As of December 31, 2020, management identified no other loans that represent or result from trends or uncertainties which would be expected to materially impact future operating results, liquidity, or capital resources.
Deposits
The following table shows the deposit mix for each of the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
We focus on deepening our relationship with customers to foster core deposit growth, allowing us to reduce our reliance on wholesale funding. Our 2020 deposit balances were impacted by the retention of PPP loan funding in customer deposit accounts, the impacts of economic stimulus, and other core deposit growth. Time deposits as a percentage of total deposits decreased to 12.9% as of December 31, 2020, compared to 19.4% as of December 31, 2019. As time deposits mature, the Company is actively engaging our customers to renew at current market rates.
Borrowings
Securities sold under agreements to repurchase, which are classified as secured borrowings, generally mature daily. Securities sold under agreements to repurchase were $175.6 million at December 31, 2020, with a weighted average rate of 0.13%. Short-term borrowings include $4.7 million in FHLB advances which mature in less than one year from the date of origination.
On January 29, 2019, the Company entered into an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement providing for a $60.0 million Term Loan with a maturity date of November 30, 2023. The Term Loan has an annual interest rate of one-month LIBOR plus a spread of 1.50%. The proceeds of the Term Loan were used to fund the cash consideration related to the acquisition of Banc Ed. The Company, at its option, repaid the balance of the Term Loan during the first quarter of 2020.
The Amended and Restated Credit Agreement retained the Company’s $20.0 million revolving credit facility with a maturity date of April 30, 2019. On April 19, 2019, the Company entered into an amendment to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement to extend the maturity of its revolving credit facility to April 30, 2020. On April 24, 2020, the revolving credit facility’s maturity was again extended by amendment for one year, to April 30, 2021, with an annual interest rate of one-month LIBOR plus a spread of 1.75%. The revolving credit facility incurs a non-usage fee based on the undrawn amount. The Company had no outstanding balance under the revolving facility on December 31, 2020 or 2019.
The following table sets forth the distribution of short-term borrowings and weighted average interest rates thereon (dollars in thousands):
(1) The weighted average interest rate is computed by dividing total interest for the period by the average daily balance outstanding.
Long-term debt includes funds borrowed from the FHLB which totaled $4.8 million and $35.6 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
On May 25, 2017, the Company issued $40.0 million of 3.75% senior notes that mature on May 25, 2022. The senior notes are payable semi-annually on each May 25 and November 25, commencing on November 25, 2017. The senior notes are not subject to optional redemption by the Company. Additionally, on May 25, 2017, the Company issued $60.0 million of fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes that mature on May 25, 2027. The subordinated notes, which qualify as Tier 2 capital for First Busey, bear interest at an annual rate of 4.75% for the first five years after issuance and thereafter bear interest at a floating rate equal to three-month LIBOR plus a spread of 2.919%, as calculated on each applicable determination date. The subordinated notes are payable semi-annually on each May 25 and November 25, commencing on November 25, 2017, during the five year fixed-term and thereafter on February 25, May 25, August 25, and November 25 of each year, commencing on August 25, 2022. The subordinated notes have an optional redemption in whole or in part on any interest payment date on or after May 25, 2022. The senior notes and subordinated notes are unsecured obligations of the Company.
To further enhance the Company’s strong capital and liquidity positions, on June 1, 2020, the Company issued $125.0 million of fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes that mature on June 1, 2030. The subordinated notes, which qualify as Tier 2 capital for First Busey, bear interest at an annual rate of 5.25% for the first five years after issuance and thereafter bear interest at a floating rate equal to a three-month benchmark rate plus a spread of 5.11%, as calculated on each applicable determination date. The subordinated notes are payable semi-annually on each June 1 and December 1, during the five-year fixed-term, and thereafter on March 1, June 1, September 1, and December 1 of each year, commencing on September 1, 2025. The subordinated notes have an optional redemption, in whole or in part, on any interest payment date on or after June 1, 2025. The subordinated notes are unsecured obligations of the Company.
Unamortized debt issuance costs related to senior notes and subordinated notes are presented in the following table (dollars in thousands):
Junior Subordinated Debt Owed to Unconsolidated Trusts
First Busey maintains statutory trusts for the sole purpose of issuing and servicing trust preferred securities and related trust common securities. Proceeds from such issuances were used by the trusts to purchase junior subordinated notes of the Company, which are the sole assets of each trust. Concurrent with the issuance of the trust preferred securities, the Company issued guarantees for the benefit of the holders of the trust preferred securities. The trust preferred securities are instruments that qualify, and are treated by the Company, as Tier 1 regulatory capital. The Company owns all of the common securities of each trust. The trust preferred securities issued by each trust rank equally with the common securities in right of payment, except that if an event of default under the indenture governing the notes has occurred and is continuing, the preferred securities will rank senior to the common securities in right of payment. In connection with the Pulaski acquisition in 2016, the Company acquired similar statutory trusts maintained by Pulaski and the fair value adjustment is being accreted over the weighted average remaining life. The Company had $71.5 million and $71.3 million of junior subordinated debt owed to unconsolidated trusts at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Liquidity
Liquidity management is the process by which we ensure that adequate liquid funds are available to meet the present and future cash flow obligations arising in the daily operations of our business. These financial obligations consist of needs for funds to meet commitments to borrowers for extensions of credit, fund capital expenditures, honor withdrawals by customers, pay dividends to stockholders, and pay operating expenses. Our most liquid assets are cash and due from banks, interest-bearing bank deposits, and federal funds sold. Balances of these assets are dependent on the Company’s operating, investing, lending, and financing activities during any given period.
Average liquid assets are summarized in the table below (dollars in thousands):
First Busey’s primary sources of funds consist of deposits, investment maturities and sales, loan principal repayments, and capital funds. At December 31, 2020, cash and unencumbered securities on our Consolidated Balance Sheets totaled $2.3 billion. Additional liquidity is provided by the ability to borrow from the FHLB, the Federal Reserve, First Busey’s revolving loan facility, or to utilize brokered deposits. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had additional capacity to borrow from the FHLB and Federal Reserve of $1.3 billion and $507.8 million, respectively. The Company has the ability to pledge PPP loans as collateral to either the FHLB or Federal Reserve Discount Window to increase the availability to borrow against any potential short-term funding needs.
As of December 31, 2020, management believed that adequate liquidity existed to meet all projected cash flow obligations. We seek to achieve a satisfactory degree of liquidity by actively managing both assets and liabilities. Asset management guides the proportion of liquid assets to total assets, while liability management monitors future funding requirements and prices liabilities accordingly.
The ability of the Company to pay cash dividends to its stockholders and to service its debt is dependent on the receipt of cash dividends from its subsidiaries. Busey Bank paid dividends to the Company of $122.0 million and $70.0 million during 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangements
The Bank routinely enters into commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit in the normal course of business to meet the financing needs of its customers. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had outstanding loan commitments and standby letters of credit of $1.8 billion and $1.7 billion, respectively. The balance of commitments to extend credit represents future cash requirements and some of these commitments may expire without being drawn upon. We anticipate we will have sufficient funds available to meet current loan commitments, including loan applications received and in process prior to the issuance of firm commitments.
Contractual Obligations
We have entered into certain contractual obligations and other commitments which generally relate to funding of operations through deposits, debt issuance, and property and equipment leases.
The following table summarizes significant contractual obligations and other commitments as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
Cash Flows
Net cash flows provided by operating activities totaled $169.3 million in 2020 compared to $80.8 million in 2019. Significant items affecting the cash flows provided by operating activities include net income, the provision for credit losses, deferred income taxes, gain on sales of mortgage loans, net of origination costs, and activities related to the origination and sales of loans held for sale, and compensation. Net cash used to originate mortgage loans held for sale totaled $38.7 million in 2020 compared to $25.7 million of in 2019. Fluctuations in sales are a function of changes in market rates for mortgage loans, which influence refinance activity. The Company’s provision for credit losses increased to $38.8 million in 2020 compared to $10.4 million in 2019, due in part to the adoption of CECL. Stock-based and non-cash compensation increased to $7.1 million in 2020, compared with a net compensation decrease of $4.0 million in 2019 related to termination of the Company’s deferred compensation plan.
Net cash used in investing activities totaled $735.7 million in 2020 compared to $65.0 million provided by investing activities in 2019. Significant items affecting cash flows from investing activities are those activities associated with
managing the Company’s investment and loan portfolios. Purchases of debt securities were $1.3 billion in 2020 compared to $408.9 million in 2019.
Net cash provided by financing activities totaled $725.6 million in 2020 compared to $143.6 million in 2019. Significant items affecting cash flows from financing activities are debt issuance, deposits, short-term borrowings, long-term debt, payment of dividends, and proceeds and redemption from stock issuances. Deposits, which represent the Company’s primary funding source, increased by $776.4 million in 2020 compared to an increase of $215.5 million in 2019, excluding acquired deposits.
Capital Resources
Our capital ratios are in excess of those required to be considered “well-capitalized” pursuant to applicable regulatory guidelines. The Federal Reserve Board uses capital adequacy guidelines in its examination and regulation of bank holding companies and their subsidiary banks. Risk-based capital ratios are established by allocating assets and certain off-balance-sheet commitments into risk-weighted categories. These balances are then multiplied by the factor appropriate for that risk-weighted category. In order to refrain from restrictions on dividends, equity repurchases, and discretionary bonus payments, banking institutions must maintain capital in excess of regulatory minimum capital requirements. The table below presents minimum capital ratios with capital buffer and December 31, 2020, capital ratios for First Busey and Busey Bank.
Management believes that no conditions or events have occurred since December 31, 2020, that would materially adversely change the Company’s or Busey Bank’s capital classifications.
New Accounting Pronouncements
The Company reviews new accounting standards as issued. Information relating to accounting pronouncements issued and applicable to the Company in 2020 appears in “Note 1. Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Effects of Inflation
The effect of inflation on a financial institution differs significantly from the effect on an industrial company. While a financial institution’s operating expenses, particularly salaries, wages, and employee benefits, are affected by general inflation, the asset and liability structure of a financial institution consists largely of monetary items. Monetary items, such as cash, loans, and deposits, are those assets and liabilities which are or will be converted into a fixed number of dollars regardless of changes in prices. As a result, changes in interest rates have a more significant impact on a financial institution’s performance than does general inflation. For additional information regarding interest rates and changes in net interest income see “Results of Operations - Average Balance Sheets and Interest Rates” and “