Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion and analysis together with the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements, including those that reflect or implied by plans, estimates and beliefs. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in or implied by the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include, without limitation, those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Company Overview
As a result of the spin-off of the Company’s other businesses and investments on September 30, 2020 discussed below (which are now reported as discontinued operations), the Company is a “pure” holding company whose primary asset is its ownership of approximately 93% of the outstanding common stock of Bluegreen Vacations Corporation, a leading vacation ownership company that markets and sells vacation ownership interests (“VOIs”) and manages resorts in popular leisure and urban destinations.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had total consolidated assets of approximately $1.3 billion and shareholders’ equity of approximately $187.9 million.
Spin-Off
On September 30, 2020, the Company completed the spin-off of its wholly-owned subsidiary, BBX Capital, Inc. (“BBX Capital”). The spin-off separated BVH’s businesses, activities, and investments into two separate, publicly-traded companies: (i) the Company, which continues to hold BVH’s investment in Bluegreen, and (ii) BBX Capital, which holds all of BVH’s other previous businesses and investments, including BBX Capital Real Estate LLC (“BBX Capital Real Estate” or “BBXRE”), BBX Sweet Holdings, LLC (“BBX Sweet Holdings”), and Renin Holdings, LLC (“Renin”). BBX Capital and its subsidiaries are presented as discontinued operations in the Company’s financial statements. Subsequent to the spin-off, BVH’s operating expenses, excluding the interest on the debt described below, are limited to executive compensation and public company costs, which in the aggregate are expected to be approximately $2.0 million annually.
The spin-off was effected through a distribution of shares of BBX Capital’s common stock to the Company’s shareholders on September 30, 2020. The BVH shareholders received one share of BBX Capital’s Class A Common Stock for each share of BVH’s Class A Common Stock and one share of BBX Capital’s Class B Common Stock for each share of BVH’s Class B Common Stock held on September 22, 2020, the record date. As a result, BVH ceased to have any ownership interest in BBX Capital following the Spin-Off.
In connection with the spin-off, BVH changed its name from BBX Capital Corporation to Bluegreen Vacations Holding Corporation, and BBX Capital was converted to a Florida corporation and changed its name from BBX Capital Florida LLC to BBX Capital, Inc. In addition, in connection with the spin-off BVH issued a $75.0 million note payable to BBX Capital that accrues interest at a rate of 6% per annum and requires payments of interest on a quarterly basis. Under the terms of the note, BVH has the option in its discretion to defer interest payments under the note, with interest on the entire outstanding balance thereafter to accrue at a cumulative, compounded rate of 8% per annum until such time as BVH is current on all accrued payments under the note, including deferred interest. All outstanding amounts under the note will become due and payable in five years or earlier upon certain other events.
Reverse Stock Split
In July 2020, the Company effected a one-for-five reverse split of its Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock. The share and per share amounts described herein have been retroactively adjusted to reflect the one-for-five reverse stock split as if it had occurred as of the earliest period presented.
Summary of Consolidated Results of Operations
Consolidated Results
The following summarizes key financial highlights for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended 2019:
Total consolidated revenues of $519.5 million, a 29.6% decrease compared to 2019.
Loss before income taxes from continuing operations of $46.8 million compared to income of $8.2 million during 2019.
Net loss attributable to common shareholders of $80.5 million compared to income of $17.7 million during 2019.
Diluted loss per share from continuing operations of $2.82 compared to a diluted earnings per share of $0.75 in 2019.
The Company’s consolidated results from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 were significantly impacted by the following:
A decrease in the Company’s revenues primarily attributable to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on its operations.
A net decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses primarily attributable to steps taken to mitigate costs implemented by Bluegreen in the 2020 period in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including permanent and temporary reductions in workforce.
An increase in Bluegreen’s allowance for loan losses in 2020 based on the estimated impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The recognition of a $39.1 million charge in 2019 associated with Bluegreen’s settlement agreement with Bass Pro in June 2019.
The following summarizes key financial highlights for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended 2018:
Total consolidated revenues of $737.8 million, a 0.5% increase compared to 2018.
Income before income taxes from continuing operations of $8.2 million compared to income of $73.8 million in 2018.
Net loss attributable to common shareholders of $17.7 million, a 49.6% decrease compared to 2018.
Diluted loss per share from continuing operations of $0.75 pr diluted share compared to a diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of $1.39 in 2018.
The Company’s consolidated results from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same 2018 period were significantly impacted by the following:
The recognition of a $39.1 million charge in the 2019 period associated with Bluegreen’s settlement agreement with Bass Pro in June 2019.
An increase in Bluegreen’s net carrying cost of VOI inventory primarily due to Bluegreen’s acquisition of the Éilan Hotel and Spa during April 2018 and higher net costs associated with Bluegreen’s owning a larger amount of inventory and increasing the allocation of available inventory to marketing guests.
A net decrease in Bluegreen’s system-wide sales of VOIs and an increase in the provision for loan losses.
Segment Results
As a result of the previously described spin-off of its non-Bluegreen assets and businesses on September 30, 2020, BVH currently reports the results of its business activities through the following reportable segments: Sales of VOIs and financing and Resort Operations and Club Management.
‎
Information regarding income before income taxes by reportable segment is set forth in the table below:
Executive Overview
The Company is a Florida holding Company which owns approximately 93% of Bluegreen. Substantially all of its operating and activities related to the operations and activities of Bluegreen. Bluegreen is a leading vacation ownership company that markets and sells VOIs and manages resorts in popular leisure and urban destinations. Bluegreen’s resort network includes 45 Club Resorts (resorts in which owners in its Vacation Club have the right to use most of the units in connection with their VOI ownership) and 23 Club Associate Resorts (resorts in which owners in its Vacation Club have the right to use a limited number of units in connection with their VOI ownership). These Club Resorts and Club Associate Resorts are primarily located in high-volume, “drive-to” vacation locations, including Orlando, Las Vegas, Myrtle Beach, Charleston and New Orleans, among others. Through Bluegreen’s points-based system, the approximately 218,000 owners in Bluegreen’s Vacation Club have the flexibility to stay at units available at any of Bluegreen’s resorts and have access to over 11,300 other hotels and resorts through partnerships and exchange networks. Bluegreen’s sales and marketing platform is supported by marketing relationships with nationally-recognized consumer brands, such as Bass Pro and Choice Hotels. These marketing relationships drive sales within the Company’s core demographic.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
Initial Impact and Response
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in an unprecedented disruption in the U.S. economy and the travel, hospitality and vacation ownership industries due to, among other things, resort closures, travel restrictions and restrictions on business operations, including government guidance and restrictions with respect to travel, public accommodations, social gatherings and related matters. The Company’s operations have been and continue to be adversely impacted by the pandemic. On March 23, 2020, Bluegreen temporarily closed all of its VOI sales centers, its retail marketing operations at Bass Pro Shops and Cabela’s stores and outlet malls, and its Choice Hotels call transfer program. In connection with these actions Bluegreen canceled existing owner reservations through May 15, 2020 and new prospect guest tours through June 30, 2020. Further, some of Bluegreen’s Club Resorts and Club Associate Resorts were closed in accordance with government mandates and advisories. Beginning in mid-May 2020, Bluegreen recommenced its sales and marketing operations and its closed resorts began to welcome guests as government mandates were lifted. By December 31, 2020, Bluegreen was operating marketing kiosks in a total of 98 Bass Pro and Cabela’s stores, Bluegreen had reactivated its Choice Hotels call transfer program, all of its resorts were open, and all but two of its VOI sales centers were open. However, there is no assurance that Bluegreen’s marketing operations at Bass Pro or Cabela’s stores, or its VOI sales centers will remain open, including in the event of an increase in COVID-19 cases. Additionally, reflecting the temporary cessation of marketing activities in the beginning months of COVID-19
pandemic in general, Bluegreen’s pipeline of vacation packages was 121,900 at December 31, 2020 compared to 169,300 at December 31, 2019. However, utilization of the packages has been significantly lower as purchasers have not traveled at the same pace as was traveled pre-pandemic. For more detailed information please see “Results of Operations” included in Part II - Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
As a result of the effect of the pandemic, Bluegreen implemented steps to mitigate its costs beginning in March 2020, including reductions of over 1,700 positions and the placement of another approximate 3,200 of Bluegreen’s associates on temporary furlough or reduced work hours. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 3,200 associates had returned to work on a full-time basis for a total of approximately 4,600 full-time associates compared to approximately 5,900 full-time associates as of December 31, 2019. As a result of the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic, during the year ended December 31, 2020, Bluegreen incurred $5.0 million in severance and $14.3 million of payroll and payroll benefit expense relating to employees on temporary furlough or reduced work hours. These payments and expenses are included in selling, general and administrative expenses in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income for the year ended December 31, 2020. While Bluegreen paid a special cash dividend of $1.19 per share during August 2020, it suspended the payment of regular quarterly cash dividends during the second quarter of 2020 and there is no assurance that Bluegreen will recommence paying regular dividends or pay additional special dividends in the future.
As a precautionary measure to provide additional liquidity if needed, in March 2020, Bluegreen drew down $60.0 million under its lines-of-credit and pledged or sold receivables under certain of its receivable backed facilities to increase its cash position. As of December 31, 2020, Bluegreen repaid the $60.0 million borrowed under Bluegreen’s lines-of-credit. Also, in June 2020, Bluegreen amended its Liberty Bank Facility to extend the advance period and maturity date, reduced the outstanding borrowings from $50.0 million to $40.0 million, decreased the advance rate from 85% for qualified conforming receivables to 80% effective September 2020 and, commencing July 1, 2020, changed the interest rate from the Prime Rate with a floor of 4.00% to the Prime Rate minus 0.10% with a floor of 3.40%. In September 2020, Bluegreen amended its NBA Receivables Facility to extend the advance period and maturity date, decreased the advance rate from 85% for qualified receivables to 80%, and changed the interest rate from one month LIBOR plus 2.75% (with an interest rate floor of 3.50%) to one month LIBOR plus 2.25% (with an interest rate floor of 3.00%). In October 2020, Bluegreen completed the 2020-A Term Securitization, a private offering and sale of approximately $131.0 million of investment-grade, VOI receivable backed notes (the “Notes”) at an overall blended interest rate of approximately 2.60%. The gross advance rate for this transaction was 88.0% and the Notes mature in February 2036. Proceeds from the 2020-A Term Securitization were used to paydown approximately $82.1 million owed on existing receivable-backed facilities, (thus creating additional availability on those facilities), to capitalize a reserve fund, to pay fees and expenses associated with the transaction, and for general corporate purposes. In December 2020, Bluegreen amended its Quorum Purchase Facility to extend the advance period from December 2020 to December 2022 and extend the maturity date from December 2032 to December 2034. Bluegreen continues to actively pursue additional credit facility capacity and capital market transactions. For more detailed information please see “Liquidity and Capital Resources” included in Part II - Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Bluegreen has historically provided financing to customers for a majority of its sales of VOIs, and accordingly, our results are subject to the risk of defaults by its customers. GAAP requires sales of VOIs are reduced by Bluegreen’s estimate of uncollectible VOI notes receivable. The COVID-19 pandemic has had a material adverse impact on unemployment in the United States and economic conditions in general and the impact may continue for some time. Bluegreen believes that the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to have an impact on the collectability of Bluegreen’s VOI notes receivable. Accordingly, the estimate of defaults for the 2021 year was increased by approximately $6.0 million, based on historical experience, forbearance requests received from customers, and other factors, including but not limited to, the seasoning of the notes receivable and FICO scores of the customers. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on Bluegreen’s default or delinquency rates as it is rapidly changing and highly uncertain.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Securities Act (“CARES Act”) was signed into law on March 27, 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. As of December 31, 2020, the Company evaluated the income tax provisions of the CARES Act and determined they had no significant effect on the computation of the Company’s estimated effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020. However, the Company has taken advantage of the deferral of the employer portion of the tax withholding amounts and the employee retention tax credits provided for in the
CARES Act. During the year ended December 31, 2020, Bluegreen recorded a tax withholding deferral of $8.6 million and employee retention tax credits of $7.1 million, which is included in selling, general and administrative expenses in its consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Continued Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
Bluegreen continues to experience lower travel rates especially to high traffic destinations such as Orlando and Las Vegas. The occupancy rates at resorts with sales centers during the fourth quarter of 2020 was approximately 71% as compared to 80% during the fourth quarter of 2019. This trend of reduced travel was also reflected in utilization of vacation packages especially for those vacation packages sold prior to the COVID-19 pandemic.
VOI Sales and Financing
Bluegreen’s primary business is the marketing and selling of deeded VOIs, developed either by Bluegreen or third parties. Customers who purchase these VOIs receive an annual allotment of points, which can be redeemed for stays at one of Bluegreen’s resorts or at 11,300 other hotels and resorts available through partnerships and exchange networks. Historically, VOI companies have funded the majority of the capital investment in connection with resort development with internal resources and acquisition and development financing. In 2009, Bluegreen began selling VOIs on behalf of third-party developers and successfully diversified from a business model focused on capital-intensive resort development to a flexible model with a balanced mix of developed and capital-light inventory as determined by management to be appropriate from time to time based on market and economic conditions, available cash, and other factors. Bluegreen’s relationships with third-party developers enable it to generate fees from the sales and marketing of their VOIs without incurring the significant upfront capital investment generally associated with resort acquisition or development. While sales of acquired or developed inventory typically result in a greater contribution to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, fee-based sales typically do not require an initial investment or involve development financing risk. Both acquired or developed VOI sales and fee-based VOI sales drive recurring, incremental and long-term fee streams by adding owners to Bluegreen’s Vacation Club and new resort management contracts. Fee-based sales of VOIs comprised 37% and 50% of system-wide sales of VOIs during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. While Bluegreen intends to remain flexible with respect to its sales of the different categories of its VOI inventory in the future based on economic conditions, business initiatives and other considerations, Bluegreen currently expects that its percentage of fee-based sales will continue to decrease over time. In conjunction with Bluegreen VOI sales, Bluegreen also generates interest income by providing financing to qualified purchasers. Collateralized by the underlying VOIs, Bluegreen’s loans are generally structured as 10-year, fully-amortizing loans with a fixed interest rate ranging from approximately 12% to approximately 18% per annum. As of December 31, 2020, the weighted-average interest rate on Bluegreen’s VOI notes receivable was 15%. In addition, Bluegreen earns fees for various other services, including title and escrow services in connection with the closing of VOI sales, and mortgage servicing.
Resort Operations and Club Management
Bluegreen enters into management agreements with the homeowner associations (“HOAs”) that maintain most of the resorts and earns fees for providing management services to those HOAs and Bluegreen’s approximately 218,000 Vacation Club owners. These resort management services include oversight of housekeeping services, maintenance, and certain accounting and administration functions. Bluegreen’s management contracts yield highly predictable, recurring cash flows and do not have the traditional risks associated with hotel management contracts that are linked to daily rate or occupancy. Bluegreen’s management contracts are typically structured as “cost-plus,” with an initial term of three years and automatic one year renewals. In connection with the management services provided to the Vacation Club, Bluegreen manages the reservation system and provides owner, billing and collection services. In addition to resort and club management services, Bluegreen earns fees for various other services that produce recurring, predictable and long term-revenue, including construction management services to third-party developers. As described above, while some of Bluegreen’s Club Resorts and Club Associate Resorts were closed during March 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, all were subsequently reopened as of December 31, 2020 and currently remain open.
Principal Components Affecting the Our Results of Operations
Principal Components of Revenue
Fee-Based Sales. Represent sales of third-party VOIs where Bluegreen is paid a commission.
JIT Sales. Represent sales of VOIs acquired from third parties in close proximity to when Bluegreen intends to sell such VOIs.
Secondary Market Sales. Represent sales of VOIs acquired from HOAs or other owners, typically in connection with maintenance fee defaults. This inventory is generally purchased at a greater discount to retail price compared to developed VOI sales and VOIs purchased by Bluegreen for sale as part of its JIT sales activities.
Developed VOI Sales. Represent sales of VOIs in resorts that Bluegreen has developed or acquired (not including inventory acquired through JIT and secondary market arrangements).
Financing Revenue. Represents revenue from the financing of VOI sales, which includes interest income and loan servicing fees. Bluegreen also earns fees from providing mortgage servicing to certain third-party developers relating to VOIs sold by them.
Resort Operations and Club Management Revenue. Represents recurring fees from managing the Vacation Club and transaction fees for Traveler Plus and other member services. Bluegreen also earns recurring management fees under its management agreements with HOAs for day-to-day management services, including oversight of housekeeping services, maintenance, and certain accounting and administrative functions.
Other Fee-Based Services. Represents revenue earned from various other services that produce recurring, predictable and long-term revenue, such as title services.
Principal Components of Expenses
Cost of VOIs Sold. Represents the cost at which Bluegreen’s owned VOIs sold during the period were relieved from inventory. In addition to inventory from Bluegreen’s VOI business, Bluegreen’s owned VOIs also include those that were acquired by Bluegreen under JIT and secondary market arrangements. Compared to the cost of Bluegreen’s developed VOI inventory, VOIs acquired in connection with JIT arrangements typically have a relatively higher associated cost of sales as a percentage of sales while those acquired in connection with secondary market arrangements typically have a lower cost of sales as a percentage of sales as secondary market inventory is generally obtained from HOAs at a significant discount to retail price. Cost of VOIs sold as a percentage of sales of VOIs varies between periods based on the relative costs of the specific VOIs sold in each period and the size of the point packages of the VOIs sold (primarily due to offered volume discounts, and taking into account consideration of cumulative sales to existing owners). Additionally, the effect of changes in estimates under the relative sales value method, including estimates of projected sales, future defaults, upgrades and incremental revenue from the resale of repossessed VOI inventory, are reflected on a retrospective basis in the period the change occurs. Cost of sales is typically favorably impacted in periods where a significant amount of secondary market VOI inventory is acquired and actual defaults and equity trades are higher and the resulting change in estimate is recognized. While Bluegreen believes that there is additional inventory that can be obtained through the secondary market at favorable prices to Bluegreen in the future, there is no assurance that such inventory will be available.
Net Carrying Cost of VOI Inventory. Represents the maintenance fees and developer subsidies for unsold VOI inventory paid or accrued to the HOAs that maintain the resorts. Bluegreen attempts to offset this expense, to the extent possible, by generating revenue from renting its VOIs and through utilizing them in Bluegreen’s sampler programs. Bluegreen nets such revenue from this expense item.
Selling and Marketing Expense. Represents costs incurred to sell and market VOIs, including costs relating to marketing and incentive programs, tours, and related wages and sales commissions. Revenue from vacation package sales are netted against selling and marketing expenses.
Financing Expense. Represents financing interest expense related to Bluegreen’s receivable-backed debt, amortization of the related debt issuance costs and other expenses incurred in providing financing and servicing loans, including administrative costs associated with mortgage servicing activities for Bluegreen’s loans and the loans of certain third-party developers. Mortgage servicing activities include, among other things, payment processing, reporting and collection services.
Resort Operations and Club Management Expense. Represents costs incurred to manage resorts and the Vacation Club, including payroll and related costs and other administrative costs to the extent not reimbursed by the Vacation Club or HOAs.
General and Administrative Expense. Primarily represents compensation expense for personnel supporting Bluegreen’s business and operations, professional fees (including consulting, audit and legal fees), and administrative and related expenses.
Key Business and Financial Metrics Used by Management
Operating Metrics
Sales of VOIs. Represent sales of Bluegreen’s owned VOIs, including developed VOIs and those acquired through JIT and secondary market arrangements, reduced by equity trade allowances and an estimate of uncollectible VOI notes receivable. In addition to the factors impacting system-wide sales of VOIs (as described below), sales of VOIs are impacted by the proportion of system-wide sales of VOIs sold on behalf of third-parties on a commission basis, which are not included in sales of VOIs.
System-wide Sales of VOIs. Represents all sales of VOIs, whether owned by Bluegreen or a third party immediately prior to the sale. Sales of VOIs owned by third parties are transacted as sales of VOIs in Bluegreen’s Vacation Club through the same selling and marketing process Bluegreen uses to sell Bluegreen’s VOI inventory. Bluegreen considers system-wide sales of VOIs to be an important operating measure because it reflects all sales of VOIs by Bluegreen’s sales and marketing operations without regard to whether Bluegreen or a third party owned such VOI inventory at the time of sale. System-wide sales of VOIs is not a recognized term under GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to sales of VOIs or any other measure of financial performance derived in accordance with GAAP or to any other method of analyzing Bluegreen’s results as reported under GAAP.
Guest Tours. Represents the number of sales presentations given at Bluegreen’s sales centers during the period.
Sale to Tour Conversion Ratio. Represents the rate at which guest tours are converted to sales of VOIs and is calculated by dividing guest tours by number of VOI sales transactions.
Average Sales Volume Per Guest (“VPG”). Represents the sales attributable to tours at Bluegreen’s sales locations and is calculated by dividing VOI sales by guest tours. Bluegreen considers VPG to be an important operating measure because it measures the effectiveness of Bluegreen’s sales process, combining the average transaction price with the sale-to-tour conversion ratio.
For further information see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 2: Basis of Presentation and Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders. Bluegreen’s EBITDA is defined as earnings, or net income, before taking into account interest income (excluding interest earned on VOI notes receivable), interest expense (excluding interest expense incurred on debt secured by Bluegreen’s VOI notes receivable), income and franchise taxes and depreciation and amortization. Bluegreen Adjusted EBITDA is defined as its EBITDA, adjusted to exclude amounts of loss (gain) on assets held for sale, and other items that Bluegreen believes are not representative of ongoing operating results. Accordingly, Bluegreen excludes certain items such as severance charges net of employee retention tax credits, incremental costs associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, and amounts accrued or incurred in connection with the Bass Pro settlement in June 2019. Bluegreen Adjusted
EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders is defined as its Adjusted EBITDA excluding amounts attributable to the non-controlling interest in Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations (in which Bluegreen owns a 51% interest). For purposes of Bluegreen’s calculation of EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders for each period presented, no adjustments were made for interest income earned on Bluegreen’s VOI notes receivable or the interest expense incurred on debt that is secured by such notes receivable because they are both considered to be part of the ordinary operations of Bluegreen’s business.
The Company considers Bluegreen’s EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders and Segment Adjusted EBITDA to be indicators of operating performance, and they are used by the Company to measure its ability to service debt, fund capital expenditures and expand its business. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are also used by companies, lenders, investors and others because they exclude certain items that can vary widely across different industries or among companies within the same industry. For example, interest expense can be dependent on a company’s capital structure, debt levels and credit ratings. Accordingly, the impact of Bluegreen’s interest expense on earnings can vary significantly among companies. The tax positions of companies can also vary because of their differing abilities to take advantage of tax benefits and because of the tax policies of the jurisdictions in which they operate. As a result, effective tax rates and provision for income taxes can vary considerably among companies. EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders also exclude depreciation and amortization because companies utilize productive assets of different ages and use different methods of both acquiring and depreciating productive assets. These differences can result in considerable variability in the relative costs of productive assets and the depreciation and amortization expense among companies.
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders are not recognized terms under GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to net income (loss) or any other measure of financial performance or liquidity, including cash flow, derived in accordance with GAAP, or to any other method or analyzing results as reported under GAAP. The limitations of using Bluegreen’s EBITDA , Adjusted EBITDA or Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders as an analytical tool include, without limitation, that they do not reflect (i) changes in, or cash requirements for, working capital needs; (ii) Bluegreen’s interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on its indebtedness (other than as noted above); (iii) Bluegreen’s tax expense or the cash requirements to pay taxes; (iv) historical cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments; or (v) the effect on earnings or changes resulting from matters that does not believe to be indicative of Bluegreen’s future operations or performance. Further, although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and Bluegreen’s EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders do not reflect any cash that may be required for such replacements. In addition, the definition of Bluegreen’s Adjusted EBITDA, or Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders may not be comparable to definitions of Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders or other similarly titled measures used by other companies.
Reportable Segments Results of Operations
Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
The Company considers Segment Adjusted EBITDA in connection with its evaluation of Bluegreen’s business segments as described in Note 17: Segment Reporting to the Company’s consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See above for a discussion of definition of Bluegreen’s Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders, how management uses it to manage Bluegreen’s business, and material limitations on its usefulness. The following tables set forth the Bluegreen’s Segment Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders, EBITDA and a reconciliation of Bluegreen’s EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders to Bluegreen’s net income, the most comparable GAAP financial measure:
‎
(1)Severance and other for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of severance, net of employee retention credits, of $5.5 million, a special bonus paid to all non-executive employees of $3.3 million and COVID-19 incremental costs of $0.9 million. Amounts for the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 consisted of severance costs.
The following tables reconcile system-wide sales of VOIs to gross sales of VOIs, the most comparable GAAP financial measure.
‎
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Sales of VOIs and Financing
(1)Developed VOI sales represent sales of VOIs acquired or developed by Bluegreen. Developed VOI sales do not include Secondary Market sales, Fee-Based sales or JIT sales.
(2)Percentages for provision for loan losses are calculated as a percentage of gross sales of VOIs, which excludes Fee-Based sales (and not of system-wide sales of VOIs).
(3)Percentages for costs of VOIs sold and gross profit are calculated as a percentage of sales of VOIs (and not based on system-wide sales of VOIs).
(4)Percentages for Fee-Based sales commission revenue are calculated as a percentage of Fee-Based sales (and not based on system-wide sales of VOIs).
(5)Represents the applicable line item, calculated as a percentage of system-wide sales of VOIs, unless otherwise indicated in the above footnotes.
(6)Equity trade allowances are amounts granted to customers upon trading in their existing VOIs in connection with the purchase of additional VOIs. Subject to certain exceptions, equity trade allowances were generally eliminated in June 2020.
Sales of VOIs. Sales of VOIs were $174.0 million and $255.4 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Sales of VOIs were impacted by the factors described in the discussion of system-wide sales of VOIs below, primarily the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Gross sales of VOIs were reduced by $56.9 million and $55.7 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, for the provision
for loan losses. The provision for loan losses varies based on the amount of financed, non-fee based sales during the period and changes in Bluegreen’s estimates of future notes receivable performance for existing loans. Bluegreen’s provision for loan losses as a percentage of gross sales of VOIs was 25% and 18% during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The percentage of Bluegreen’s sales which were realized in cash within 30 days from sale was 42% during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The increase in the provision for loan losses during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to an increase in defaults experienced during the 2020 year and the increased defaults expected to result based on the COVID-19 pandemic. Bluegreen believes that the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to have an impact on Bluegreen’s VOI notes receivable. Accordingly, Bluegreen increased its estimate of defaults for the 2021 year by approximately $6.0 million, based on Bluegreen’s historical experience, forbearance requests received from its customers, and other factors, including, but not limited to, the seasoning of the notes receivable and FICO scores of the customers. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on default and delinquency rates is rapidly changing and highly uncertain. In March 2020, Bluegreen began receiving requests from borrowers requesting modifications of their VOI notes receivable due to financial hardship resulting from the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Hardship requests declined in June 2020 and the program was discontinued on June 30, 2020. Prior to discontinuing the program approximately 4.1% of Bluegreen’s portfolio was granted up to a three-month deferral or extension of payments, approximately 86% of which as of December 31, 2020 had subsequently resumed payments under the newly modified terms. In addition to the COVID-19 pandemic, the provision for loan losses continues to be impacted by defaults which Bluegreen believes are attributable to the receipt of letters from third parties and attorneys who purport to represent certain VOI owners and who have encouraged such owners to become delinquent and ultimately default on their obligations. Defaults associated with such letters during the year ended December 31, 2020 remained consistent compared with 2019. See Note 12: Commitments and Contingencies to the Company’s consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this report for additional information regarding such letters and actions Bluegreen has taken in connection with such letters. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the continued impact of actions taken by timeshare exit firms are highly uncertain and there is no assurance that Bluegreen’s steps taken to mitigate the impact of the pandemic or actions taken by timeshare exit firms will be successful. As a result, actual defaults may differ from Bluegreen’s estimates and the allowance for loan losses may not prove to be adequate.
In addition to the factors described below impacting system-wide sales of VOIs, sales of VOIs are also impacted by the number of system-wide sales of VOIs sold on behalf of third parties on a commission basis, which are not included in sales of VOIs.
The average annual default rates and delinquency rates (more than 30 days past due) on Bluegreen’s VOI notes receivable were as follows:
(1)The Average Default Rates in the table above includes VOIs which have been defaulted but had not yet charged off due to the provisions of certain of our receivable-backed notes payable transactions, as well as certain third-party and attorney represented cease and desist loans over 127 days delinquent. Accordingly, these have been removed from the Delinquency Rates above.
System-wide sales of VOIs. System-wide sales of VOIs were $367.0 million and $619.1 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. System-wide sales of VOIs depend on the number of guests who attend a timeshare sale presentation, with each guest counted as a “tour”, that Bluegreen can potentially convert to a sale of VOI. The number of guest tours is driven by the number of existing owner guests Bluegreen has staying at a resort with a sales center and the number of new guest arrivals that agree to attend a sales presentation. As a result of COVID-19 pandemic, the number of owners and guests willing to travel was decreased significantly, which lowered the number of tours Bluegreen completed. Further, the temporary closure of all marketing operations and VOI sales centers as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and other adverse impacts of the pandemic is expected to continue to
significantly impact system-wide sales of VOIs in the near-term and possibly longer. The ultimate impact, including the extent and duration of the impact, cannot be predicted at this time.
Included in system-wide sales are Fee-Based Sales, JIT Sales, Secondary Market Sales and developed VOI sales. Sales by category are tracked based on which deeded VOI is conveyed in each transaction. The individual VOIs sold is based on several factors, including the needs of fee-based clients, Bluegreen’s debt service requirements and default resale requirements under term securitizations and similar transactions. These factors and business initiatives contribute to fluctuations in the amount of sales by category from period to period. Fee-Based Sales comprised 37% and 50% of system-wide sales of VOIs during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. While Bluegreen intends to remain flexible with respect to the sales of the different categories of Bluegreen’s VOI inventory in the future based on economic conditions, business initiatives and other considerations, Bluegreen currently expects that the percentage of fee-based sales will continue to decrease over time as Bluegreen increases its efforts to generate Bluegreen’s developed VOI sales and secondary market VOI sales. Actual trends may differ from current expectations.
The following table sets forth certain information for system-wide sales of VOIs for 2020 and 2019:
(1)Due to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, two sales centers were consolidated and one has not reopened.
Cost of VOIs Sold. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, cost of VOIs sold was $13.6 million and $21.8 million, respectively, and represented 8% and 9%, respectively, of sales of VOIs. Cost of VOIs sold as a percentage of sales of VOIs varies between periods based on the relative costs of the specific VOIs sold in each period and the size of the point packages of the VOIs sold (due to offered volume discounts, including consideration of cumulative sales to existing owners). Additionally, the effect of changes in estimates under the relative sales value method, including estimates of sales, future defaults, upgrades and incremental revenue from the resale of repossessed VOI inventory, are reflected on a retrospective basis in the period the change occurs. Therefore, cost of sales is typically favorably impacted in periods where a significant amount of Secondary Market VOI inventory is acquired or actual defaults and equity trades are higher than anticipated and the resulting change in estimate is recognized. Cost of VOIs sold as a percentage of sales of VOIs decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily due to the impact of anticipated higher future defaults partially offset by lower cost secondary market purchases.
Fee-Based Sales Commission Revenue. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, Bluegreen sold $136.1 million and $308.0 million, respectively, of third-party VOI inventory under commission arrangements and earned sales and marketing commissions of $90.0 million and $207.8 million, respectively, in connection with those sales. The decreases in sales of third-party developer inventory on a commission basis during 2020 was due primarily to the temporary closure of VOI sales centers as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and other factors described above. Bluegreen earned an average sales and marketing commission of 66% and 67% during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which is net of a reserve for commission refunds in connection with early defaults and cancellations pursuant to the terms of certain of Bluegreen’s fee-based service arrangements. The decrease in sales and marketing commissions as a percentage of fee-based sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily related to an increase in Bluegreen’s reserve for cancellations coupled with the decrease in fee-based sales described above.
Financing Revenue, Net of Financing Expense - Sales of VOIs. Interest income on VOIs notes receivable was $77.5 million and $80.0 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which was partially offset by interest expense on receivable backed debt of $17.0 million and $20.5 million, respectively. The increase in finance revenue, net of finance expense during 2020 as compared to 2019 is primarily due to lower outstanding receivable-backed debt balances and a lower weighted-average cost of borrowings attributable to the lower interest rates in 2020 partially offset by lower notes receivable balances as a result of lower VOI sales due to the COVID-19 pandemic and other factors described above. Revenue from mortgage servicing during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 of $5.9 million and $6.2 million, respectively, are included in financing revenue, net of mortgage servicing expenses of $4.6 million and $5.3 million, respectively.
Other Fee-Based Services - Title Operations, net. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, revenue from Bluegreen’s title operations was $7.6 million and $14.2 million, respectively, which was partially offset by expenses directly related to Bluegreen’s title operations of $3.8 million and $7.0 million, respectively. Resort title fee revenue varies based on VOI sales volumes as well as the relative title costs in the jurisdictions where the inventory being sold is located. The decrease in 2020 is due to lower VOI sales as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and other factors described above.
Net Carrying Cost of VOI Inventory. The carrying cost of Bluegreen’s inventory was $40.8 million and $35.6 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which was partially offset by rental and sampler revenue of $6.2 million and $11.8 million, respectively. The increase in net carrying costs of VOI inventory was primarily related to decreased rentals of developer inventory and decreased sampler stays due to, among other things, reduced travel associated with the COVID-19 pandemic as well as increased maintenance fees and developer subsidies associated with the increase in VOI inventory. In certain circumstances, Bluegreen offsets marketing costs by using inventory for marketing guest stays.
Selling and Marketing Expenses. Selling and marketing expenses were $217.4 million and $321.2 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As a percentage of system-wide sales of VOIs, selling and marketing expenses were 59% and 52% during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The increase in selling and marketing expenses as a percentage of system-wide sales of VOIs during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, is primarily attributable to certain fixed costs inherent in Bluegreen’s sales and marketing operations and the costs of maintaining certain sales and marketing associates on furlough despite the temporary closure of Bluegreen’s VOI sales sites and marketing operations in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic as discussed above. During the year ended December 31, 2020, Bluegreen incurred $3.2 million in severance and $13.6 million of payroll and benefits expenses relating to employees on temporary furlough or reduced work hours as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, since reopening activities commenced, Bluegreen incurred costs associated with the reopening of 88 Bass Pro and Cabela’s stores that were open prior to the COVID-19 pandemic and the commencement of marketing operations at 10 additional Cabela’s stores. Bluegreen utilizes these stores to sell mini-vacation packages to customers for future travel which require the customers to attend a timeshare presentation. During 2020 Bluegreen incurred costs associated with redesigning its sales and marketing platform including updating its sales offices, refreshing its marketing collateral and adding new sales and marketing senior leadership positions. Further, Bluegreen has invested in various local and national marketing programs to attract new customers. These programs may not be successful or generate a sufficient number of prospects to offset the program costs incurred.
‎
The following table sets forth certain new customer marketing information, excluding sampler and other returning owner vacation packages, for 2020 and 2019:
(1)Excludes vacation packages sold to customers more than one year prior to the period presented and vacation packages sold to customers who had already toured but purchased an additional vacation package.
During 2020, Bluegreen eliminated certain of its lower performing mini-vacation programs, including a lead generation operation at various malls. While the elimination of this program did result in lower sales of mini-vacation packages in 2020 and in the short-term, Bluegreen believes its expansion into Cabela’s and other programs will make up for the lost mini-vacation packages in the future. Additionally, package sales generated through Bluegreen’s Choice call transfer program declined 50% compared to 2019, reflecting lower occupancy throughout Choice’s system.
Bluegreen’s agreement with Bass Pro previously provided for the payment of a variable commission upon the sale of a VOI to a marketing prospect obtained through the Bass Pro marketing channels. As previously disclosed, during June 2019, Bluegreen entered into a settlement agreement and amended marketing agreement with Bass Pro. Pursuant to the settlement agreement and amended marketing arrangement with Bass Pro the settlement payment and a portion of the ongoing annual marketing fees are fixed costs and/or are subject to annual minimums regardless of the volume of VOI sales produced from the resulting marketing prospects generated from the amended agreement. If Bluegreen’s marketing operations pursuant to the amended agreement with Bass Pro does not generate a sufficient number of prospects and leads or is terminated or limited, Bluegreen may not be able to successfully market and sell its products and services at anticipated levels or at levels required in order to offset the costs associated with Bluegreen’s marketing efforts. In addition, the amended arrangement with Bass Pro has resulted in an increase in Bluegreen’s marketing costs as a percentage of sales from the program, based on increases in program fixed costs and anticipated VOI sales volumes from this marketing channel. In light of the decrease in sales due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the increase in cost of this marketing program has adversely impacted Bluegreen’s results of operations and cash flow and may continue to have an adverse impact if sales continue to be below expected levels. See Note 12: Commitments and Contingencies to the Company’s consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this report for additional information regarding the terms of the Bass Pro settlement and amended marketing agreement.
In addition to vacation packaged sold to new prospects, we also sell vacation packages to customers who indicated they would tour again. As of December 31, 2020, the pipeline of such packages was approximately 15,000.
General and Administrative Expenses - Sales and Marketing Operations. General and administrative expenses, representing expenses directly attributable to sales and marketing operations, were $27.3 million and $70.3 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As a percentage of system-wide sales of VOIs, general and administrative expenses directly attributable to sales and marketing operations were 7% and 11% during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Included in general and administrative expenses attributable to sales and marketing operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 was approximately $39.1 million related to the settlement of the dispute with Bass Pro in June 2019. Net of the June 2019 Bass Pro settlement, general and administrative expenses attributable to sales and marketing operations decreased during the year ended
December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily as a result of lower branding, licensing, and marketing fees for Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations as a result of decreased sales of VOIs described above.
Resort Operations and Club Management
Resort Operations and Club Management Revenue. Resort operations and club management revenue decreased 4% during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Cost reimbursement revenue, which consists of payroll and other expenses which Bluegreen incurs and passes to the HOAs to operate, was flat during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 reflecting the temporary closure of many resorts related to the COVID-19 pandemic, as described above. Net of cost reimbursement revenue, resort operations and club management revenues decreased 6% during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily as a result of decreases in revenues from Bluegreen’s Traveler Plus program, other owner programs, resort retail operations and third-party rental commissions as a result of lower activity due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Bluegreen’s resort network includes 68 Club and Club Associate Resorts as of December 31, 2020 compared to a total of 69 resorts at December 31, 2019. Bluegreen managed 49 resort properties as of both December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Resort Operations and Club Management Expense. During 2020, resort operations and club management expense decreased 14% compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to steps taken to reduce costs in the first quarter of 2020 in addition to lower costs related to the Traveler Plus program, other owner programs and resort retail operations in 2020 as compared to 2019, in each case, as a result of or in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, in December 2019 Bluegreen conveyed the ski and golf operations and related property at one of its resorts to the HOA, which resulted in a non-cash loss on the disposal of approximately $5.6 million.
Bluegreen Corporate and Other
General and Administrative Expenses - Corporate and Other. General and administrative expenses directly attributable to corporate overhead were $68.2 million and $81.1 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease was primarily due to a $7.1 million employee retention credit earned in 2020 under the CARES Act ($2.2 million of which was earned on severance) and an overall $7.7 million reduction in payroll expense due to lower headcount as a result of steps taken to reduce costs in the first quarter. These decreases were
partially offset by $1.9 million in severance cost for corporate employees during the year ended December 31, 2020 ($1.2 million was due to severance related to steps taken to reduce costs in the first quarter attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic) and a $3.3 million special bonus paid to all non-executive employees during 2020.
Other (Expense) Income, net. Other (expense) income, net was ($0.4) million and $1.9 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This decrease was primarily related to a land sale during June 2019 resulting in a gain of $2.0 million, with no such transaction in 2020.
Interest Expense Interest expense not related to Bluegreen’s receivable-backed debt was $15.0 million and $19.0 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to a lower weighted-average cost of borrowing, partially offset by higher outstanding debt balances as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Non-Controlling Interest in Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations. The Company includes in its consolidated financial statements the results of operations and financial condition of Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations, Bluegreen’s 51%-owned subsidiary. The non-controlling interest in Adjusted EBITDA of Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations is the portion of Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations’ Adjusted EBITDA that is attributable to Big Cedar LLC, which holds the remaining 49% interest in Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations. Adjusted EBITDA attributable to the non-controlling interest in Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations was $7.6 million and $11.7 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in Adjusted EBITDA attributable to the non-controlling interest in Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the temporary closure of Bluegreen’s VOI sales centers in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic as described above.
BVH Corporate
BVH Corporate in the Company’s segment information primarily includes the following:
BVH’s corporate general and administrative expenses;
Interest expense associated with Woodbridge’s junior subordinated debentures and the note payable to BBX Capital; and
Interest income on interest-bearing cash accounts.
Corporate General and Administrative Expenses
BVH’s corporate general and administrative expenses consist primarily of costs associated with administering the various support functions at its corporate headquarters, including executive compensation, legal, accounting, human resources, investor relations, and executive offices lease payments. BVH’s corporate general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $59.3 million and $42.2 million, respectively. The increase in corporate general and administrative expenses for 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily reflects the acceleration of the vesting of unvested restricted stock awards and payments relating to BVH’s long-term incentive program for 2020, in each case, in connection with the spin-off of BBX Capital during the third quarter of 2020, which in the aggregate resulted in $32.6 million of compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition, included in BVH corporate general and administrative expenses for year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.8 million of other costs associated with the spin-off. The increase in corporate general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 was partially offset by lower 2020 fourth quarter expenses as the support functions at BVH corporate headquarters, including legal, accounting, and human resources, remained with BBX Capital subsequent to the spin-off.
Interest Expense
BVH’s interest expense (excluding interest expense related to the $80.0 million note payable to Bluegreen which was repaid in full during August 2020) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $4.8 million and $5.8 million, respectively. The decrease in interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 primarily resulted from the repayment of BVH’s mandatorily redeemable cumulative preferred stock in December 2019 and lower interest expense on Woodbridge’s junior subordinated debentures reflecting variable rates of interest on such
debt during 2020 partially offset by $1.1 million of interest expense on the $75.0 million promissory note that was issued to BBX Capital in connection with the spin-off.
BVH’s interest expense on the $80.0 million note payable to Bluegreen for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $2.5 million and $4.8 million, respectively. The decrease in interest expense reflects the repayment of the note in August 2020 from proceeds received from a special cash dividend paid by Bluegreen. The interest expense on this note and the related interest income recognized by Bluegreen are eliminated in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations.
Interest Income
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized $0.9 million of interest and investment income from its interest-bearing cash accounts and other investments compared to $2.3 million recognized during 2019. The decline in interest income reflects lower interest rates on interest earning assets during 2020.
Benefit/Provision for Income Taxes from continuing operations
The benefit for income taxes was $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a provision for income taxes of $7.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company’s effective income tax rate was approximately 5% and 92% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The effective income tax rate differed than the expected federal income tax rate of 21% due to the impact of the Company’s nondeductible executive compensation and state income taxes.
Discontinued Operations
Discontinued operations represent the activities of BBX Capital, the former wholly owned subsidiary of the Company which was spun off on September 30, 2020. BBX Capital’s businesses include all of BVHs previous businesses other than Bluegreen, including BBX Capital Real Estate, BBX Sweet Holdings, and Renin.
Loss from discontinued operations before income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $41.6 million compared to income from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $40.6 million, which reflects $30.7 million of impairment losses primarily resulting from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on BBX Capital’s businesses, including IT’SUGAR, and a reduction in equity in net earnings from unconsolidated real estate joint ventures of $37.2 million due to sales of real estate in 2019 by unconsolidated joint ventures in which BBX Capital Real Estate had investments.
Net Income or Loss from Continuing Operations Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests
The Company’s consolidated financial statements include the results of operations and financial position of partially-owned subsidiaries in which it holds a controlling financial interest, including Bluegreen and Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations. As a result, the Company is required to attribute net income or loss to the noncontrolling interests in these subsidiaries.
Net income from continuing operations attributable to noncontrolling interests during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $8.2 million and $14.6 million, respectively. The decrease in net income attributable to noncontrolling interests for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to a decrease in the net income of Bluegreen and Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations.
‎
For the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018
Sales of VOIs and Financing
(1)Developed VOI sales represent sales of VOIs acquired or developed by Bluegreen. Developed VOI sales do not include Secondary Market sales, Fee-Based sales or JIT sales.
(2)Percentages for provision for loan losses are calculated as a percentage of gross sales of VOIs, which excludes Fee-Based sales (and not of system-wide sales of VOIs).
(3)Percentages for costs of VOIs sold and gross profit are calculated as a percentage of sales of VOIs (and not based on system-wide sales of VOIs).
(4)Percentages for Fee-Based sales commission revenue are calculated as a percentage of Fee-Based sales (and not based on system-wide sales of VOIs).
(5)Represents the applicable line item, calculated as a percentage of system-wide sales of VOIs, unless otherwise indicated in the above footnotes.
(6)Equity trade allowances are amounts granted to customers upon trading in their existing VOIs in connection with the purchase of additional VOIs. Subject to certain exceptions, equity trade allowances were generally eliminated in June 2020.
Sales of VOIs. Sales of VOIs were $255.4 million and $254.2 million during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Sales of VOIs are impacted by the factors described below in system-wide sales of VOIs. Gross sales of VOIs were reduced by $55.7 million and $51.3 million during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, for the provision for loan losses. The provision for loan losses varies based on the amount of financed,
non-fee based sales during the period and changes in Bluegreen’s estimates of future notes receivable performance for existing loans. Bluegreen’s provision for loan losses as a percentage of gross sales of VOIs was 18% and 17% during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The percentage of Bluegreen’s sales which were realized in cash within 30 days from sale was 42% during both the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018. The increase in the provision for loan losses was primarily due to an increase in the average annual default rates, which Bluegreen believes is due in large part to the receipt of letters from attorneys who purport to represent certain VOI owners and who have encouraged such owners to become delinquent and ultimately default on their obligations. Defaults associated with such letters in 2019 increased 26% compared to 2018, with a significant portion of such increase attributable to default activity for Bluegreen’s resorts and owners located in Missouri, where Bluegreen believes certain attorneys are currently targeting Bluegreen’s customers. See “Item 3. Legal Proceedings” for additional information regarding such letters and actions taken by Bluegreen in connection therewith. While Bluegreen believes its notes receivable are adequately reserved at this time, actual defaults may differ from the estimates and the reserve may not be adequate, whether due to actions by Bluegreen’s attorneys or otherwise. In addition to the factors described below impacting system-wide sales of VOIs, sales of VOIs are impacted by the proportion of system-wide sales of VOIs sold on behalf of third parties on a commission basis, which are not included in sales of VOIs.
The average annual default rates and delinquency rates (more than 30 days past due) on Bluegreen’s VOI notes receivable were as follows:
System-wide sales of VOIs. System-wide sales of VOIs were $619.1 million and $624.1 million during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. System-wide sales decreased during 2019 due to a decrease in the number of guest tours. Bluegreen believes the decrease was due in part to disruptions in staffing and operations at certain of its sales offices related to the issues with Bass Pro which were resolved when the parties entered into a settlement agreement in June 2019.
Included in system-wide sales are Fee-Based Sales, JIT Sales, Secondary Market Sales and developed VOI sales. Sales by category are tracked based on which deeded VOI is conveyed in each transaction. Bluegreen manages which VOIs are sold based on several factors, including the needs of fee-based clients, Bluegreen’s debt service requirements and default resale requirements under term securitization and similar transactions. These factors contribute to fluctuations in the amount of sales by category from period to period. Fee-Based Sales comprised 50% and 51% of system-wide sales of VOIs during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
The following table sets forth certain information for system-wide sales of VOIs for 2019 and 2018:
Cost of VOIs Sold. During the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, cost of VOIs sold was $21.8 million and $23.8 million, respectively, and represented 9% of sales of VOIs during each year. Cost of VOIs sold as a percentage of sales of VOIs varies between periods based on the relative costs of the specific VOIs sold in each period and the size of the point packages of the VOIs sold (due to offered volume discounts, including consideration of cumulative sales to existing owners). Additionally, the effect of changes in estimates under the relative sales value method, including estimates of project sales, future defaults, upgrades and incremental revenue from the resale of repossessed VOI inventory, are reflected on a retrospective basis in the period the change occurs. Therefore, cost of sales will typically be favorably impacted in periods where a significant amount of Secondary Market VOI inventory is acquired or actual defaults and equity trades are higher than anticipated and the resulting change in estimate is recognized. During 2019, Bluegreen acquired more Secondary Market VOI inventory compared to 2018 due to a temporary suspension of Secondary Market VOI inventory purchases in September 2018 in connection with a system conversion involving Bluegreen’s sales and inventory process. In addition, during 2019 Bluegreen’s cost of sales benefited from sales of relatively lower cost VOIs as compared to 2018. Further, in 2018 Bluegreen increased the average selling price of VOIs by approximately 3%. As a result of this pricing change in 2018, Bluegreen also increased its estimate of total gross margin on the sale of its VOI inventory under the relative sales value method. Under the relative sales value method prescribed for timeshare developers to relieve the cost of VOI inventory, changes to the estimate of gross margin expected to be generated on the sale of VOI inventory are recognized on a retrospective basis in earnings. Accordingly, during 2018, Bluegreen recognized a benefit to cost of VOIs sold of $3.6 million ($2.7 million net of tax, $0.04 EPS).
Fee-Based Sales Commission Revenue. During the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, Bluegreen sold $308.0 million and $318.5 million, respectively, of third-party VOI inventory under commission arrangements and earned sales and marketing commissions of $207.8 million and $216.4 million, respectively, in connection with those sales. Bluegreen earned an average sales and marketing commission of 67% and 68% during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, which is net of a reserve for commission refunds in connection with early defaults and cancellations pursuant to the terms of certain of Bluegreen’s fee-based service arrangements. The decrease in sales and marketing commission as a percentage of fee-based sales for 2019 as compared to 2018 is primarily related to the mix of developer sales at higher commission rates in 2018 as well as higher reserves for early defaults in 2019, which Bluegreen refunds to the third-party developers in certain circumstances.
Financing Revenue, Net of Financing Expense - Sales of VOIs. Interest income on VOIs notes receivable was $80.0 million and $79.4 million during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, which was partially offset by interest expense on receivable backed debt of $20.5 million and $19.5 million, respectively. The increase in finance revenue net of finance expense in 2019 as compared to 2018 is a result of an increase in Bluegreen’s notes receivable portfolio partially offset by Bluegreen’s higher debt outstanding balances. Revenue from mortgage servicing during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 of $6.2 million and $6.0 million, respectively, are included in financing revenue, net of mortgage servicing expenses of $5.3 million and $6.2 million, respectively.
Other Fee-Based Services - Title Operations, net. During the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, revenue from Bluegreen’s title operations was $14.2 million and $12.2 million, respectively, which was partially offset by expenses directly related to Bluegreen’s title operations of $7.0 million and $4.6 million, respectively. Resort title fee revenue varies based on sales volumes as well as the relative title costs in the jurisdictions where the inventory being sold is located.
Net Carrying Cost of VOI Inventory. The carrying cost of Bluegreen’s inventory was $35.6 million and $27.4 million during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, which was partially offset by rental and sampler revenue of $11.8 million and $16.1 million, respectively. The increase in net carrying costs of VOI inventory was primarily related to Bluegreen’s acquisition of the Éilan Hotel and Spa during April 2018, increased maintenance fees and developer subsidies associated with Bluegreen’s increase in VOI inventory and decreased rentals of developer inventory. In certain circumstances, Bluegreen offsets the marketing costs by using its inventory for marketing guest stays.
Selling and Marketing Expenses. Selling and marketing expenses were $321.2 million and $310.6 million during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. As a percentage of system-wide sales of VOIs, selling and marketing expenses were 52% and 50% during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in selling and marketing expenses as a percentage of system-wide sales of VOIs is primarily attributable to higher costs per guest tour, higher fees to Bass Pro as well as a change in the timing of expense recognition under the settlement agreement with Bass Pro discussed below, additional costs related to Bluegreen’s marketing operations in 15 new Cabela’s stores in 2019 and additional costs associated with testing new traditional and digital marketing programs. In addition, 2019 includes severance of $0.6 million pursuant to an agreement entered into with an executive during 2019 and is included in severance within the Sales of VOI and Financing segment.
Bluegreen’s agreement with Bass Pro previously provided for the payment of a variable commission upon the sale of a VOI to a marketing prospect obtained through the Bass Pro marketing channels. As discussed herein, pursuant to the settlement agreement and amended marketing arrangement with Bass Pro, the settlement payment and a portion of the ongoing annual marketing fees are fixed costs and/or are subject to annual minimums regardless of the volume of VOI sales produced from the resulting marketing prospects generated from the amended agreement. In addition, the amended arrangement with Bass Pro is expected to result in an annual 9% increase in Bluegreen’s marketing costs as a percentage of sales from the program, based on increases in program fixed costs and anticipated VOI sales volumes from this marketing channel. Should Bluegreen’s VOI sales volumes be below expectations, the increase in cost of this marketing program would be higher than expected and Bluegreen’s results of operations and cash flows would be adversely impacted.
General and Administrative Expenses - Sales and Marketing Operations. General and administrative expenses, representing expenses directly attributable to sales and marketing operations, were $70.3 million and $27.8 million during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. As a percentage of system-wide sales of VOIs, general and administrative expenses directly attributable to sales and marketing operations were 11% and 4% during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Included in general and administrative expenses attributable to sales and marketing operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 was approximately $39.1 million related to the settlement of the dispute with Bass Pro in June 2019. In addition, 2019 includes severance of $0.8 million pursuant to an agreement entered into with an executive during 2019 and is included in severance within the Sales of VOIs and Financing segment.
‎
Resort Operations and Club Management
Resort Operations and Club Management Revenue. Resort operations and club management revenue increased 4% during the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. Cost reimbursement revenue, which primarily consists of payroll and payroll related expenses for management of the HOAs and other services Bluegreen provides where Bluegreen is the employer, increased 2% during the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. Net of cost reimbursement revenue, resort operations and club management revenues increased 5% during the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. Resort operations and club management revenues, net of cost reimbursement revenues, increased during 2019 compared to 2018 primarily as a result of the receipt of management fees for the full year in 2019 related to two managed resorts added during 2018 and higher third-party rental commissions. Bluegreen managed 49 resort properties as of both December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018.
Resort Operations and Club Management Expense. During 2019, resort operations and club management expense increased 5% compared to 2018. This increase was primarily due to increased cost reimbursement expense and the addition of new managed resorts during 2018 described above. Additionally, in December 2019 Bluegreen conveyed the ski and golf operations and related property at one of its resorts to the HOA, which resulted in a non-cash loss on the disposal of approximately $5.6 million.
Corporate and Other
General and Administrative Expenses - Corporate and Other. General and administrative expenses directly attributable to corporate overhead were $81.1 million and $79.2 million during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in 2019 was primarily attributable to increased severance costs pursuant to agreements entered into with certain executives during 2019 compared to 2018, partially offset by lower self-insured health care costs, lower legal expense and lower information technology costs.
Other Income, net. Other income, net was $1.9 million and $1.2 million during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. This increase was primarily related to a land sale during June 2019 resulting in a gain of $2.0 million.
Interest Expense. Interest expense not related to receivable-backed debt was $19.0 million and $15.2 million during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in interest expense is primarily due to a higher outstanding debt balances during the 2019 periods as compared to the 2018 periods. Additionally, in September 2019, Bluegreen paid off its 2013 Notes Payable and in connection with this repayment, Bluegreen wrote off unamortized debt issuance costs of $0.4 million.
Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Non-Controlling Interest in Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations. Bluegreen includes in its consolidated financial statements the results of operations and financial condition of Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations, its 51%-owned subsidiary. The non-controlling interest in Adjusted EBITDA of Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations is the portion of Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations’ Adjusted EBITDA that is attributable to Big Cedar LLC, which holds the remaining 49% interest in Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations. Adjusted EBITDA attributable to the non-controlling interest in Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations was $11.7 million and $12.5 million during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
BVH Corporate
BVH Corporate in the Company’s segment information includes the following:
BVH’s corporate general and administrative expenses;
Interest expense associated with Woodbridge’s junior subordinated debentures; and
Interest income on interest-bearing cash accounts.
Corporate General and Administrative Expenses
BVH’s corporate general and administrative expenses consist primarily of costs associated with administering the various support functions at its corporate headquarters, including executive compensation, legal, accounting, human resources, investor relations, and executive offices. BVH’s corporate general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 were $42.2 million and $45.9 million, respectively. Corporate general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018 decreased by $3.7 million, which primarily reflects lower costs related to executive incentive bonuses and share-based compensation expense and lower professional fees, partially offset by higher severance costs.
Interest Expense
BVH’s interest expense (excluding interest expense related to the $80.0 million note payable to Bluegreen) for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $5.8 million compared to $6.6 million for 2018 which was repaid in full in August 2020. The decrease in interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared 2018 primarily resulted from BVH’s repayment of the outstanding balance of $30.0 million on its $50.0 million revolving line of credit in January 2019.
Interest Income
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recognized $2.3 million of interest and investment income from its interest-bearing cash accounts and other investments compared to $2.0 million during 2018.
Provision for Income Taxes from continuing operations
The provision for income taxes was $7.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $26.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2018. The Company’s effective income tax rate was approximately 92% and 36% for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The effective income tax rate differed from the expected federal income tax rate of 21% due to the impact of the Company’s nondeductible executive compensation and state income taxes.
‎
Discontinued Operations
Discontinued operations represent the activities of BBX Capital, the former wholly owned subsidiary of the Company which was spun off on September 30, 2020. BBX Capital’s businesses include all of BVHs previous businesses other than Bluegreen, including BBX Capital Real Estate, BBX Sweet Holdings, and Renin.
Income from discontinued operations before income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $40.6 million compared to $13.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, which reflects an increase in equity in net earnings from unconsolidated real estate joint ventures of $23.7 million due to the sales of real estate by joint ventures mentioned above.
Net Income or Loss from Continuing Operations Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests
BVH’s consolidated financial statements include the results of operations and financial position of partially-owned subsidiaries in which it holds a controlling financial interest, including Bluegreen and Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations. As a result, the Company is required to attribute net income or loss to the noncontrolling interests in these subsidiaries.
Net income from continuing operations attributable to noncontrolling interests during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 was $14.6 million and $21.0 million, respectively. The decrease in net income attributable to noncontrolling interests for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to a decrease in the net income of Bluegreen and Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations.
‎
Changes in Financial Condition
The following table summarizes the Company’s cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
The Company’s operating cash flow decreased $49.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to increased operating losses as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including decreases in cash proceeds from sales and marketing activities due to the initial and continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and lower distributions from unconsolidated real estate joint ventures, partially offset by a reduction in spending on the acquisition and development of VOI and real estate inventory during 2020 as compared to 2019, lower payments of interest on debt of $5.3 million, and a $16.0 million reduction in settlement payments made by Bluegreen to Bass Pro pursuant to the settlement agreement entered into in June 2019.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
The Company’s cash used in investing activities increased $30.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to decreased distributions from unconsolidated real estate joint ventures and decreased proceeds from the sale of real estate and property and equipment, partially offset by decreased investments in unconsolidated real estate joint ventures and decreased spending by Bluegreen for property and equipment.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
The Company’s cash used in financing activities increased $56.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, primarily associated with assets spun off in August 2020, primarily due to $96.8 million of cash transferred in the spin-off and Bluegreen’s repurchase of $11.7 million of its common stock in a private transaction during 2020 partially offset by a $17.6 million increase in net borrowings on the Company’s notes payable and other borrowings, and $20.0 million of purchases of the Company’s Class A Common Stock and a $10.0 million payment to redeem the Company’s redeemable 5% cumulative preferred stock in 2019.
For additional information on the availability of cash from existing credit facilities, as well as repayment obligations, see “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below.
Seasonality
Bluegreen has historically experienced, and expects to continue to experience, seasonal fluctuations in its revenues and results of operations. This seasonality has resulted, and may continue to result, in fluctuations in Bluegreen’s quarterly operating results. Due to consumer travel patterns, Bluegreen typically experienced more tours and higher VOI sales during the second and third quarters. However, due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the temporary closures of its marketing operations and VOI sales centers as described above, Bluegreen experienced significantly decreased sales of VOIs in the second quarter, third, and fourth quarters of 2020 as compared to prior years and currently expect such adverse impact to continue in the near term and possibly longer.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company, excluding Bluegreen
As of December 31, 2020, the Company, excluding Bluegreen, had cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments of approximately $22.2 million. BVH believes that its primary source of liquidity for the foreseeable future will be its available cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments and that it has sufficient liquidity to fund anticipated working capital and debt service requirements for at least two years based on current interest rates (assuming that BVH does not exercise its right to defer interest under the terms of the BBX Capital promissory note).
BVH’s principal sources of liquidity have historically been its available cash and short-term investments, dividends received from Bluegreen, and borrowings. However, as described below, the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted or otherwise resulted in uncertainty regarding many of these sources of liquidity. Prior to the spin-off of BBX Capital, BVH also from time to time received funds from distributions by BBX Capital Real Estate; however this source of funds is no longer available due to the spin-off of BBX Capital.
In connection with the spin-off, BVH issued a $75.0 million note payable to BBX Capital that accrues interest at a rate of 6% per annum and requires payments of interest on a quarterly basis. Under the terms of the note, BVH has the option in its discretion to defer interest payments under the note, with interest on the entire outstanding balance thereafter to accrue at a cumulative, compounded rate of 8% per annum until such time as BVH is current on all accrued payments under the note, including deferred interest. All outstanding amounts under the note will become due and payable in five years or earlier upon certain other events.
The Company’s wholly owned subsidiary, Woodbridge, had $66.3 million in junior subordinated debentures outstanding as of December 31, 2020. Woodbridge’s junior subordinated debentures accrue interest at a rate of 3-month LIBOR plus a spread ranging from 3.80% to 3.85%, mature between 2035 and 2036, and require interest payments on a quarterly basis.
BVH is a Bluegreen holding company with limited operations, and it is currently expected that it will incur approximately $2.0 million annually in executive compensation expenses and public company costs and annual interest expense of approximately $7.2 million associated with Woodbridge’s junior subordinated debentures and the note payable to BBX Capital. These amounts are based on current expectations and assumptions, currently available information and, with respect to interest expense on Woodbridge’s junior subordinated debentures, interest rates as of December 31, 2020. Such assumptions and expectations may not prove to be accurate, interest rates may increase and, accordingly or otherwise, actual expenses may exceed the amounts expected. BVH will rely primarily on cash on hand and cash equivalents, as well as dividends that may be provided by Bluegreen in the future, to fund its operations and satisfy its debt service requirements and other liabilities, including its note payable to BBX Capital. As discussed above, the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in Bluegreen’s suspension of its regular quarterly dividend, and while BVH believes that it will have sufficient cash and cash equivalents to fund its operations for approximately two years following the spin-off, it will be dependent on the resumption of dividends from Bluegreen to fund its operations in future periods. There is no assurance that Bluegreen will resume the payment of dividends.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, BVH received dividends from Bluegreen of $8.7 million and $42.9 million, respectively. The resumption of dividends payments by Bluegreen, the recovery for the COVID-19 pandemic following its cessation (the timing of which is highly uncertain), as well as the amount and timing of such dividends, if any, will be based upon factors that Bluegreen’s board of directors deems to be appropriate, including Bluegreen’s operating results, financial condition, cash position, and operating and capital needs. Except as otherwise noted, the debts and obligations of Bluegreen are not direct obligations of BVH and generally are non-recourse to BVH. Similarly, the assets of Bluegreen are not available to BVH absent a dividend or distribution. Furthermore, certain of Bluegreen’s credit facilities contain terms which could limit the payment of cash dividends without the lender’s consent or waiver, and Bluegreen may only pay dividends subject to such restrictions as well as the declaration of dividends by its board of directors. BVH may also seek additional liquidity in the future from outside sources, including traditional bank financing, secured or unsecured indebtedness, or the issuance of equity and/or debt
securities. However, these alternatives may not be available to BVH on attractive terms, or at all. The inability to raise funds through such sources when such are needed would have a material adverse effect on the Company’s business, results of operations, and financial condition.
On July 22, 2020, Bluegreen declared a special cash dividend of $1.19 per share on its common stock, or $86.3 million in the aggregate. BVH used its proceeds from the special cash dividend of approximately $80.0 million to repay BVH’s $80.0 million note owed to Bluegreen.
BVH has also historically received funds from its subsidiaries, including Bluegreen, in connection with the parties’ tax sharing agreement to the extent that a subsidiary utilized BVH’s tax benefits in BVH’s consolidated tax return. However, BVH did not receive any tax sharing payments during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily as a result of the impact of COVID-19 on the Company’s operations. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, $1.0 million and $9.0 million, respectively, was due to Bluegreen from BVH pursuant to the Agreement. BBX Capital and its subsidiaries are no longer parties to the tax sharing agreement as a result of the spin-off.
BVH paid regular quarterly dividends on its Class A and Class B Common Stock totaling $0.25 per share, or $4.8 million in the aggregate, during the year ended December 31, 2019. However, following the first quarter dividend, in April 2020, the Company suspended its regular quarterly dividend due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the suspension of dividend payments by Bluegreen as discussed above. BVH does not expect to resume payments in the near term and any future declaration and payment of cash dividends with respect to the Company’s common stock, if any, will be determined in light of the then-current financial condition of the Company, its operating and capital needs, its debt covenants, and other factors deemed relevant by the board of directors.
In June 2017, the Company’s board of directors approved a share repurchase program which replaced the September 2009 share repurchase program and authorizes the repurchase of up to 1,000,000 shares of the Company’s Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock at an aggregate cost of up to $35.0 million. During the years ended December 31, 2019, and 2018, the Company repurchased 645,778 and 240,000 shares, respectively, of its Class A Common Stock for approximately $15.4 million and $7.6 million, respectively. There were no share repurchases during the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, subject to the dollar cap on repurchases, 49,903 shares of the Company’s Class A or Class B Common Stock remained available for repurchase under the June 2017 share repurchase program.
Bluegreen
Bluegreen believes that it has sufficient liquidity from the sources described below to fund its operations, including its anticipated working capital, capital expenditure, debt service requirements and impacts associated with the COVID-19 pandemic challenges for the foreseeable future, subject to the success of its ongoing mitigating measures to manage through current challenges caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, as discussed in this report, including cost and capital expenditure reductions and the ongoing availability of credit.
Bluegreen’s primary sources of funds from internal operations are: (i) cash sales; (ii) down payments on VOI sales which are financed; (iii) proceeds from the sale of, or borrowings collateralized by, notes receivable; (iv) cash from finance operations, including mortgage servicing fees and principal and interest payments received on the purchase money mortgage loans arising from sales of VOIs; and (v) net cash generated from sales and marketing fee-based services and other fee-based services, including resort management operations.
While the vacation ownership business has historically been capital intensive and Bluegreen has in the past and may in the future pursue transactions or activities which may require significant capital investment, Bluegreen has sought to focus on the generation of  “free cash flow” (defined as cash flow from operating activities, less capital expenditures) by: (i) incentivizing Bluegreen’s sales associates and creating programs with third-party credit card companies to generate a higher percentage of sales in cash; (ii) maintaining sales volumes that focus on efficient marketing channels; (iii) limiting Bluegreen’s capital and inventory expenditures; (iv) utilizing sales and marketing, mortgage servicing, resort management services, title and construction expertise to pursue fee-based-service business relationships that generally require minimal up-front capital investment and have the potential to produce incremental
cash flows; and (v) by selling VOIs obtained through secondary market or JIT arrangements. Bluegreen considers free cash flow to be a measure of cash generated by operating activities that can be used for future investing and financing activities, however, it is not a guarantee that Bluegreen will use excess cash flows for such purposes. While Bluegreen intends to remain flexible with its sales of different categories of VOI inventory in the future, Bluegreen currently expects that its mix of fee-based inventory will decrease over time.
Bluegreen has $20.1 million of required contractual obligations coming due to be paid within one year, as well as two financing facilities with advance periods that will expire in 2021. While there is no assurance that Bluegreen will be successful, Bluegreen intends to seek to renew or extend its debt and extend the advance periods on certain facilities.
The ability to sell and/or borrow against notes receivable from VOI buyers has been critical to Bluegreen’s continued liquidity. A financed VOI buyer is generally only required to pay a minimum of 10% to 20% of the purchase price in cash at the time of sale; however, selling, marketing and administrative expenses attributable to the sale are primarily cash expenses that generally exceed a buyer’s minimum required down payment. Accordingly, having financing facilities available for the hypothecation, sale or transfer of Bluegreen’s VOI notes receivable has been critical to its ability to meet its short and long-term cash needs. Bluegreen has attempted to maintain a number of diverse financing facilities. Historically, Bluegreen has relied on its ability to sell receivables in the term securitization market in order to generate liquidity and create capacity in its receivable facilities. Bluegreen has historically financed a majority of its sales of VOIs, and accordingly, are subject to the risk of defaults by its customers. While Bluegreen does not believe that the full impact of COVID - 19 is reflected in its default or delinquency rates as of December 31, 2020, and believes that the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to have an impact on the collectability of its VOI notes receivable.
Further, the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in instability and volatility in the financial markets. As described above, Bluegreen’s ability to borrow against or sell its VOI notes receivable has historically been a critical factor in Bluegreen’s liquidity. If Bluegreen is unable to renew credit facilities or obtain new credit facilities, Bluegreen’s business, results of operations, liquidity, or financial condition would be materially, adversely impacted.
In connection with Bluegreen’s capital-light business activities, Bluegreen has entered into agreements with third-party developers that allow Bluegreen to buy VOI inventory, typically on a non-committed basis, prior to when it intends to sell such VOIs. Bluegreen’s capital-light business strategy also includes secondary market sales, pursuant to which Bluegreen enters into secondary market arrangements with certain HOAs and others generally on a non-committed basis, which allows Bluegreen to acquire VOIs generally at a significant discount, as such VOIs are typically obtained by the HOAs through foreclosure in connection with maintenance fee defaults. Acquisition of JIT and secondary market inventory in 2021 is expected to range between $10.0 million to $15.0 million.
In October 2020, Bluegreen completed the 2020-A Term Securitization, a private offering and sale of approximately $131.0 million of investment-grade, VOI receivable backed notes (the “Notes”), including approximately $48.6 million of Class A Notes, approximately $47.9 million of Class B Notes and approximately $34.5 million of Class C Notes with interest rates of 1.55%, 2.49%, and 4.22%, respectively, which blends to an overall interest rate of approximately 2.60%. The gross advance rate for this transaction was 88.0%. The Notes mature in February 2036. KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc. (“KeyCM”) and Barclays Capital Inc. acted as co-lead managers and were the initial purchasers of the Notes. KeyCM also acted as structuring agent for the transaction.
Subject to the performance of the collateral, Bluegreen will receive any excess cash flows generated by the receivables transferred under the 2020-A Term Securitization (excess meaning after payments of customary fees, interest, and principal under the 2020-A Term Securitization) on a pro-rata basis as borrowers make payments on their VOI loans.
While ownership of the VOI receivables included in the 2020-A Term Securitization is transferred and sold for legal purposes, the transfer of these receivables is accounted for as a secured borrowing for financial accounting purposes. Accordingly, no gain or loss was recognized as a result of this transaction.
In October 2020, Bluegreen repaid in full the notes payable issued in connection with the 2012 Term Securitization. Accordingly, the related unamortized debt issuance costs of $0.1 million were written off during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Bluegreen’s level of debt and debt service requirements have several important effects on its operations and in turn on the Company, including that: (i) significant debt service cash requirements reduce the funds available for operations and future business opportunities and increase Bluegreen’s vulnerability to adverse economic and industry conditions, as well as conditions in the credit markets, generally; (ii) Bluegreen’s leverage position increases its vulnerability to economic and competitive pressures; (iii) the financial covenants and other restrictions contained in indentures, credit agreements and other agreements relating to its indebtedness require Bluegreen to meet certain financial tests and may restrict Bluegreen’s ability to, among other things, pay dividends, borrow additional funds, dispose of assets or make investments; and (iv) Bluegreen’s leverage position may limit funds available for acquisitions, working capital, capital expenditures, dividends and other general corporate purposes. Certain of Bluegreen’s competitors operate on a less leveraged basis and have greater operating and financial flexibility than Bluegreen does.
Credit Facilities for Receivables with Future Availability
Bluegreen maintains various credit facilities with financial institutions which allow Bluegreen to borrow against or sell its VOI notes receivable. As of December 31, 2020, Bluegreen had the following credit facilities with future availability, all of which are subject to revolving availability terms during the advance period and therefore provide for additional availability as the facility is paid down, subject in each case to compliance with covenants, eligible collateral and applicable terms and conditions during the advance period (dollars in thousands):
(1)As described in further detail below, borrowings prior to September 25, 2020 accrue interest at a rate equal to one month LIBOR plus 2.75% (with an interest rate floor of 3.50%), provided that the rate shall decrease to one-month LIBOR plus 2.25% (with an interest rate floor of 3.00%) on the then remaining balance of borrowing prior to September 25, 2020 if new advances subsequent to September 25, 2020 are at least $25.0 million by June 30, 2021. Borrowings after September 25, 2020 accrue interest at one-month LIBOR plus 2.25% (with an interest rate floor of 3.00%).
(2)Borrowings accrue interest at a rate equal to either LIBOR, a “Cost of Funds” rate or commercial paper (“CP”) rates plus 2.25% (with an interest rate floor of 0.25%). As described in further detail below, the interest rate will increase to the applicable rate plus 3.25% upon the expiration of the advance period (with an interest rate floor of 0.25%).
(3)Of the amounts outstanding under the Quorum Purchase Facility at December 31, 2020, $2.2 million accrues interest at a rate per annum of 4.75%, $15.3 million accrues interest at a fixed rate of 4.95%, and $12.3 million accrues interest at a fixed rate of 5.10%.
Liberty Bank Facility. Since 2008, Bluegreen has maintained a revolving VOI notes receivable hypothecation facility (the “Liberty Bank Facility”) with Liberty Bank which provides for advances on eligible receivables pledged under the Liberty Bank Facility, subject to specified terms and conditions, during the revolving credit period. On June 25, 2020, Bluegreen amended the Liberty Bank Facility to extend the revolving credit period from June 2020 to June
2021, and the maturity from March 2023 to June 2024. In addition, the amendment decreased the advance rate with respect to Qualified Timeshare Loans from 85% to 80% of the unpaid principal balance of the Qualified Timeshare Loans. The advance rate is 60% of the unpaid principal balance of Non-Conforming Qualified Timeshare Loans. The amendment also reduced the maximum permitted outstanding borrowings from $50.0 million to $40.0 million, subject to the terms of the facility, and effective July 1, 2020, decreased the interest rate to the Prime Rate minus 0.10% with a floor of 3.40% from the Prime Rate with a floor of 4.00%. In addition, recourse to Bluegreen under the amended facility was reduced to $10.0 million, with certain exceptions set forth in the facility. Subject to the terms of the facility, principal and interest due under the Liberty Bank Facility are paid as cash is collected on the pledged receivables, with the remaining balance being due by maturity.
NBA Receivables Facility. Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations has a revolving VOI hypothecation facility (the “NBA Receivables Facility”) with National Bank of Arizona (“NBA”) which was amended and restated on September 25, 2020. The Amended and Restated NBA Receivables Facility extended the revolving advance period from September 2020 to September 2023 and the maturity date from March 2025 to March 2028. In addition, the interest rate on all new advances made under the facility will be one month LIBOR plus 2.25% (with an interest rate floor of 3.00%). Further, if new advances of at least $25.0 million are made by June 30, 2021, the interest rate on borrowings under the facility at September 25, 2020, to the extent then remaining outstanding, will be reduced from the current rate of one month LIBOR plus 2.75% (with an interest rate floor of 3.50%) to one month LIBOR plus 2.25% (with an interest rate floor of 3.00%). The Amended and Restated NBA Receivables Facility provides for advances at a rate of 80% on eligible receivables pledged under the facility (decreased from the prior rate of 85%), subject to eligible collateral and specified terms and conditions, during the revolving credit period. The maximum borrowings allowed under the facility remains at $70.0 million. In addition, recourse to Bluegreen/Big Cedar under the amended facility was reduced to $19.9 million as of December 31, 2020 and will be reduced by $1.3 million per month until it reaches a floor of $10.0 million. Subject to the terms of the facility, principal and interest payments received on pledged receivables are applied to principal and interest due under the facility, with the remaining outstanding balance being due by maturity.
Pacific Western Facility. Bluegreen has a revolving VOI notes receivable hypothecation facility (the “Pacific Western Facility”) with Pacific Western Bank, which provides for advances on eligible VOI notes receivable pledged under the facility, subject to specified terms and conditions, during a revolving credit period. Maximum outstanding borrowings under the Pacific Western Facility are $40.0 million, subject to eligible collateral and customary terms and conditions. The revolving advance period expires in September 2021 and the Pacific Western Facility matures in September 2024 (in each case, subject to an additional 12-month extension at the option of Pacific Western Bank). Eligible “A” VOI notes receivable that meet certain eligibility and FICO score requirements, which Bluegreen believes are typically consistent with loans originated under its current credit underwriting standards, are subject to an 85% advance rate. The Pacific Western Facility also allows for certain eligible “B” VOI notes receivable (which have less stringent FICO score requirements) to be funded at a 53% advance rate. All borrowings outstanding under the Pacific Western Facility accrue interest at an annual rate equal to 30-day LIBOR plus 3.00%; provided, however, that a portion of the borrowings, to the extent such borrowings are in excess of established debt minimums, will accrue interest at 30-day LIBOR plus 2.75%. Subject to the terms of the facility, principal repayments and interest on borrowings under the Pacific Western Facility are paid as cash is collected on the pledged VOI notes receivable, subject to future required decreases in the advance rates after the end of the revolving advance period, with the remaining outstanding balance being due by maturity. The facility has limited recourse not to exceed $10.0 million.
KeyBank/DZ Purchase Facility. Bluegreen has a VOI notes receivable purchase facility (the “KeyBank/DZ Purchase Facility”) with DZ Bank AG Deutsche Zentral-Genossenschaftsbank, Frankfurt AM Main (“DZ”), and KeyBank National Association (“KeyBank”) which permits maximum outstanding financings of up to $80.0 million and provides for an advance rate of 80% with respect to VOI receivables securing amounts financed. On December 27, 2019, the KeyBank/DZ Purchase Facility was amended to extend the advance period to December 2022 from December 2019. The KeyBank/DZ Purchase Facility will mature and all outstanding amounts will become due 24 months after the revolving advance period has expired, or earlier under certain circumstances set forth in the facility. Interest on amounts outstanding under the facility is tied to an applicable index rate of the LIBOR rate, in the case of amounts funded by KeyBank, and a cost of funds rate or commercial paper rates, in the case of amounts funded by or through DZ. Pursuant to the amendment, the interest rate payable under the facility decreased from 2.75% to the applicable index rate plus 2.25% (with an interest rate index floor of 0.25%) until the expiration of the revolving advance period, and thereafter decreased from 4.75% to equal the applicable index rate plus 3.25% (with an interest rate index floor of 0.25%). Subject to the terms of the facility, Bluegreen will receive the excess cash flows generated
by the VOI notes receivable sold (excess meaning after payments of customary fees, interest and principal under the facility) until the expiration of the VOI notes receivable advance period, at which point all of the excess cash flow will be paid to the note holders until the outstanding balance is reduced to zero. While ownership of the VOI notes receivable included in the facility is transferred and sold for legal purposes, the transfer of these VOI notes receivable is accounted for as a secured borrowing for financial reporting purposes. The facility is nonrecourse.
Quorum Purchase Facility. Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations has a VOI notes receivable purchase facility (the “Quorum Purchase Facility”) with Quorum Federal Credit Union (“Quorum”), pursuant to which Quorum has agreed to purchase eligible VOI notes receivable in an amount of up to an aggregate $50.0 million purchase price, subject to certain conditions precedent and other terms of the facility. On December 18, 2020, the Quorum Purchase Facility was amended to extend the advance period to December 2022 from December 2020 and the maturity date to December 2034 from December 2032. The interest rate on each advance is set at the time of funding based on rates mutually agreed upon by the parties. Of the amounts outstanding under the Quorum Purchase Facility at December 31, 2020, $2.2 million accrues interest at a rate per annum of 4.75%, $15.3 million accrues interest at a fixed rate of 4.95%, and $12.3 million accrues interest at a fixed rate of 5.10%. The Quorum Purchase Facility provides for an 85% advance rate on eligible receivables sold under the facility, however Quorum can modify this advance rate on future purchases subject to the terms and conditions of the Quorum Purchase Facility. Eligibility requirements for VOI notes receivable sold include, among others, that the obligors under the VOI notes receivable sold be members of Quorum at the time of the note sale. Subject to performance of the collateral, Bluegreen or Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations, as applicable, will receive any excess cash flows generated by the VOI notes receivable transferred to Quorum under the facility (excess meaning after payment of customary fees, interest and principal under the facility) on a pro-rata basis as borrowers make payments on their VOI notes receivable. While ownership of the VOI notes receivable included in the Quorum Purchase Facility is transferred and sold for legal purposes, the transfer of these VOI notes receivable is accounted for as a secured borrowing for financial reporting purposes. The facility is nonrecourse.
Other Credit Facilities
Fifth Third Syndicated Line-of-Credit and Fifth Third Syndicated Term Loan. In December 2016, Bluegreen entered into a $100.0 million syndicated credit facility with Fifth Third Bank, as administrative agent and lead arranger, and certain other bank participants as lenders. In October 2019, Bluegreen amended the facility and increased the facility to $225.0 million. The amended facility includes a $100.0 million term loan (the “Fifth Third Syndicated Term Loan”) with quarterly amortization requirements and a $125.0 million revolving line of credit (the “Fifth Third Syndicated Line-of-Credit”). Borrowings under the amended facility generally bear interest at LIBOR plus 2.00% - 2.50% (with a LIBOR floor of 0.25%), depending on Bluegreen’s leverage ratio, are collateralized by certain of Bluegreen’s VOI inventory, sales center buildings, management fees, short-term receivables and cash flows from residual interests relating to certain term securitizations, and will mature in October 2024. During March 2020, in an effort to assure adequate liquidity for a sustained period given the effect and uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, Bluegreen drew down $60.0 million under its line-of credit which it has repaid as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, outstanding borrowings under the facility totaled $123.8 million, including $93.8 million under the Fifth Third Syndicated Term Loan with an interest rate of 2.25%, and $30.0 million under the Fifth Third Syndicated Line of Credit with an interest rate of 2.25%.
Bluegreen also has outstanding obligations under various credit facilities and securitizations that have no remaining future availability as the advance periods have expired.
‎
Commitments
The Company’s material commitments as of December 31, 2020 included the required payments due on receivable-backed debt, notes payable and other borrowings, junior subordinated debentures, commitments to complete certain projects based on its sales contracts with customers, subsidy advances to certain HOAs, and commitments under non-cancelable operating leases.
The following table summarizes the contractual minimum principal and interest payments required on all of the Company’s outstanding debt, non-cancelable operating leases and inventory purchase commitments by period due date, as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(1)Amounts do not include purchase accounting adjustments for junior subordinated debentures of $37.9 million.
(2)Amounts represent the cash payment for leases and includes interest of $11.9 million. The increase in noncancelable operating leases is primarily the result of 2 new leases executed in December 2020.
(3)Amounts represent the $4.0 million annual cash payment to Bass Pro during each of 2021, 2022, 2023, and 2024 pursuant to the June 2019 settlement agreement and include imputed interest of $2.7 million.
(4)Assumes that the scheduled minimum principal payments are made in accordance with the table above and the interest rate on variable rate debt remains the same as the rate at December 31, 2020.
The future commitments of the Company, excluding Bluegreen, relate to the Woodbridge’s junior subordinated debentures and the note payable to BBX Capital, including interest thereon. The Company will rely primarily on cash on hand and cash equivalents, as well as dividends that may be provided by Bluegreen in the future, in order to satisfy the principal payments required on its contractual obligations. As discussed above, the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in Bluegreen’s suspension of its regular quarterly dividend, and while the Company believes that it will have sufficient cash and cash equivalents to fund its operations for approximately two years following the spin-off, it will be dependent on the resumption of dividends from Bluegreen to fund its operations in future periods. There is no assurance that Bluegreen will resume the payment of dividends.
In December 2019, Bluegreen’s then-serving President and Chief Executive Officer resigned. In connection with his resignation, Bluegreen agreed to make payments totaling $3.5 million over a period of 18 months, $1.2 million of which remained payable as of December 31, 2020.
In lieu of paying maintenance fees for unsold VOI inventory, Bluegreen may enter into subsidy agreements with certain HOAs. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, Bluegreen made payments related to such subsidies of $24.0 million, $24.9 million, and $12.6 million, respectively, which are included within cost of other fee-based services in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, Bluegreen had no accrued liabilities for such subsidies.
Bluegreen intends to use cash on hand and cash flow from operations, including cash received from the sale or pledge of VOI notes receivable, and cash received from new borrowings under existing or future credit facilities in order to satisfy the principal payments and interest required on its contractual obligations.
Bluegreen believes that its existing cash, anticipated cash generated from operations, anticipated future permitted borrowings under existing or future credit facilities, and anticipated future sales of notes receivable under existing, future or replacement purchase facilities will be sufficient to meet its anticipated working capital, capital expenditure and debt service requirements, including the contractual payment of the Bluegreen obligations set forth above, for the foreseeable future, subject to the success of its ongoing business strategies, the ongoing availability of credit and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and success of the actions Bluegreen has taken in response thereto. Bluegreen will continue its efforts to renew, extend or replace any credit and receivables purchase facilities that have expired or that will expire in the near term. Bluegreen may, in the future, also obtain additional credit facilities and may issue corporate debt or equity securities. Any debt incurred or issued may be secured or unsecured, bear interest at fixed or variable rates and may be subject to such terms as the lender may require and management believes acceptable. There can be no assurance that Bluegreen’s efforts to renew or replace credit facilities or receivables purchase facilities which have expired or which are scheduled to expire in the near term will be successful or that sufficient funds will be available from operations or under existing, proposed or future revolving credit or other borrowing arrangements or receivables purchase facilities to meet Bluegreen’s cash needs, including debt service obligations. To the extent Bluegreen is unable to sell notes receivable or borrow under such facilities, its ability to satisfy its obligations would be materially adversely affected.
Bluegreen’s receivables purchase facilities, credit facilities, indentures and other outstanding debt instruments include what Bluegreen believes to be customary conditions to funding, eligibility requirements for collateral, cross-default and other acceleration provisions and certain financial and other affirmative and negative covenants, including, among others, limits on the incurrence of indebtedness, payment of dividends, investments in joint ventures and other restricted payments, the incurrence of liens and transactions with affiliates, as well as covenants concerning net worth, fixed charge coverage requirements, debt-to-equity ratios, portfolio performance requirements and cash balances, and events of default or termination. In the future, Bluegreen may be required to seek waivers of such covenants, but may not be successful in obtaining waivers, and such covenants may limit its ability to raise funds, sell receivables or satisfy or refinance its obligations, or otherwise adversely affect Bluegreen’s financial condition and results of operations, as well as its ability to pay dividends. During April 2020, Bluegreen’s board of directors suspended regular quarterly cash dividends on Bluegreen’s common stock due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. While Bluegreen paid a special dividend during August 2020, no regular or any other special cash dividends are currently anticipated. Bluegreen’s future operating performance and ability to meet its financial obligations will be subject to future economic conditions and to financial, business and other factors, many of which may be beyond its control.
Pursuant to a settlement agreement Bluegreen entered into with Bass Pro and its affiliates during June 2019, Bluegreen paid Bass Pro $20.0 million and agreed to make five annual payments to Bass Pro of $4.0 million, which commenced in January 2020. Additionally, in lieu of the previous commission arrangement, Bluegreen agreed to pay Bass Pro a fixed annual fee of $70,000 for each Bass Pro and Cabela’s retail store that it is accessing (excluding sales at retail stores which are designated to provide tours to Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations, or “Bluegreen/Big Cedar feeder stores”), plus $32.00 per net vacation package sold (less cancellations or refunds within 45 days of sale). Bluegreen also agreed to contribute to the Wonders of Wildlife Foundation $5.00 per net package sold (less certain cancellations and refunds within 45 days of sale), subject to an annual minimum of $700,000. Subject to the terms and conditions of the settlement agreement, Bluegreen is generally required to pay the fixed annual fee with respect to at least 59 Bass Pro retail stores and a minimum number of Cabela’s retail stores that increases over time to a total of at least 60 Cabela’s retail stores by the end of 2021. During 2020, Bluegreen paid $5.7 million for this fixed fee, which is included in selling, general and administrative expenses within the Company’s consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive income. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the minimum number of Bass Pro and Cabela’s retail stores for purposes of the fixed annual fee may be reduced under certain circumstances set forth in the agreement,
including as a result of a reduction of traffic in the stores in excess of 25% year-over-year. In March 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, Bluegreen temporarily closed its retail marketing operations at Bass Pro Shops and Cabela’s stores. Beginning in mid-May 2020, Bluegreen started the process of recommencing its sales and marketing operations and by December 31, 2020, Bluegreen had recommenced operating marketing kiosks at 88 Bass Pro Shops and Cabela’s stores and commenced operating marketing kiosks at 10 new Cabela’s stores, for a total of 98 Bass Pro Shops and Cabela’s stores.
Off-balance-sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company did not have any “off-balance sheet” arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The Company’s discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition are based upon its consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires it to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of commitments and contingencies. On an ongoing basis, the Company evaluates its estimates, including those that relate to the estimated future sales value of inventory, the recognition of revenue and its allowance for loan losses. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates if different assumptions and conditions were utilized. If actual results differ significantly from its estimates, its results of operations and financial condition could be materially, adversely impacted.
Revenue Recognition for Sales of VOIs
Bluegreen generally offers qualified purchasers financing for up to 90% of the purchase price of VOIs. The typical financing provides for a term of ten years and a fixed interest rate, is fully amortizing in equal installments and may be prepaid without penalty. For sales of VOIs for which Bluegreen provides financing, it has reduced the transaction price for expected loan losses, which Bluegreen considers to be variable consideration. To the extent Bluegreen determines that it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized may occur, it records an estimate of variable consideration as a reduction to the transaction price of the sales of VOIs until the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. Bluegreen’s estimate of variable consideration is based on the results of its static pool analysis, which relies on historical payment data for similar VOI notes receivable and tracks uncollectibles for each period’s sales over the entire life of the VOI notes receivable. Bluegreen also considers whether historical economic conditions are comparable to then current economic conditions, as well as variations in underwriting standards. Bluegreen’s policies regarding the estimation of variable consideration on its notes receivable are discussed in further detail under “Allowance for Loan Losses on VOI Notes Receivable” below.
Allowance for Loan Losses on VOI Notes Receivable
The allowance for loan losses is related to the notes receivable generated in connection with financing Bluegreen’s VOI sales. Bluegreen holds large amounts of homogeneous VOI notes receivable and assess uncollectibility based on pools of receivables as there are no significant concentrations of credit risk with any individual counterparty or groups of counterparties. In estimating future loan losses, Bluegreen does not use a single primary indicator of credit quality but instead evaluates its VOI notes receivable based upon a static pool analysis that incorporates the age of the respective receivables, default trends and prepayment rates by origination year, as well as the FICO scores of the borrowers.
Inventory and Cost of Sales
Bluegreen carries its completed inventory at the lower of:  (i) cost, including costs of improvements and amenities incurred subsequent to acquisition, capitalized interest, real estate taxes and other costs incurred during construction, or (ii) estimated fair market value, less costs to sell. Bluegreen uses the relative sales value method for establishing the cost of its VOI sales and relieving inventory, which requires it to make estimates subject to significant uncertainty.
Under the relative sales value method required by timeshare accounting rules, cost of sales is calculated as a percentage of net sales using a cost-of-sales percentage based on the ratio of total estimated development costs to total estimated VOI revenue, including the estimated incremental revenue from the resale of VOI inventory repossessed, generally as a result of the default of the related receivable. Also, pursuant to timeshare accounting rules, Bluegreen does not relieve inventory for VOI cost of sales related to anticipated loan losses. Accordingly, no adjustment is made when inventory is reacquired upon default of the related receivable. The effect of changes in estimates under the relative sales value method, including estimates of projected sales, future defaults, upgrades and incremental revenue from the resale of repossessed VOI inventory, are reflected on a retrospective basis in the period the change occurs.
‎