Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors and our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K (Annual Report). In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Some of the numbers included herein have been rounded for the convenience of presentation. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under Part 1, Item 1A. Risk Factors and elsewhere in this Annual Report. A discussion of the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 has been reported previously in our final prospectus filed with the SEC on February 12, 2021, under the heading "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations."
Executive summary
We are a global medical device company focused on developing and commercializing clinically differentiated, cost efficient and minimally invasive treatments that engage and enhance the body’s natural healing process. We operate our business through two reportable segments, U.S. and International, and our portfolio of products is grouped into the following three verticals:
•OA joint pain treatment and joint preservation products, which are HA viscosupplementation therapies approved by the FDA through a PMA;
•BGSs, which are human tissue allograft and synthetic products used primarily in spine surgery which have either (i) received 510(k) clearance, which is a premarket submission made to the FDA to demonstrate that the device to be marketed is at least as safe and effective, that is, substantially equivalent, to a legally marketed device, or (ii) are regulated solely as Section 361 HCT/Ps, which means they are human cells, tissues and cellular and tissue-based products that do not require a PMA in the United States; and
•minimally invasive fracture treatment, which is a FDA-approved Exogen system prescribed for long bone stimulation for fracture healing.
Our U.S. segment offers our full existing portfolio of products. This includes our OA joint pain treatment and joint preservation products, which address the entire market for HA viscosupplementation with offerings for single, three and five injection therapies: (i) Durolane, a single injection therapy, which we launched in the United States in the first half of 2018 and also market outside the United States in more than 30 countries; (ii) GELSYN-3, a three injection therapy, which we have marketed in the United States since the second half of 2016; and (iii) SUPARTZ FX, a five injection therapy, which we have marketed in the United States since May 2012. Our U.S. segment also offers our BGS products, which are targeted at improving bone fusion rates following spinal fusion and other orthopedic surgeries. These products include allograft-derived bone graft with growth factors (OsteoAMP), a DBM (Exponent), cancellous bone in different preparations (PureBone), bioactive synthetics (Signafuse and Interface), a collagen ceramic matrix (OsteoMatrix) and two bone marrow isolation systems (CellXtract and Extractor). Further, our U.S. segment offers our Exogen system, which we believe offers significant advantages over electrical based long bone stimulation systems, including documented mechanism of action, shorter treatment times and superior nonunion heal rates.
Our International segment offers Durolane, or single injection therapy, OsteoAMP, our allograft-derived bone graft with growth factors, and our Exogen system.
The following table sets forth total net sales, net income from continuing operations, Adjusted EBITDA and pro forma net income (loss) per unit attributable to common unit holders - basic and diluted:
(1)See below under Components of our results of operations-Adjusted EBITDA for a definition of Adjusted EBITDA and Results from continuing operations for a reconciliation of net income from continuing operations to Adjusted EBITDA.
(2)See below for a computation of pro forma net income per unit attributable to common unit holders - basic and diluted after the recapitalization described below which was in conjunction with our IPO.
On February 16, 2021, our limited liability company agreement was amended and restated to, among other things, (i) provide for a new single class of common membership interests in the Company (LLC Interests) and (ii) exchange all of the existing membership interests for LLC Interests. For purposes of calculating pro forma earnings per unit, we have adjusted the number of outstanding membership units retroactively to give effect to the amendment and resulting recapitalization.
Pro forma basic net income per unit is computed by dividing net income by the pro forma weighted-average number of units outstanding during the period. Pro forma diluted net income per unit is computed by dividing net income by the pro forma weighted-average number of units outstanding adjusted to give effect to potentially dilutive securities. As a result of the recapitalization and the New LLC Owner assuming the obligations of the Company’s Phantom Plan awards there are no dilutive securities.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of the numerators and denominators used to compute pro forma basic and diluted net income per unit for the years ended December 31 as follows:
Strategic transactions
We have pursued and continue to pursue business development opportunities that leverage our significant customer presence across orthopedics, broaden our portfolio and increase our global footprint. Below is a summary of some of our recent transactions:
Collaboration and development agreement for MOTYS
On May 29, 2019, we entered into a collaboration and development agreement (Development Agreement), with Musculoskeletal Transplant Foundation, Inc., or MTF, to develop an injectable placental tissue product, MOTYS, for use in the OA joint pain treatment. The development and commercialization of the product is anticipated to take place in two stages. In consideration for achieving its development milestones, we paid MTF $1.5 million and are obligated to pay additional payments totaling $0.8 million if certain further milestones are achieved. We began selling MOTYS in the fourth quarter of 2020, subject to the terms of an exclusive commercial supply agreement entered into with MTF on June 18, 2020.
Development collaboration agreement for PROcuff
On August 23, 2019, we entered into an exclusive Collaboration Agreement with Harbor, to develop and license the rights to commercialize a woven-suture-collagen composite implant product. Concurrently with the execution of the agreement, we purchased $1.0 million of shares of Harbor. As a result of Harbor’s achievement of certain milestones, on October 5, 2020, we purchased $1.0 million of additional shares of Harbor. Furthermore, we are obligated to make two additional one-time payments totaling $6.0 million in aggregate upon Harbor’s achievement of (i) receiving regulatory approval and (ii) achieving a certain net sales target. The sole use of proceeds from these investments is for the development of the implant product that is the subject of our agreement. We intend to negotiate and enter into a definitive supply agreement with Harbor if and when the product is cleared for marketing by the FDA at a price per unit not to exceed an agreed upon maximum.
CartiHeal (developer of Agili-C) investment and option and equity purchase agreement
On July 15, 2020, we made a $15.0 million equity investment in CartiHeal, a privately-held company headquartered in Israel and developer of the proprietary Agili-C implant for the treatment of joint surface lesions in traumatic and osteoarthritic joints. This investment follows the recently completed enrollment and outcome of interim analysis in CartiHeal’s IDE multinational pivotal study for Agili-C. This new round of funding is expected to enable CartiHeal to complete all patient follow-up in the Agili-C study and submit an application for PMA to the FDA. Under the agreement, CartiHeal can secure an additional $5.0
million equity investment from us, if needed, for IDE study completion. We previously made an initial $2.5 million investment in CartiHeal in January 2018 and a subsequent investment of $0.2 million in January 2020.
Contemporaneous with the July 2020 investment, we also entered into an Option and Equity Purchase Agreement with CartiHeal and its shareholders, which provides us with an exclusive option to acquire 100% of CartiHeal’s shares under certain conditions, or the Call Option, and provides CartiHeal with a put option that would require us to purchase 100% of CartiHeal’s shares under certain conditions, or the Put Option. The Call Option is exercisable by us at any time after the closing of the investment. The Put Option is only exercisable by CartiHeal upon pivotal clinical trial success, including achievement of certain secondary endpoints and FDA approval of the Agili-C device with a label consistent in all respects with pivotal clinical trial success. The pivotal clinical trial’s objective is to demonstrate the superiority of the Agili-C implant over the surgical standard of care, including microfracture and debridement, for the treatment of cartilage or osteochondral defects, in both osteoarthritic knees and knees without degenerative changes. If not previously exercised, the Call Option and the Put Option terminate 45 days following the FDA approval of Agili-C or in the event of failure of the pivotal clinical trial. We also have the right to terminate the Call Option and Put Option at any time ending 30 days after receipt from CartiHeal of the statistical report regarding the final results of the pivotal clinical trial upon payment of a break fee of $30.0 million. Consideration for the acquisition of all of the shares of CartiHeal pursuant to the Call Option or Put Option would be $350.0 million, all of which would be payable at closing, with an additional $150.0 million payable upon achievement of certain sales milestones related to Agili-C. Such closing would be subject to customary closing conditions.
Certain of the foregoing transactions have had a significant impact on our financial results of operations for the periods in which they occurred, and they have affected the comparability of these statements for the corresponding comparative periods.
Outlook
We plan to continue to expand our business and to increase our net sales and profitability by executing on the following strategies:
•continue to expand market share in HA viscosupplementation;
•introduce new OA joint pain treatment and joint preservation products;
•further develop and commercialize our BGS portfolio;
•expand indications for use for our Exogen system;
•invest in research and development;
•pursue business development opportunities; and
•opportunistically grow our international markets.
We expect to face challenges as we execute on our business strategy. Our industry is highly competitive, subject to rapid change and significantly affected by market activities of industry participants, new product introductions and other technological advancements. We believe our experienced management team positions us for success in facing these and other challenges. However, there are several factors affecting our business that are beyond our control, such as our ability to successfully introduce new products and line extensions, expand labels, continue to obtain reimbursement for our products at acceptable rates and receive necessary governmental approvals. In addition, we expect that market demand, government regulation, third-party coverage and reimbursement policies and societal pressures will continue to change the healthcare industry worldwide, resulting in further business consolidations and alliances among our customers, which may exert further downward pressure on the prices of our products. For information about additional factors that may affect our outlook, see Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors and “Special note regarding forward-looking statements” sections of this Annual Report.
COVID-19 Update and Outlook
During 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic spread around the world and in the U.S. and, more recently, new variants of the virus have emerged, some of which have shown to be more contagious. The COVID-19 pandemic has had widespread, rapidly evolving and unpredictable impacts on global society, economies, financial markets and business practices. Federal and state governments responded by implementing a number of measures designed to prevent or minimize its spread and the ongoing effects of the pandemic, including stay-at-home or shelter-in-place orders, quarantines and closure of all non-essential businesses, social distancing, travel restrictions, border closures, and other measures, which have caused global business disruptions and significant volatility in U.S. and international debt and equity markets.
The COVID-19 pandemic has rapidly escalated in the United States, creating significant uncertainty and economic disruption, and leading to record levels of unemployment nationally. Due to the evolving nature of the COVID-19 crisis, we continue to monitor the situation closely and assess the impact on our business. In response to various governmental orders and public health advisories, we have implemented a number of measures to protect the health and safety of our workforce, conserve liquidity and position us to emerge from the current crisis in a healthy financial position. These measures include closing our offices and instituting work-from-home policies with the exception of essential personnel in March 2020. In addition, we temporarily imposed employee salary reductions for our U.S. employees for the month of June 2020 and suspended, until December 31, 2020, a portion of the employer contribution we make under our 401(k) plan. All temporary salary reductions have now been reversed and all salaries have been reinstated to pre-COVID-19 levels. To the extent permitted and in accordance with guidance from public health officials and government agencies, we have begun to reopen our locations and resume normal operations where appropriate. It is possible our operations will continue to be impacted in 2021, however, the magnitude and duration of the impact is impossible to predict due to:
•uncertainties regarding the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the length of time over which the disruptions caused by COVID-19 will continue;
•the impact of governmental orders and regulations that have been, and may in the future be, imposed in response to the pandemic;
•the impact of COVID-19 on our suppliers, manufacturers and other third parties on which we rely;
•the deterioration of economic conditions in the United States, as well as record high unemployment levels, which could have an adverse impact on discretionary consumer spending; and
•uncertainty regarding the potential for additional waves of the COVID-19 crisis to occur.
The COVID-19 pandemic began to have a material impact on our business during the second quarter of 2020. Since March 2020, various governmental orders and public health advisories, including “shelter-in-place” orders and quarantines, have reduced or prevented patient access to hospitals and physicians. As a result, the number of both elective and non-elective procedures have been reduced and our sales have decreased.
In addition, we could be further impacted if we begin to see delays in payments from customers, return to more stringent “shelter-in-place” orders or advisories, facility closures or other reasons related to the pandemic. Despite the COVID-19 pandemic, we had positive cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to a lack of significant delays in payments from customers, decreases in expenses correlating to a related decrease in sales, reduction in travel expenses and the institution of various cost cutting measures provided us with positive cash flow during the year ended December 31, 2020. However, the extent to which COVID-19 could materially impact our future liquidity is uncertain.
In April 2020, we received $1.2 million in funds from the HHS as part of the CARES Act Provider Relief Fund. We determined we have complied with the CARES Act Provider Relief Fund conditions so that we may use the funds to reimburse for health care related expenses and lost revenues attributable to the public health emergency resulting from COVID-19. An additional $2.9 million was received from the CARES Act Provider Relief Fund in July 2020. We have recognized these payments as other income within our consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive income (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Under the CARES Act, we have also taken advantage of the deferral of employer social security payroll tax payments. In April 2020, we began deferring all employer social security payroll tax payments for the remainder of the 2020 calendar year, with 50% of the taxes is deferred until December 31, 2021 and the remaining 50% deferred until December 31, 2022.
We are continuing to evaluate other aspects of the CARES Act, including the use of the employee retention tax credit. The employee retention tax credit provides an additional tax credit to employers that (i) have either fully or partially suspended operations because of government orders associated with COVID-19 or (ii) experience a substantial decline in income but continue to pay employees their wages.
Components of our results of operations
Net sales
We generate net sales from a portfolio of active healing products that serve physicians spanning the orthopedic continuum, including sports medicine, total joint reconstruction, hand and upper extremities, foot and ankle, podiatric surgery, trauma, spine and neurosurgery. We report sales net of contractual allowances, rebates and returns.
We sell our OA joint pain treatment and joint preservation products and minimally invasive fracture treatment through our direct sales team, who manage and maintain the sales relationship with healthcare providers, distribution centers or specialty pharmacies. In certain international markets, we also sell to independent distributors on prearranged business terms, who manage or maintain the sales relationship with their physician customers. Refer to Note 2. Summary of significant accounting policies to our Notes to consolidated financial statements for further information We recognize revenue at the point in time when control is transferred to the customer, typically, in the case of our OA joint pain treatment and joint preservation products, when these products are shipped to the customer and, in the case of our Exogen system, when the patient has accepted the product.
Our BGSs are primarily sold in the U.S. market through independent distributors. We generally consign our BGS products to hospitals so our neurosurgeon and orthopedic spine surgeon customers can use them in procedures. We recognize revenue based upon consumption in a surgical procedure.
Cost of sales
Our cost of sales primarily consist of costs of products purchased from our third-party suppliers, direct labor and allocated overhead associated with the assembly of our Exogen system, excess and obsolete inventory charges, shipping, inspection and related costs incurred in making our products available for sale or use. In addition, cost of sales includes depreciation related to production as well as amortization of product-related intellectual property and distribution rights associated with commercialized products. Our OA joint pain treatment and joint preservation products and BGS products are manufactured by or obtained from third-party suppliers primarily located in Japan, Switzerland, Sweden and the United States. We receive the components for our Exogen system from suppliers and assemble each system in-house at our Cordova, Tennessee facility. In the future, we expect our cost of sales to increase due to increased sales volume.
Gross profit and gross margin
Gross profit consists of net sales less cost of sales. We calculate gross margin as gross profit divided by net sales. Our gross margin has been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, including costs of products purchased from our third-party suppliers, manufacturing costs, product mix and implementation over time of cost-reduction strategies. We expect net sales and product mix to vary quarter by quarter and therefore our gross profit will likely fluctuate from quarter to quarter.
Selling, general and administrative expense
Selling, general and administrative expense primarily consists of salaries, benefits and other related costs, including equity-based compensation, for personnel employed in sales, marketing, finance, legal, compliance, administrative, information technology, medical education and training, quality and human resource departments. Selling, general and administrative expense also includes third-party marketing, supply chain and distribution, product recall costs, information technology, legal, human resources, insurance and facilities expenses, selling, general and administrative expenses also include commissions, generally based on a percentage of sales, to our direct sales team and independent distributors. We expect our selling, general and administrative expenses will increase with the continued expansion of our sales organization and commercialization of our current and pipeline products. We plan to hire more personnel to support the growth of our business. In addition, as a public company, we will be implementing additional procedures and processes to address the standards and requirements applicable to public companies. We expect to incur additional annual selling, general and administrative expenses related to these additional procedures and processes including, among other things, equity-based compensation, increased liability insurance for our directors and officers, director fees, reporting requirements of the SEC, transfer agent fees, hiring additional accounting, legal and administrative personnel, increased auditing and legal fees and similar expenses. We also expect a change in the timing over which compensation expense is recognized as a result of the termination of the Phantom Plan and the receipt by participants of shares of Class A common stock upon settlement of their awards, which settlement is expected to take place twelve months after the date of such termination. However, over time, as we grow our net sales, we expect selling, general and administrative expenses to decline as a percentage of net sales.
Research and development expense
Research and development expense primarily consists of employee compensation, equity compensation and related expenses, as well as contract research organization service expenses related to clinical trials. We expense internal research and development costs as incurred and research and development costs incurred by third parties as they perform contracted work. Our research and development expenses may vary substantially from period to period based on the timing of research and development activities. We are focused on internal research and development to broaden our product portfolio across all verticals, expand our Exogen system product label and undertake clinical research to support commercialization of all of our products. As a result, we expect our research and development expenses to increase to the mid-single digits as a percentage of net sales as we introduce new products, extend existing product lines and expand indications. We see significant opportunity to develop innovative and clinically differentiated products in-house with our experienced research and development team. We are currently funding our B.O.N.E.S. clinical study, which began enrollment in 2018 and is aimed at broadening the label of our Exogen system to include a broader range of bones that may be treated as fresh fractures in predisposed patients at risk of nonunion. In addition, we are planning preclinical and animal model studies for MOTYS and PROcuff. Clinical and preclinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations.
Restructuring costs
Restructuring costs primarily consist of employee severance, legal, consulting and temporary labor expenses. During the periods presented, restructuring costs were associated with headcount reductions in our international business to improve operating efficiency. Key assumptions in determining the restructuring costs include headcount reductions, as well as terms and negotiated payments to terminate certain contractual obligations.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation expense primarily consists of depreciation of computer equipment and software as well as leasehold improvements, furniture, fixtures, machinery and equipment. Amortization expense primarily consists of amortization expense related to customer relationships and other intangible assets.
Interest expense
Interest expense primarily consists of interest on our indebtedness, which currently consists of our term loan and revolving credit facility, which was incurred pursuant to the 2019 Credit Agreement. We have entered into interest rate swaps to limit our exposure to changes in the variable interest rate on our term loan. Interest expense includes any fair value gain or losses on these swaps. Interest expense also includes the revaluation for the liability related to our Equity Participation Right, or EPR, Unit. The EPR Unit’s entitlement is 0.55% of available distributions arising from a distribution event as defined in the Bioventus LLC Agreement and was settled in cash as part of our IPO.
Other (income) expense
Other (income) expense primarily consists of foreign currency transaction and remeasurement gains and losses on transactions denominated in currencies other than our functional currency. Our foreign currency transaction and remeasurement gains and losses are primarily related to foreign currency denominated cash, liabilities and intercompany receivables and payables. Other (income) expense may also include certain nonrecurring items.
Income tax expense
Bioventus LLC (BV LLC) is a partnership for U.S. federal tax purposes. Accordingly, the members include the profits and losses of BV LLC in their income tax returns. Certain wholly-owned subsidiaries of BV LLC are taxable entities for U.S. or foreign tax purposes and file tax returns in their local jurisdictions. Income tax expense includes U.S. federal and state and international income taxes, including certain taxes applicable to BV LLC and U.S. federal income taxes for one of our subsidiaries that is treated as a corporation for U.S. federal tax purposes. Certain income and expense items in income tax returns are not reported in the same year as financial statements. We report the income tax effects of these differences as deferred income taxes. Valuation allowances recognized reduce the related deferred tax assets to an amount which will, more likely than not, be realized. We recognize interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as a component of income tax expense.
Bioventus Inc. is subject to U.S. federal, state and local income taxes at the prevailing corporate tax rates with respect to our taxable income. In addition to tax expenses, we are obligated to make payments under the TRA, which could be significant. The TRA, obligates us to pay to the Continuing LLC Owner 85% of the amount of any realized tax benefits, (or in some circumstances are deemed to realize) resulting from (i) increases in the tax basis of assets of BV LLC as a result of (a) any future redemptions or exchanges of LLC Interests described under Part III, Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence-Bioventus LLC Agreement-LLC Interest Redemption Right, and (b) certain distributions (or deemed distributions) by BV LLC and (ii) certain other tax benefits arising from our making payments under the TRA. For more information, see Part III, Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence-Tax Receivable Agreement.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures - Adjusted EBITDA
We present Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure because we believe it is a useful indicator of our operating performance. Our management uses Adjusted EBITDA principally as a measure of our operating performance and believes that Adjusted EBITDA is useful to our investors because it is frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties frequently use it in their evaluation of the operating performance of companies in industries similar to ours. Our management also uses Adjusted EBITDA for planning purposes, including the preparation of our annual operating budget and financial projections. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) from continuing operations before depreciation and amortization, provision of income taxes and interest expense, adjusted for the impact of certain cash, non-cash and other items that we do not consider in our evaluation of ongoing operating performance. These items include equity compensation, change in fair value of contingent consideration, COVID-19 benefits, succession and transition charges, loss on impairment of intangible assets, losses associated with debt refinancing, restructuring costs, foreign currency impact and other non-recurring costs. Adjusted EBITDA by segment is comprised of net sales and costs directly attributable to a segment, as well as an allocation of corporate overhead costs. The allocation of corporate overhead costs is determined based on various methods but is primarily based on a ratio of net sales by segment to total consolidated net sales. See table within Results from continuing operations for a reconciliation of net income from continuing operations to Adjusted EBITDA.
Interim Periods
The Company reports quarterly interim periods on a 13-week basis within a standard calendar year. Each annual reporting period begins on January 1 and ends on December 31. Each quarter ends on the Saturday closest to calendar quarter-end, with the exception of the fourth quarter, which ends on December 31. The 13-week quarterly periods ended on March 28, June 27 and September 26 for the year ended December 31, 2020. As a result, the fourth and first quarters may vary in length depending on the calendar year.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth components of our condensed consolidated statements of operations from continuing operations as a percentage of net sales for the periods presented:
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income from continuing operations to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented:
(a)Includes for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 depreciation and amortization of $21.2 million and $22.4 million in cost of sales and also includes $7.4 million and $7.9 million, respectively, presented in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss), with the balance in research and development.
(b)Represents compensation as well as the change in fair market value resulting from two equity-based compensation plans, the MIP and the Phantom Plan.
(c)Represents income resulting from the CARES Act offset by additional cleaning and disinfecting expenses and contract termination fees for canceled events.
(d)Primarily represents costs related to the CEO transition.
(e)Represents costs related to a shift from direct to an indirect distribution model in our International business to improve performance. Various international subsidiaries were dissolved and or merged into other BV LLC entities.
(f)Foreign currency impact represents realized and unrealized gains and losses from fluctuations in foreign currency and is included within other (income) loss in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss).
(g)Represents our share in the losses of CartiHeal for the year ended December 31, 2020.
(h)Other non-recurring items in 2020 includes settlement and legal costs of $1.9 million with the OIG. The remaining activities in 2020 and the balance in 2019 are primarily comprised of charges associated with potential strategic transactions, such as potential acquisitions and preparing to become a public company, primarily accounting and legal fees.
Net sales
U.S.
Net sales decreased $11.4 million, or 3.7%, for year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The changes in net sales by vertical are as follows:
•Minimally invasive fracture treatment
($11.5) million
•OA joint pain treatment and joint restoration
($6.3) million
•Bone graft substitutes
$6.4 million
Minimally invasive fracture treatment decreased primarily due to sales volume declines resulting from the disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. OA joint pain and joint preservation decreased primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic as well as more treatments being sold under contracts with major insurers at lower prices, partially offset by sales volume growth. These decreases were also offset by sales volume growth within our BGS vertical.
International
Net sales decreased $7.6 million, or 21.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a decline in order volumes due to the disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross profit and gross margin
U.S.
Gross profit decreased $10.4 million, or 4.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the decline in net sales above described. Manufacturing variances created by maintaining consistent production levels in a period of low demand coupled with idle time attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic caused a slight decrease of 0.6% in gross margin during 2020.
International
Gross profit decreased $5.3 million, or 21.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the decrease in sales from the disruption caused by COVID-19 pandemic.
Selling, general and administrative expense
Selling, general and administrative expense declined $5.4 million, or 2.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to:
•COVID-19 related decreases, including declines in travel and meetings from doing business virtually, lower compensation related expenses as well as various cost-reduction initiatives
$9.3 million
•Lower legal and accounting expenses, which were higher in 2019 due to the OIG matter discussed in Note 12. Commitment and contingencies within Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary data
$5.8 million
These items were partially offset by the following increases:
•Succession and transition charges associated with the transition to our new Chief Executive Officer
$5.6 million
•Costs and services related to strategic transactions, product recall expenses and other non-recurring charges
$4.1 million
Research and development expense
Research and development expense increased $0.1 million, or 1.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to costs relating to the development agreement for MOTYS being almost entirely offset by cost reduction initiatives undertaken as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization during the year ended December 31, 2020 remained consistent with the year ended December 31, 2019, as it slightly decreased $0.5 million, or 5.9%.
Other expense (income)
Interest expense decreased $11.8 million, or 54.8%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to decreased debt interest resulting from refinancing our debt in December 2019 as well as the decline in interest rates. This decrease was partially offset with an increase of $1.6 million primarily resulting from the decline in value of our interest rate swap.
Other income during year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily the result of receiving Provider Relief Fund payments of approximately $4.1 million in the aggregate pursuant to the CARES Act.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense decreased $0.4 million, or 24.4%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the change in income from continuing operations before income taxes. Our change in effective tax rate is the result of BV LLC’s pass-through structure for U.S. income tax purposes, while being treated as taxable in certain states and various foreign jurisdictions as well as for certain subsidiaries.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA for each of our reportable segments is as follows:
U.S.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased $2.4 million, or 3.4%, during the comparable time periods. The decline was the result of decreased gross profit, excluding depreciation and amortization in cost of sales, due to the decrease in sales primarily resulting from the economic impact of COVID-19, which also led to lower expenses resulting from doing business virtually, lower compensation related expenses, as well as various other cost-reduction initiatives.
International
Adjusted EBITDA decreased $4.3 million, or 57.5%, during the comparable time periods. The decline was the result of decreased gross profit, excluding depreciation and amortization in cost of sales, resulting from the decrease in sales primarily due to the economic impact of COVID-19, which was partially offset by lower expenses resulting from doing business virtually, reduced compensation related expenses and various other cost-reduction initiatives.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our principal liquidity needs have historically been for acquisitions, working capital, research and development, clinical trials, and capital expenditures. We expect these needs to continue as we develop and commercialize new products and further our expansion into international markets. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, borrowing capacity under our revolving credit facility, cash flow from operations, and net proceeds from our IPO will be enough to meet our anticipated cash requirements for at least the next twelve months. We may require additional liquidity as we continue to execute our business strategy. Negative impacts to our liquidity would include a decline in sales of our products, including declines due to changes in our customers’ ability to obtain third-party coverage and reimbursement for procedures that utilize our products, increased pricing pressures resulting from intensifying competition and cost increases, as well as general economic and industry factors. We anticipate that to the extent that we require additional liquidity, we will obtain funding through the incurrence of other indebtedness, additional equity financings or a combination of these potential sources of liquidity. In addition, we may raise additional funds to finance future cash needs through receivables or royalty financings or corporate collaboration and licensing arrangements. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities or convertible debt, our stockholders will experience dilution. Debt financing, if available, would result in increased fixed payment obligations and may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, or making capital expenditures. If we raise additional funds through collaboration and licensing arrangements with third parties, it may be necessary to relinquish valuable rights to our products, future revenue streams or product candidates, or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. The covenants under our credit agreement limit our ability to obtain additional debt financing. We cannot be certain that additional funding will be available on acceptable terms, or at all. Any failure to raise capital in the future could have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategies.
Initial public offering
On February 16, 2021, in connection with our IPO, we issued and sold 9,200,000 shares of our Class A common stock at a price to the public of $13.00 per share, resulting in gross proceeds to us of approximately $119.6 million, before deducting the underwriting discount, commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by us.
We are a holding company and have no material assets other than its ownership of LLC Interests and no independent means of generating revenue. The limited liability company agreement of BV LLC provides for the payment of certain distributions to the Continuing LLC Owner and us in amounts sufficient to cover the income taxes imposed on such members with respect to the allocation of taxable income from BV LLC as well as to cover our obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreement (TRA). Additionally, in the event we declare any cash dividend, we intend to cause BV LLC to make distributions to us, in an amount sufficient to cover such cash dividends declared by us. Deterioration in the financial condition, earnings, or cash flow of BV LLC and its subsidiaries for any reason could limit or impair their ability to pay such distributions. In addition, the terms of our financing arrangements, including the 2019 Credit Agreement, contain covenants that may restrict BV LLC and its subsidiaries from paying such distributions, subject to certain exceptions. Further, BV LLC is generally prohibited under Delaware law from making a distribution to a member to the extent that, at the time of the distribution, after giving effect to the distribution, liabilities of BV LLC (with certain exceptions), as applicable, exceed the fair value of its assets. Subsidiaries of BV LLC are generally subject to similar legal limitations on their ability to make distributions to BV LLC. If we do not have sufficient funds to pay taxes or other liabilities or to fund our operations, we may have to borrow funds, which could materially adversely affect our liquidity and financial condition and subject us to various restrictions imposed by any such lenders. To the extent that we are unable to make payments under the TRA for any reason, such payments generally will be deferred and will accrue interest until paid; provided, however, that nonpayment for a specified period may constitute a material breach of a material obligation under the TRA and therefore accelerate payments due under the TRA.
In addition, under the TRA, we are required to make cash payments to the Continuing LLC Owner equal to 85% of the tax benefits, if any, that we actually realize (or in certain circumstances are deemed to realize), as a result of (1) increases in the tax basis of assets of BV LLC resulting from (a) any future redemptions or exchanges of LLC Interests described under Part III, Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence-Bioventus LLC Agreement-LLC Interest Redemption Right, and (b) certain distributions (or deemed distributions) by BV LLC and (2) certain other tax benefits arising from payments under the TRA. We expect the amount of the cash payments required to be made under the TRA will be significant. The actual amount and timing of any payments under the TRA will vary depending upon a number of factors, including the timing of redemptions or exchanges by the Continuing LLC Owner, the amount of gain recognized by the Continuing LLC Owner, the amount and timing of the taxable income we generate in the future, and the federal tax rates then applicable. Any payments made by us to the Continuing LLC Owner under the TRA will generally reduce the amount of overall cash flow that might have otherwise been available to us.
Cash and cash equivalents, as of December 31, 2020, totaled $86.8 million compared to $64.5 million at December 31, 2019. Changes in cash are as follows:
Operating Activities
Cash flows from operating activities from continuing operations increased $29.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019 due to collections on accounts receivables staying strong while selling, general and administrative expenses declined, partially offset by the timing of rebate payments. We experienced lower travel expense payments resulting from the near halting of all travel due to the COVID-19 pandemic, a reduction in compensation related expenses due to the decline in sales and increased cash savings from cost cutting measures. We also received stimulus payments from government entities while we purchased less inventory due to the decline in sales. In addition, our interest expense was significantly lower during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the December 2019 refinancing.
Investing Activities
Cash flows used in investing activities increased $12.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to $16.6 million in payments for the 2020 CartiHeal investments and an increase of $1.8 million in capital expenditures due to software and technology upgrades. These investing cash outflows were partially offset by the absence of payments for distribution rights in 2020 compared to $6.0 million for the purchases of distribution rights during 2019.
Financing Activities
Cash flows used in financing activities increased $18.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to a $10.7 million increase in distribution to members as well as the $6.1 million increase in debt payments.
Other
For information regarding Commitments and Contingencies, refer to Note 12. Commitment and contingencies in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data in this Annual Report for further information regarding other matters.
Indebtedness
On December 6, 2019, we entered into the 2019 Credit Agreement. The 2019 Credit Agreement is comprised of our $200.0 million term loan and our $50.0 million revolving credit facility. All obligations under the 2019 Credit Agreement are guaranteed by certain of our wholly owned domestic subsidiaries and secured by substantially all our and the guarantors’ assets. The term loan and revolving credit facility mature on December 6, 2024. The 2019 Credit Agreement contains various restrictive covenants, including a quarterly covenant not to exceed a consolidated leverage ratio of 3.50 to 1.00 and an interest coverage ratio of 3.00:1.00 for the prior four consecutive quarters. The leverage and interest coverage ratios are based on Consolidated EBITDA as defined in the 2019 Credit Agreement, which includes several differences from Adjusted EBITDA as calculated in this Annual Report. Consolidated EBITDA as defined in the 2019 Credit Agreement permits, among other things, the exclusion of (1) certain extraordinary, unusual and/or non-recurring expenses, some of which are subject to an aggregate cap, including but not limited to severance, acquisitions, dispositions, debt refinancing/amendment and IPO-related, (2) foreign currency gains/losses recognized in the statement of operations and (3) franchise, excise and property taxes recognized in the statement of operations. The restrictive covenants include limitations on (1) the declaration or payment of certain distributions on or in respect of our equity interests, (2) restrictions on acquisitions, investments and certain other payments, (3) limitations on the incurrence of new indebtedness, (4) limitations on transfers, sales and other dispositions and (5) limitations on making changes to our business and organizational documents. As of December 31, 2020, we complied with all covenants under the 2019 Credit Agreement and there was $190.0 million of outstanding borrowings under the term loan. We have one nominal outstanding letter of credit. In March 2020, as a precautionary measure and in order to increase our cash position and preserve financial flexibility in view of the uncertainty resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, we drew down $49.0 million on our revolving credit facility. On September 24, 2020, we repaid all borrowings outstanding under our revolving credit facility. Our revolving credit facility had $50.0 million in borrowing capacity as of December 31, 2020.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 were as follows:
The table above does not include certain obligations as follows:
•commitments under our multi-year exclusive supply agreements for our OA products except for those amounts that are contractually committed as of December 31, 2020. Our purchase obligations under these supply agreements are generally based upon our forecasted requirements, subject in some cases to a contractual minimum per annum;
•commitments under the Development Agreement with MTF, the Option and Equity Purchase Agreement with CartiHeal and its shareholders and the Collaboration Agreement with Harbor, for which the relevant contingent events requiring a payment under the respective agreements have not yet occurred; and
•future milestone payments pursuant to the Development Agreement with MTF, the Option and Equity Purchase Agreement with CartiHeal and its shareholders, the Collaboration Agreement with Harbor and the amended and restated license agreement, or the Q-Med License Agreement, with Q-Med and NSH, as the payment obligations under these agreements are contingent upon future events and we are unable to estimate the timing or likelihood of achieving these milestones or generating future product sales.
Recent accounting pronouncements
Refer to Note 2. Summary of significant accounting policies in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for further information regarding recently adopted and proposed accounting pronouncements.
Internal control over financial reporting
Internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP.
Presently, as a newly public company, our management is not required to perform an annual assessment of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting. This requirement will first apply to our second Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our independent public registered accounting firm will first be required to attest to the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting for our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the first year we are no longer either an “emerging growth company” or a “non-accelerated filer,” as such terms are defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Critical accounting policies and estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires us to make assumptions, estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of sales and expenses during the reporting periods. Certain of our more critical accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by management in selecting the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our judgments, including those related to inventories, recoverability of long-lived assets and the fair value of our common stock. We use historical experience and other assumptions as the basis for our judgments in making these estimates. Because future events and their effects cannot be determined with precision, actual results could differ significantly from these estimates. Any changes in these estimates will be reflected in our consolidated financial statements as they occur. Refer to Note 1. Organization and basis of presentation of financial information in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for a further description of our significant accounting policies, however, we believe that the following accounting policies and estimates that are considered critical to our business in order to obtain a full understanding and to evaluate our reported financial results. The critical accounting policies addressed below reflect our most significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue recognition
Sale of products
We derive revenue primarily from the sale of our OA joint pain treatment and joint preservation products, BGSs and minimally invasive fracture treatment. We sell these products directly to healthcare institutions, patients, distributors and dealers. We also enter into arrangements with pharmacy and health benefit managers that provide for privately negotiated rebates, chargebacks and discounts with respect to the purchase of our products. We recognize revenue at a point in time upon transfer of control of the promised product to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products. We exclude from revenues taxes collected from customers and remitted to governmental authorities.
Revenues are recorded at the transaction price, which is determined as the contracted price net of estimates of variable consideration resulting from discounts, rebates, returns, chargebacks, contractual allowances, estimated third-party payer settlements and certain distribution and administration fees offered in our customer contracts and other indirect customer contracts relating to the sale of our products. We establish reserves for the estimated variable consideration based on the amounts earned or eligible for claim on the related sales. Where appropriate, these estimates take into consideration a range of possible outcomes, which are probability-weighted for relevant factors such as our historical experience, current contractual requirements, specific known market events and trends, industry data and forecasted customer buying and payment patterns. The amount of variable consideration is included in the transaction price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period. We regularly review all reserves and update them at the end of each reporting period as needed. There were no adjustments arising from the change in estimates of variable consideration for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
OA joint pain treatment and joint preservation
Revenue from customers such as healthcare providers, distribution centers or specialty pharmacies is recognized at the point in time when control is transferred to the customer, typically upon shipment.
Distributor chargebacks
We have preexisting contracts with established rates with many of the distributors’ customers that require the distributors to sell our product at their established rate. We offer chargebacks to distributors who supply these customers with our products. We reduce revenue at the time of sale for the estimated future chargebacks. We record chargeback reserves as a reduction of accounts receivable and base the reserves on the expected value by using probability-weighted estimates of volume of purchases, inventory holdings and historical chargebacks requested for each distributor.
Discounts and rebates
We offer retrospective discounts and rebates linked to the volume of purchases which may increase at negotiated thresholds within a contract-buying period. We reduce revenue and record the reserve as a reduction to accounts receivable for the estimated discount and rebate at the most likely amount the customer will earn, based on historical buying trends and forecasted purchases.
Bone graft substitutes
The majority of our BGS product sales are through consignment inventory with hospitals, where ownership remains with us until the hospital performs a surgery and consumes the consigned inventory. We recognize the revenue when the surgery has been performed. The customer does not have control of the product until the customer consumes it, as we are able to require the return or transfer of the product to a third-party. An unconditional obligation to pay for the product does not exist until the customer consumes it.
Minimally invasive fracture treatment
We recognize revenue from third-party payers, such as governmental agencies, insurance companies or managed care providers, when we transfer control of the Exogen system to the patient, typically when the patient has accepted the product or upon delivery. We record this revenue at the contracted rate, net of contractual allowances at the time of sale, or an estimated price based on historical data and other available information for non-contracted payers. We record contractual allowances based on probability weighting historical data and collections. We recognize revenue from patients (self-pay and insured patients with coinsurance and deductible responsibilities) based on billed amounts giving effect to any discounts and implicit price concessions. Implicit price concessions represent differences between amounts billed and the amounts we expect to collect from patients, which considers historical collection experience and current market conditions.
Settlements with third-party payers for retroactive revenue adjustments due to audits, reviews or investigations are considered variable consideration and are included in the determination of the estimated transaction price using the most likely outcome method. These settlements are estimated based on the terms of the payment agreement with the payer, correspondence from the payer and historical settlement activity, including an assessment to ensure that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the retroactive adjustment is subsequently resolved. Estimated settlements are adjusted in future periods as adjustments become known (that is, new information becomes available), or as years are settled or are no longer subject to such audits, reviews and investigations. We are not aware of any claims, disputes or unsettled matters with any payer that would materially affect revenues for which we have not been adequately provided.
Product returns
We estimate the amount of returns and reduce revenue in the period the related product revenue is recognized. We record a liability for expected returns based on probability weighted historical data.
Accounts receivable, net
Accounts receivable, net are amounts billed and currently due from customers. We record the amounts due net of allowance for doubtful accounts. We maintain allowances for credit losses to provide for receivables we do not expect to collect. We base the allowance on an assessment of customer creditworthiness, historical payment experience, the age of outstanding receivables and other information as applicable. Collection of the consideration that we expect to receive typically occurs within 30 to 90 days of billing. We apply the practical expedient for contracts with payment terms of one year or less which does not consider the effects of the time value of money. Occasionally, we enter into payment agreements with patients that allow payment terms beyond one year. In those cases, the financing component is not deemed significant to the contract.
Contract assets
Contract assets consist of unbilled amounts resulting from estimated future royalties from an international distributor that exceeds the amount billed. Contract assets are included in prepaid and other current assets on the consolidated balance sheets.
Contract liabilities
Contract liabilities consist of customer advance payments or deposits and deferred revenue. Occasionally for certain international customers, we require payments in advance of shipping product and recognizing revenue resulting in contract liabilities. Contract liabilities are included in accrued liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets.
Shipping and handling
We classify amounts billed for shipping and handling as a component of net sales. The related shipping and handling fees and costs as well as other distribution costs are included in cost of sales. We have elected to recognize shipping and handling activities that occur after control of the related product transfers to the customer as fulfillment costs and are included in cost of sales.
Contract costs
We apply the practical expedient of recognizing the incremental costs of obtaining contracts as an expense when incurred as the amortization period of the assets that we otherwise would have recognized is one year or less. These incremental costs include our sales incentive programs for the internal sales force and third-party sales agents as the compensation is commensurate with annual sales activities. These costs are included in selling, general and administrative expense on the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss).
Use of estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the period. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates these estimates, including those related to contractual allowances and sales incentives, allowances for doubtful accounts, inventory reserves, goodwill and intangible assets impairment, useful lives of long lived assets, noncontrolling interest, fair value measurements, litigation and contingent liabilities, income taxes, and equity-based compensation. Management bases its estimates on historical experience, future expectations and other relevant assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from those estimates.
Fair value
We record certain assets and liabilities at fair value. Fair value is defined as the price that would be received from selling an asset or paid to transfer a liability in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. A three-level fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs used to measure fair value is described below. This hierarchy requires entities to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. Assets and liabilities are categorized based on the lowest level that is significant to the valuation.
The three levels of inputs used to measure fair value are as follows:
Level 1-Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities;
Level 2-Observable inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1, such as quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar assets and liabilities in markets that are not active; or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data; and
Level 3-Unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market data. This includes certain pricing models, discounted cash flow methodologies and similar techniques that use significant unobservable inputs.
Business combinations
We record identifiable assets acquired, liabilities assumed and any noncontrolling interest in an acquiree resulting from a business combination at their estimated fair values on the date of the acquisition. We generally have third-party valuations completed for intangible assets in a business combination using a discounted cash flow analysis, incorporating various assumptions. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair value of the net assets acquired, including the amount assigned to identifiable intangible assets. The most significant estimates and assumptions inherent in a discounted cash flow analysis include the amount and timing of projected future cash flows, discount rate used to measure the risks inherent in the future cash flows, assessment of the asset’s life cycle, and competitive and other trends impacting the asset, including consideration of technical, legal, regulatory, economic and other factors. Each of these factors and assumptions can significantly affect the value of the intangible asset.
Acquired in-process research and development, or IPR&D, is the fair value of projects for which the related products have not received regulatory approval and have no alternative future use and is capitalized as an indefinite-lived intangible asset. Due to inherent uncertainty related to research and development, actual results could differ materially from the assumptions used in the discounted cash flow model. Additionally, there are risks including, but not limited to, delay or failure to receive regulatory requirements to conduct clinical trials, required market clearances, or patent issuance, and that the research and development project does not result in a successful commercial product. Development costs incurred after the acquisition are expensed as incurred. Upon receipt of regulatory approval of the related technology or product, the indefinite-lived intangible asset is accounted for as a finite-lived intangible asset and amortized on a straight-line basis over its estimated useful life. If the research and development project is abandoned, the indefinite-lived asset is charged to expense.
We recognize contingent consideration liabilities resulting from business combinations at estimated fair value on the acquisition date. Contingent consideration liabilities are revalued subsequent to the acquisition date with changes in fair value recognized in earnings. Contingent payments related to acquisitions consist of development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments, and are valued using discounted cash flow techniques. Significant estimates and assumptions required for these valuations include the probability of achieving regulatory approval under specified time frames, product sales projections under various scenarios and discount rates used to calculate the present value of the estimated payments. Changes in the fair value of contingent consideration liabilities result from changes in these estimates and assumptions. Significant judgment is employed in determining the appropriateness of the estimates and assumptions as of the acquisition date and in post-acquisition periods.
Impairment
We evaluate goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually during the fourth quarter, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. Our reporting units are U.S. and International and we analyze each reporting unit separately in our goodwill impairment evaluation. We used independent third-party valuation specialists in 2020 and 2019 using year-to-date October data in each year to assist management in performing the annual review of goodwill for impairment. We also utilized valuation specialists in April 2020 as we believed COVID-19 represented a triggering event that might indicate impairment. The specialists assist management in the determination of fair value of reporting units based upon inputs and assumptions provided by management, which management uses for its impairment assessment. We analyze all other indefinite-lived intangible assets qualitatively to determine if it is more likely than not for an impairment to exist. If we meet the criteria, we perform a quantitative analysis to determine if an impairment exists.
Goodwill
Our goodwill impairment process includes applying a quantitative impairment analysis where the fair value of the reporting unit and compare it to its carrying value (including goodwill). We determine the fair value of U.S. and International reporting units based primarily on an income approach, which incorporates the use of a discounted free cash flow analysis. The discounted free cash flow analyses is based on significant judgments, including the current operating budgets, estimated long-term growth projections and future forecasts for each reporting unit. We discount future cash flows based on a market comparable weighted average cost of capital rate for each reporting unit. The discount rates used in the discounted free cash flow analyses reflect the risks inherent in the expected future cash flows generated by the respective intangible assets. Market risk, industry risk and a small company premium has an impact on the discount rate. The value of each reporting unit is determined on a stand-alone basis from the perspective of a market participant and represents the price we estimate we would receive in a sale of the reporting unit in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. Significant judgments inherent in this analysis include estimating the amount and timing of future cash flows and the selection of appropriate discount rates, royalty rate and long-term growth rate assumptions. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value for each reporting unit and for some of the reporting units and could result in an impairment charge, which could be material to our financial position and results of operations. There has been no impairment of our goodwill related to our U.S. and International reporting units since our formation.
Equity compensation
Prior to the IPO, the Company operated two equity-based compensation plans, the MIP and the Phantom Plans, which allows our employees to share our future profit without granting any additional voting rights. Awards granted under the MIP and certain Phantom Plan awards granted in 2015 and thereafter, or the 2015 Phantom Plan Units, are liability-classified. Those Phantom Plan awards granted from inception in 2012 and until the grant of the 2015 Phantom Plan Units, or the 2012 Phantom Plan Units, are equity-classified, as they do not contain a put option or other features requiring them to be liability-classified. Equity compensation includes compensation expense for all equity awards made to employees that are part of continuing operations and are based on estimated fair values as of the grant date for the 2012 Phantom Plan Units and period end fair value for the MIP units and 2015 Phantom Plan Units. We recognize expense for performance-based awards when we expect them to be earned. We recognize timed-based awards over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the award. We recognize forfeitures as they occur.
We used independent third-party valuation specialists in 2020 and 2019 using year-to-date October data in each year to assist management in performing the annual valuation of MIP and 2015 Phantom Plan Units. We also utilized valuation specialists in April 2020 as we believed COVID-19 represented a triggering event that might indicate impairment. The specialists assist management in the determination of fair value of awards granted using the Monte Carlo option pricing model. The subjective assumptions and the application of judgment in determining the fair value of the awards represent management’s best estimates. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our equity compensation expense could be materially different in the future. The most significant assumptions and judgments are as follows:
•Expected volatility-We determine the expected price volatility based on the historical volatilities of our peer group, as we do not have a sufficient trading history for our units. Industry peers consist of several public companies in the medical device industry similar to us in size, stage of life cycle and financial leverage. We intend to continue to consistently apply this process using the same or similar public companies until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available, or unless circumstances change such that the identified companies are no longer similar to us, in which case, more suitable companies whose share prices are publicly available would be utilized in the calculation.
•Time to liquidity event-The amount of time that the awards are expected to be outstanding.
•Risk-free interest rate-We based the risk-free rate on U.S. Government Constant Maturity Treasury rates for a term corresponding to the Time to Liquidity Event.
•Expected dividend yield-We used a dividend rate of zero as we have not previously issued dividends and do not anticipate paying dividends in the foreseeable future.
The assumptions utilized to determine the fair value of the awards are indicated in the following table:
The calculation of the fair value of awards also requires an estimate of our equity value, based on inputs from management and reporting unit valuation reports prepared by the specialists during the annual goodwill impairment process.
We determined the value of our equity utilizing methodologies, approaches and assumptions consistent with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Aid, “Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation”. In the absence of a public trading market, our Board of Managers determines a reasonable estimate of the grant date fair value of our equity awards based on input from management and the annual valuation reports prepared by the specialists. In addition, we exercised judgment in evaluating and assessing the foregoing based on several factors including:
•the nature and history of our business;
•our historical operating and financial results;
•the market value of companies that are engaged in a similar business to ours;
•the lack of marketability of our common stock;
•the overall inherent risks associated with our business at the time awards were approved; and
•the overall equity market conditions and general economic trends.
As of December 31, 2020, there was approximately $9.7 million of unrecognized compensation expense to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 1.3 years.
Income taxes
BV LLC is currently a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes. As a partnership, taxable income or loss is generally included in the income tax returns of its members. We also have a subsidiary that operates as a C-corporation that is subject to income tax requirements and international operations that are subject to foreign income tax requirements. Additionally, BV LLC is liable for various other state and local taxes. As a corporation, Bioventus Inc. will be subject to U.S. federal, state and local income taxes. We recognize the effect of income tax positions only if these positions are more likely than not to be sustained. We reflect changes in recognition or measurement in the period in which the change in judgment occurs. Upon the redemption or exchange of BV LLC Units for shares of Class A common stock or cash, we will determine if we are likely to realize the resulting tax benefits. If we are, we will record (i) a deferred tax asset based on the step-up in basis resulting from the exchange and the then effective income tax rate, (ii) a payable to related party in respect of the corresponding 85% payment under the TRA and (iii) a tax benefit based on the net difference between (i) and (ii). As we realize cash tax savings, we will reduce the deferred tax asset and the payments made under the TRA will reduce the payable to related party. Further, we will evaluate the likelihood that we will realize the benefit represented by the deferred tax asset and, to the extent that we estimate it is more likely than not that we will not realize the benefit, we will reduce the carrying amount of the deferred tax asset with a valuation allowance.
Long-lived assets
Property and equipment are stated at cost and are depreciated using the straight-line method over the shorter of the asset’s estimated useful life, or the lease term if related to leased property, as follows in years:
We amortize finite-lived identifiable intangible assets using the straight-line method over their estimated remaining weighted average useful lives as follows in years:
We capitalize costs incurred from third-party vendors for software design, configuration, coding and testing and amortizes these costs on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the product, not to exceed three years. We do not capitalize costs that are precluded from capitalization in authoritative guidance, such as preliminary project phase costs, planning, oversight, process re-engineering costs, training costs or data conversion costs.
The carrying values of property, equipment and finite lived intangible assets are reviewed for recoverability if the facts and circumstances suggest that a potential impairment may have occurred. If this review indicates that carrying values may not be recoverable, we will perform an assessment to determine if an impairment charge is required to reduce carrying values to estimated fair value. There were no events, facts or circumstances for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 that resulted in any impairment charges to our property, equipment or finite lived intangible assets.
JOBS Act
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” pursuant to the provisions of the JOBS Act. For as long as we are an “emerging growth company,” we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not “emerging growth companies,” including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements, reduced disclosure obligations relating to the presentation of financial statements in the “Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations” section and exemptions from the requirements of holding advisory “say-on-pay” votes on executive compensation and shareholder advisory votes on golden parachute compensation. We have availed ourselves of the reduced reporting obligations and executive compensation disclosure in this Annual Report and expect to continue to avail ourselves of the reduced reporting obligations available to emerging growth companies in future filings.
In addition, an emerging growth company can delay its adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. However, we are choosing to “opt out” of such extended transition period, and as a result, we plan to comply with any new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which non- emerging growth companies must adopt such standards. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that our decision to opt out of the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards is irrevocable.
We will continue to qualify as an emerging growth company until the earliest of:
•The last day of our fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the date of our IPO;
•The last day of our fiscal year in which have annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more;
•The date on which we have, during the previous three-year period, issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt;
•The date on which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer”, which will occur at such time as we (1) have an aggregate worldwide market value of common equity securities held by non-affiliates of $700 million or more as of the last business day of our most recently completed second quarter, (2) have been required to file annual and quarterly reports under the Exchange Act for a period of at least 12 months and (3) have filed at least one annual report pursuant to the Exchange Act.