Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Better World Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth elsewhere in this Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on August 5, 2020 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of entering into a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities (an “initial business combination”). We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering (as defined below) and the private placement warrants (as defined below), our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete an initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
Our only activities from August 5, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to consummate the IPO, described below, and identifying a target company for an initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account (as defined below). We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from August 5, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $4,187,718, which consisted of operating costs of $121,087, a change in fair value of warrants of $4,069,896 and transaction costs related to the initial public offering of $11,564, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account of $11,521 and an unrealized gain of $3,308.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On November 17, 2020, we consummated our initial public offering (“IPO”) of 11,000,000 units (the “units”), at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $110,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the private sale of 4,800,000 warrants (the “private placement warrants”) to our Sponsor and EarlyBirdCapital, generating gross proceeds of $4,800,000.
On November 19, 2020, in connection with the underwriters’ partial exercise of their over-allotment option, we consummated the sale of an additional 1,618,600 units at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating total gross proceeds of $16,186,000. In addition, we also consummated the sale of an additional 485,580 private placement warrants at $1.00 per private placement warrant, generating total gross proceeds of $485,580.
For the period from August 5, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $147,816. Net loss of $4,187,718 was affected by interest earned on investments held in the trust account of $11,521, change in fair value of warrant liability of $4,069,896, transaction costs incurred in connection with the initial public offering of $11,564 and unrealized gain on investments held in trust account of $3,308. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $26,729 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, in the U.S.-based trust account (the “trust account”) maintained by Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, acting as trustee, we had cash held of $1,214 and marketable securities held in the trust account of $127,461,475 (including approximately $11,500 of interest income) consisting of securities held in a money market fund that invests in U.S. Treasury securities with a maturity of 180 days or less. Interest income on the balance in the trust account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2020, we did not withdraw any interest earned on the trust account to pay our taxes.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, to acquire a target business and to pay our expenses relating thereto, including a fee payable to Imperial Capital, upon consummation of our initial business combination for assisting us in connection with our initial business combination. To the extent that our capital stock is used in whole or in part as consideration to effect an initial business combination, the remaining funds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business. Such working capital funds could be used in a variety of ways including continuing or expanding the target business’ operations, for strategic acquisitions and for marketing, research and development of existing or new products. Such funds could also be used to repay any operating expenses or finders’ fees which we had incurred prior to the completion of our initial business combination if the funds available to us outside of the trust account were insufficient to cover such expenses.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $1,023,178 held outside the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, the Insiders, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the private placement warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such initial business combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
The Company has agreed, commencing on November 12, 2020 through the earlier of the Company’s consummation of an initial business combination and its liquidation, to pay an affiliate of the Company’s management a total of $10,000 per month for office space, utilities and secretarial support. For the period from August 5, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, the Company incurred $20,000 in fees for these services. At December 31, 2020, fees of $20,000 is included in accrued expenses in the accompanying balance sheet.
The Company granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of IPO to purchase up to 1,650,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the IPO price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On November 19, 2020, the underwriters partially exercised their over-allotment option to purchase an additional 1,618,600 units at $10.00 per unit and forfeited the remaining over-allotment option.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liability
The Company accounts for the private placement warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40-15-7D and 7F under which the private placement warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, the Company classifies the private placement warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjusts the private placement warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The private placement warrants for periods where no observable traded price was available are valued using a binomial lattice simulation model.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income (loss) per common share, basic and diluted for common stock subject to possible redemption is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the trust account, net of applicable taxes, if any, by the weighted average number of shares of common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding for the period. Net income (loss) per common share, basic and diluted for and non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing net loss less income attributable to common stock subject to possible redemption, by the weighted average number of shares of non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.