Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following information specifies certain forward-looking statements of management of the Company. Forward-looking statements are statements that estimate the happening of future events are not based on historical fact. Forward-looking statements may be identified by the use of forward-looking terminology such as, “may,” “shall,” “could,” “expect,” “estimate,” “anticipate,” “predict,” “probable,” “possible,” “should,” “continue,” or similar terms, variations of those terms or the negative of those terms. The forward-looking statements specified in the following information have been complied by our management and considered by management to be reasonable. Our future operating results, however, are impossible to predict and no representation, guaranty or warranty is to be inferred from those forward-looking statements.
The assumptions used for purposes of the forward-looking statements specified in the following information represent estimates of future events and are subject to uncertainty as to possible changes in economic, legislative, industry and other circumstances. As a result, the identification and interpretation of data and other information and their use in developing and selecting assumptions from and among reasonable alternatives requires the exercise of judgment. To the extent that the assumed events do not occur, the outcome may vary substantially from anticipated or projected results, and accordingly, no opinion is expressed on the achievability of these forward-looking statements. No assurance can be given that any of the assumptions relating to the forward-looking statements specified in the following information are accurate, and we assume no obligation to update any such forward-looking statements.
Overview
BorrowMoney.com, Inc. operates what we believe to be the leading online loan marketplace for consumers seeking loans and other credit-based offerings. The Company offers borrowers “screened lenders” and takes steps to ensure the lender’s trustworthiness and legitimacy. The Company provides institutional lenders with innovative digital solutions by offering fintech technologically advanced gathered leads through an exclusive proprietary platform. Our online marketplace provides consumers with access to product offerings from our Network Lenders, including mortgage loans, home equity loans and lines of credit, reverse mortgage loans, auto loans, credit cards, deposit accounts, personal loans, student loans, small business loans and other related offerings. In addition, we offer tools and resources, including free credit scores that facilitate comparison shopping for these loans, deposits and other credit-based offerings. We seek to match consumers with multiple lenders, who can provide them with competing quotes for the product they are seeking.
We also serve as a valued partner to lenders seeking an efficient, scalable and flexible source of customer acquisition with directly measurable benefits, by matching the consumer inquiries we generate with these lenders.
Our BorrowMoney.com platform offers a personalized loan comparison-shopping experience by providing free credit scores and credit score analysis. This platform enables us to observe consumers’ credit profiles and then identify and alert them to loan and other credit-based opportunities on our marketplace that may be more favorable than the loans they may have at a given point in time. This is designed to provide consumers with measurable savings opportunities over their lifetimes.
In addition to operating our core mortgage inquiry and leads business, we are focused on growing our non-mortgage lending businesses and developing new product offerings and enhancements to improve the experiences that consumers and lenders have as they interact with us. By expanding our portfolio of loans and other product offerings, we are growing and diversifying our business and sources of revenue. We intend to capitalize on our expertise in performance marketing, product development and technology, and to leverage the widespread recognition of the BorrowMoney.com brand to affect this strategy.
We believe the consumer and small business financial services industry is in the early stages of a fundamental shift to online product offerings, similar to the shift that started in retail and travel many years ago and is now well established. We believe that like retail and travel, as consumers continue to move towards online shopping and transactions for financial services, suppliers will increasingly shift their product offerings and advertising budgets toward the online channel. We believe the strength of our brands and of our lender network, place us in a strong position to continue to benefit from this market shift.
BorrowMoney.com, Inc.’s main objective is to provide lead generation services to the mortgage and loan lenders. BorrowMoney.com, Inc.’s business model envisions providing current, qualified leads to local lending institutions nationwide. These leads will represent qualified borrowers in targeted zip code locations where the lender conducts business. Our internet platform offers a portal geared toward providing services to lending institutions who would be our customers. The key function of our platform is to provide qualified leads to local mortgage and lending professionals. The Company generates customer inquiries using various marketing methods. The Company also sells advertising space on its website and creates revenue through the sale of advertisement space, membership fees and lead packages.
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as modified by the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. As such, we are eligible to take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not “emerging growth companies” including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, or the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a non-binding advisory vote on executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved. If some investors find our securities less attractive as a result, there may be a less active trading market for our securities and the prices of our securities may be more volatile.
In addition, Section 107 of the JOBS Act also provides that an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an “emerging growth company” can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We intend to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period until we are no longer an “emerging growth company.”
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier of (1) the last day of the fiscal year (a) in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, or (b) in which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer, which means the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as (2) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt during the prior three-year period.
Limited Operating History
We have not previously demonstrated that we will be able to expand our business through an increased investment in our product lines and/or marketing efforts. We cannot guarantee that the expansion efforts described in this report will be successful. Our business is subject to risks inherent in growing an enterprise, including limited capital resources and possible rejection of our products and/or sales methods.
Plan of Operations
We have completed our technology platform. We are now entering our operational phase which includes contracting business loan, mortgage and personal loan lenders for geographic areas using ZIP Codes. In addition to expanding our network of lenders over the next 12 months, we intend to continue optimizing and enhancing our Internet-based platform to focus on lead generation and generating additional revenues for our marketplace services. Our mission is to be the premier loan lead generation company. The budget for the next 12 months is estimated to be $500,000, which is expected to come from friends, family, and officers. A breakdown of the estimated cost for our next 12 months of operation are as follows:
Revenues are expected to be minimal as the volume of lender agreements during this stage of operation is expected to increase at a gradual pace throughout the year. We expect to operate at a loss during our initial growth/operating period. President, Directors, or other executive officers will be compensated with sweat equity options until such time that the company has positive cash flows.
Contingent upon the successful completion of our next 12 months of operation, we plan to aggressively expand our operation and business from existing revenues. Our expansion would be accompanied by an increase in the number of personnel to obtain lender agreements for ever-expanding geographic areas.
Channels of Distribution; Marketing Costs
BorrowMoney.com markets and offers services directly to customers through its branded website allowing customers to be pre-qualified in a one stop platform and have access to all the major lenders and loan programs. The Company has made, and expects to continue to make, substantial investments in its online technology platform and marketing strategy to build its brand awareness in the marketplace that will drive traffic and generate leads. The need for online mortgages and personal money loan platform is driven not only by the millennium generation that are moving away from traditional brick and mortar banks but also from the new lifestyle changes caused by the Covid-19 pandemic. BorrowMoney.com expects to take advantage of this opportunity to capture a large portion of this “new” marketplace demand and increase its revenue exponentially.
Results of Operations
The following table provides selected financial data about our Company as of August 31, 2021, and 2020.
As of August 31, 2021, the Company’s cash balance was $9.3k compared to $7.8k as of August 31, 2020, and our total assets as of August 31, 2021, was $9.3k.
As of August 31, 2021, the Company had total liabilities of $635.3k compared with total liabilities of $598.0 as of August 31, 2020. The increase in total liabilities for the year ended August 31, 2021, was primarily the result of an increase in accrued interest and notes, an increase in legal expense accrual and due to related party, as well as an advance on a line of credit.
We had $144.2k of cash used in operating activities for the year ended August 31, 2021, compared to $90.0k of cash used in operating activities for the year ended August 31, 2020.
We had $145.7k of cash provided by financing activities for the year ended August 31, 2021, compared to $90.2k of cash provided by financing activities for the year ended August 31, 2020. Cash provided by financing activities was primarily proceeds from stock sale and related party loans.
Financial Position, Liquidity and Capital Resource
As of August 31, 2021, all cash loaned by the Company to pay its operating and development expenses has been furnished by loans from its founder and President, Aldo Piscitello, as well as from the sale of equity and advances by related parties and advances from a line of credit. Additionally, the Company anticipates selling shares of the Company through a private offering of its securities to supplement its capital requirements in the future, as funding is needed.
Interest expense of $42.9k and $37.2k for the years ended August 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively, was the result of accruals related to shareholder and related party.
Plan of Operation and Funding
During the next twelve months, we anticipate that our principal sources of funding will comprise of proceeds from sales of our common stock, revenue generated from our operations, and additional debt, if needed.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our critical accounting policies, including the assumptions and judgments underlying them, are disclosed in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. We have consistently applied these policies in all material respects. We do not believe that our operations to date have involved uncertainty of accounting treatment, subjective judgment, or estimates, to any significant degree.
Going Concern
Because we have suffered recurring losses from operations and negative operating cash flows, there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The ability to continue as a going concern is dependent on Management’s plans, which include potential asset acquisitions, mergers or business combinations with other entities, further implementation of its business plan and continuing to raise funds through debt or equity raises. The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to stockholders.