Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto included in Financial Statements under Item 1 within this Annual Report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. See Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Information.
BUSINESS OVERVIEW
B&W is a growing, globally-focused renewable, environmental and thermal technologies provider with decades of experience providing diversified energy and emissions control solutions to a broad range of industrial, electrical utility, municipal and other customers. B&W’s innovative products and services are organized into three market-facing segments which changed in the third quarter of 2020 as part of the Company's strategic, market-focused organizational and re-branding initiative to accelerate growth and provide stakeholders improved visibility into our renewable and environmental growth
platforms. Segment results for all periods have been restated for comparative purposes. Our reportable segments are as follows:
•Babcock & Wilcox Renewable: Cost-effective technologies for efficient and environmentally sustainable power and heat generation, including waste-to-energy, biomass energy and black liquor systems for the pulp and paper industry. B&W’s leading technologies support a circular economy, diverting waste from landfills to use for power generation and replacing fossil fuels, while recovering metals and reducing emissions.
•Babcock & Wilcox Environmental: A full suite of best-in-class emissions control and environmental technology solutions for utility, waste to energy, biomass, carbon black, and industrial steam generation applications around the world. B&W’s broad experience includes systems for cooling, ash handling, particulate control, nitrogen oxides and sulfur dioxides removal, chemical looping for carbon control, and mercury control.
•Babcock & Wilcox Thermal: Steam generation equipment, aftermarket parts, construction, maintenance and field services for plants in the power generation, oil and gas, and industrial sectors. B&W has an extensive global base of installed equipment for utilities and general industrial applications including refining, petrochemical, food processing, metals and others.
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, COVID-19, was identified in Wuhan, China and has subsequently spread globally. This global pandemic has disrupted business operations, trade, commerce, financial and credit markets, and daily life throughout the world. Our business has been, and continues to be, adversely impacted by the measures taken and restrictions imposed in the countries in which we operate and by local governments and others to control the spread of this virus. These measures and restrictions have varied widely and have been subject to significant changes from time to time depending on the changes in the severity of the virus in these countries and localities. These restrictions, including travel and curtailment of other activity, negatively impact our ability to conduct business. The volatility and variability of the virus has limited our ability to forecast the impact of the virus on our customers and our business. The continuing resurgence of COVID-19, including at least one new strain thereof, has resulted in the reimposition of certain restrictions and may lead to other restrictions being implemented in response to efforts to reduce the spread of the virus. These varying and changing events have caused many of the projects we had anticipated would begin in 2020 to be delayed into 2021 and beyond. Many customers and projects require B&W's employees to travel to customer and project worksites. Certain customers and significant projects are located in areas where travel restrictions have been imposed, certain customers have closed or reduced on-site activities, and timelines for completion of certain projects have, as noted above, been extended into 2021 and beyond. Additionally, out of concern for our employees, even where restrictions permit employees to return to our offices and worksites, we have incurred additional costs to protect our employees as well as, advising those who are uncomfortable returning to worksites due to the pandemic that they are not required to do so for an indefinite period of time. The resulting uncertainty concerning, among other things, the spread and economic impact of the virus has also caused significant volatility and, at times, illiquidity in global equity and credit markets. The full extent of the COVID-19 impact on our operational and financial performance will depend on future developments, including the ultimate duration and spread of the pandemic and related actions taken by the U.S. government, state and local government officials, and international governments to prevent disease spread, as well as the availability and effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccinations in the U.S. and abroad, all of which are uncertain, out of our control, and cannot be predicted.
Our operating results for 2020 have been negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic as previously described on pages 7 and 8. Because the majority of our revenues are driven by projects, we cannot reasonably estimate the amount of the decreases in our operating results directly caused by COVID-19. We have experienced adverse impacts on our 2020 revenues due to delays in closing new business deals, deferrals or delays in starting new projects, and other product volume decreases due to COVID-19 in 2020 caused by the following, among other reasons:
•Customers’ concern regarding the duration and magnitude of COVID-19;
•Customers’ hesitance to place large orders;
•Certain planned 2020 projects being delayed into 2021 and beyond;
•Field service personnel unable to get to certain site projects;
•Travel restrictions impeding our ability to acquire new customers; and
•International growth plans hindered by recruitment, training & deployment of new field personnel.
We have manufacturing facilities in the Unites States, Mexico, Denmark, Scotland and China. Many aspects of our operations and properties could be affected by political developments, environmental regulations and operating risks. These and other factors may have a material impact on our international and domestic operations or our business as a whole.
Through our restructuring efforts, we continue to make progress to make our cost structure more variable and to reduce costs. We expect our cost-saving measures to continue to translate to bottom-line results, with top-line growth driven by opportunities for our core technologies and support services across the B&W Renewable, B&W Environmental, and B&W Thermal segments globally. While we anticipate quarterly variability and cyclicality typical of our industry, we expect to continue to show improvement in 2021 as compared to 2020.
We expect to continue to explore other cost-saving initiatives to improve cash generation and evaluate additional non-core asset sales to continue to strengthen our liquidity. There are or will be important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those indicated in these statements. If one or more events related to these or other risks or uncertainties materialize, or if our underlying assumptions prove to be incorrect, actual results may differ materially from what we anticipate.
Our operating loss improved to a loss of $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a loss of $29.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Year-over-year comparisons of our results from continuing operations were affected by:
•On October 10, 2020, we entered into a settlement agreement with an insurer in connection with five of the six European B&W Renewable EPC loss contracts. In connection with the insured losses recognized in prior years, we recognized a loss recovery of $26.0 million as a reduction of our Cost of operations in our Consolidated Statements of Operations included in Item 8 of this Annual Report. On October 23, 2020, we received gross proceeds of $26.0 million, as described in Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report.
•$11.8 million and $11.7 million of restructuring and spin-off costs were recognized in 2020 and 2019, primarily related to severance.
•$4.4 million and $9.1 million of financial advisory service fees were recorded in 2020 and 2019, respectively, which are required under our U.S. Revolving Credit Facility. Financial advisory service fees are included in advisory fees and settlement costs in the Consolidated Statement of Operations included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
•$6.4 million and $11.8 million of legal and other advisory fees were recognized in 2020 and 2019, respectively, primarily related to a loss recovery settlement agreement, a contract settlement and for liquidity planning and are included in advisory fees and settlement costs in the Consolidated Statement of Operations included in Item 8 of this Annual Report. The settlements are further described above and in Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report.
•$(23.2) million and $8.8 million of actuarially determined mark to market (“MTM”) (losses) gains on our pension and other post-retirement benefits in 2020 and 2019, respectively. MTM losses are further described in Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report.
•$4.9 million of accelerated depreciation expense in 2019 for fixed assets affected by our September 2018 announcement to consolidate office space and relocate our global headquarters to Akron, Ohio in December 2019.
•$6.6 million of settlement cost was recognized in 2019 in connection with an additional European waste-to-energy EPC contract, for which notice to proceed was not given and the contract was not started and is included in advisory fees and settlement costs in the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report. The settlement limits our obligations to our core scope activities and eliminates risk related to acting as the prime EPC should the project have moved forward.
•$3.6 million of loss on sale of business was recognized in 2019 for a non-core materials handling business in Germany, Loibl GmbH, as described in Note 23 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Consolidated Results of Operations
The presentation of the components of our adjusted EBITDA in the table below is consistent with the way our chief operating decision maker reviews the results of our operations and makes strategic decisions about our business. Items such as gains or losses on asset sales, MTM pension adjustments, restructuring and spin costs, impairments, losses on debt extinguishment, costs related to financial consulting required under our U.S. Revolving Credit Facility and other costs that may not be directly controllable by segment management are not allocated to the segments.
(1) During the year ended December 31, 2020, we redefined our definition of adjusted EBITDA to eliminate the effects of certain items including loss from a non-strategic business, interest on letters of credit included in cost of operations and loss on business held for sale. Consequently, adjusted EBITDA in prior periods have been revised to conform with the revised definition and present separate reconciling items in our reconciliation.
(2) Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020, includes the recognition of a $26.0 million loss recovery settlement related to certain historical EPC loss contracts in the third quarter.
Revenues decreased by $292.8 million to $566.3 million in 2020 as compared to $859.1 million in 2019. Revenues for each of our segments have been adversely impacted by COVID-19, including the postponement and delay of several projects due to COVID-19. In addition to the impacts of COVID-19, revenue was also impacted by segment specific changes which are discussed in further detail in the sections below. .
Operating losses improved $27.6 million to $(1.7) million in 2020 from $(29.4) million in 2019, primarily due to the insurance loss recovery of $26.0 million and a lower level of losses on the EPC loss contracts, partially offset by the divestiture of Loibl and the impacts of COVID-19 in the B&W Renewable segment, as well as a decline in volume in the B&W Environmental and B&W Thermal segments related primarily to COVID-19. Restructuring expenses, advisory fees, amortization expense, gains (losses) on dispositions of equity method investees, and impairments are discussed in further detail in the sections below.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The following discussion of our business segment results of operations includes a discussion of adjusted gross profit, a non-GAAP financial measure. Adjusted gross profit differs from the most directly comparable measure calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). Amortization expense is not allocated to the segments’ adjusted gross profit. A reconciliation of operating income (loss), the most directly comparable GAAP measure, to adjusted gross profit is included in the table below. Management believes that this financial measure is useful to investors because it excludes certain expenses, allowing investors to more easily compare our financial performance period to period. As
previously discussed, we changed our reportable segments in 2020 and have recast prior period results to account for this change.
(1) Intangible amortization is not allocated to the segments' adjusted gross profit, but depreciation is allocated to the segments' adjusted gross profit.
(2) Adjusted gross profit for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, excludes losses related to a non-strategic business that was previously included in Adjusted gross profit within the B&W Environmental segment and totals $2.6 million and $5.5 million, respectively.
(3) Adjusted gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020, includes the recognition of a $26.0 million loss recovery settlement related to certain historical EPC loss contracts in the third quarter.
Adjusted gross profit by segment is as follows:
B&W Renewable Segment Results
Revenues in the B&W Renewable segment decreased 24%, or $49.4 million to $156.2 million in 2020 compared to $205.6 million in 2019. The reduction in revenue is due to the advanced completion of activities on the European B&W Renewable EPC loss contracts in the prior year as well as new anticipated activities being deferred due to COVID-19, partially offset by a higher level of activities on two operations and maintenance contracts in the U.K. which followed the turnover of the EPC loss contracts to the customers. Additionally, the reduction in revenue partially relates to the divestiture of Loibl, a materials handling business in Germany that generated revenues of approximately $14.3 million in 2019.
Adjusted EBITDA in the B&W Renewable segment improved $23.3 million to $25.0 million in 2020 compared to $1.6 million in 2019. The improvement is primarily due to the loss recovery of $26.0 million recognized in 2020 under an October 10, 2020 settlement agreement with an insurer in connection with five of the six European B&W Renewable EPC loss contracts. In addition the B&W Renewable segment incurred lower costs in the current year to complete the six European
B&W Renewable EPC loss contracts which included $3.7 million and $6.9 million in net losses, including warranty in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Adjusted EBITDA improvement was also partially offset by the divestiture of Loibl and lower volume, as described above.
Adjusted gross profit in the B&W Renewable segment increased $28.8 million to $58.8 million in 2020 compared to $30.0 million in 2019. The improvement is primarily due to the loss recovery of $26.0 million recognized in 2020 under an October 10, 2020 settlement agreement with an insurer in connection with five of the six European B&W Renewable EPC loss contracts and lower costs in the current year to complete the six European B&W Renewable EPC loss contracts, partially offset by lower volume.
B&W Environmental Segment Results
Revenues in the B&W Environmental segment decreased 61%, or $167.7 million, to $108.0 million in 2020 from $275.6 million in 2019. The decrease is primarily due to the completion of large construction projects in the prior year and a lower level of activity primarily due to the postponement of new projects by several customers as a result of COVID-19. B&W Environmental's two significant legacy loss contracts, generated revenues of $4.1 million and $18.8 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Adjusted EBITDA in the B&W Environmental segment decreased $9.0 million to $3.5 million in 2020 compared to $12.5 million in 2019. The decline is primarily attributable to the impacts of lower volume, the effects of which were partially offset by a lower percentage of overhead being allocated to the segment that were not previously allocated to other segments.
Adjusted gross profit in the B&W Environmental segment decreased $24.8 million, to $23.5 million in 2020, compared to $48.4 million in 2019. The decrease is primarily attributable to the decrease in volume as described above.
B&W Thermal Segment Results
Revenues in the B&W Thermal segment decreased 26%, or $104.8 million, to $305.0 million in 2020 compared to $409.7 million in 2019. The revenue decrease is attributable to the completion of large construction projects in the prior year in addition to the adverse impacts of COVID-19 resulting in lower parts, construction, package boilers and international service orders.
Adjusted EBITDA in the B&W Thermal segment decreased 31%, or $15.9 million, to $35.4 million in 2020 compared to $51.4 million in 2019, primarily attributable to lower volume of project activity and a higher percentage of overhead being allocated to the segment that was previously allocated to other segments, the effects of which were partially offset by favorable product mix and a full period of cost savings and restructuring initiatives benefiting the current year.
Adjusted gross profit in the B&W Thermal segment remained flat at $91.2 million primarily due to lower volume as described above which was offset by favorable product mix and the effects of a full period of cost savings and restructuring initiatives benefiting the current year.
Bookings and Backlog
Bookings and backlog are our measure of remaining performance obligations under our sales contracts. It is possible that our methodology for determining bookings and backlog may not be comparable to methods used by other companies.
We generally include expected revenue from contracts in our backlog when we receive written confirmation from our customers authorizing the performance of work and committing the customers to payment for work performed. Backlog may not be indicative of future operating results, and contracts in our backlog may be canceled, modified or otherwise altered by customers. Backlog can vary significantly from period to period, particularly when large new build projects or operations and maintenance contracts are booked because they may be fulfilled over multiple years. Additionally, because we operate globally, our backlog is also affected by changes in foreign currencies each period. We do not include orders of our unconsolidated joint ventures in backlog.
Bookings represent changes to the backlog. Bookings include additions from booking new business, subtractions from customer cancellations or modifications, changes in estimates of liquidated damages that affect selling price and revaluation of backlog denominated in foreign currency. We believe comparing bookings on a quarterly basis or for periods less than one year is less meaningful than for longer periods, and that shorter-term changes in bookings may not necessarily indicate a material trend.
Our bookings for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was as follows:
(1) B&W Renewable bookings includes the revaluation of backlog denominated in currency other than U.S. dollars. The foreign exchange impact on B&W Renewable bookings in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $(14.7) million and $(3.3) million, respectively.
Our backlog as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 was as follows:
(1) B&W Renewable backlog at December 31, 2020, includes $164.1 million related to long-term operation and maintenance contracts for renewable energy plants, with remaining durations extending until 2034. Generally, such contracts have a duration of 10-20 years and include options to extend.
Of the backlog at December 31, 2020, we expect to recognize revenues as follows:
Corporate
Corporate costs include SG&A expenses that are not allocated to the reportable segments. These costs include certain executive, compliance, strategic, reporting and legal expenses associated with governance of the total organization and being an SEC registrant. Corporate costs decreased $3.2 million to $14.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $17.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to decreased bonus costs recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Advisory Fees and Settlement Costs
Advisory fees and settlement costs decreased by $15.1 million to $12.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $27.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to settlement costs to exit the fifth B&W Renewable EPC contract in the first quarter of 2019 as described in Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report and also due to reduced use of external consultants in 2020 as the Company staffed certain positions internally.
Research and Development
Our research and development activities are related to improving our products through innovations to reduce the cost of our products to make them more competitive and through innovations to reduce performance risk of our products to better meet our and our customers' expectations. Research and development costs unrelated to specific contracts are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses totaled $4.4 million and $2.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase resulted primarily from our strategy to support future growth.
Restructuring
Restructuring actions across our business segments and corporate functions resulted in $11.8 million and $11.7 million of expense in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Depreciation and Intangible Asset Amortization
Depreciation expense was $11.3 million and $19.3 million in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We recorded intangible asset amortization expense of $5.5 million and $4.3 million in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
In December 2019, we consolidated all of our Barberton and most of our Copley, Ohio operations into new, leased office space in Akron, Ohio and $4.9 million of accelerated depreciation was recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
We recognize benefits from our defined benefit and other postretirement benefit plans based on actuarial calculations primarily because our expected return on assets is greater than our service costs. Service cost is low because our plan benefits are frozen except for a small number of hourly participants. Pension benefits, excluding MTM adjustments of a loss of $23.2 million and a gain of $8.8 million, were $28.8 million and $14.0 million in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in the net periodic pension benefit was primarily due to the impact of lower discount rates and higher actual return on plan assets. The change in the MTM adjustment was primarily due to the lower impact of discount rate changes, lower actual return on plan assets, reduced mortality assumption gains and higher losses related to demographic experience.
The following sensitivity analysis reflects the impact of a 25 basis point change in the assumed discount rate and return on assets on our pension plan obligations and expense for the year ended December 31, 2020:
(1) Excludes effect of annual MTM adjustment.
A 25 basis point change in the assumed discount rate and return on assets would have no meaningful impact on our other postretirement benefit plan obligations and expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 individually or in the aggregate, excluding the impact of any annual MTM adjustments we record annually.
Foreign Exchange
We translate assets and liabilities of our foreign operations into United States dollars at current exchange rates, and we translate items in our statement of operations at average exchange rates for the periods presented. We record adjustments resulting from the translation of foreign currency financial statements as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). We report foreign currency transaction gains and losses in income.
Foreign exchange was a gain of $58.8 million and a loss of $16.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Foreign exchange gains and losses are primarily related to unhedged intercompany loans denominated in European currencies to fund foreign operations. Foreign exchange gains in 2020 were primarily driven by a weakening U.S. dollar compared to the underlying European currencies and changes in loan balances denominated in Danish Krone that averaged over $500 million throughout the year.
Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate in 2020 reflects a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets in jurisdictions other than, Mexico, Canada, the United Kingdom, and Sweden.
The increase in our income tax expense in 2020 compared to 2019 is primarily attributable to additional income in our profitable foreign subsidiaries, additional foreign withholding taxes incurred on cross-border transactions, and a $1.1 million deferred tax liability related to unremitted earnings of certain foreign subsidiaries.
In 2019, our effective tax rate was also impacted by valuation allowances related to losses incurred in certain jurisdictions.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Our primary liquidity requirements include debt service and working capital needs. We fund our liquidity requirements primarily through cash generated from operations and external sources of financing, including our A&R Credit Agreement (as defined below) that governs the U.S. Revolving Credit Facility and the last out term loans (the “Last Out Term Loans”), each of which are described below in further detail along with other sources of liquidity.
As described in Recent Developments in Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, on February 12, 2021, we completed offerings of common stock and 8.125% senior notes due 2026, which resulted in net proceeds of approximately $283 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions, but before expenses.
Cash and Cash Flows
At December 31, 2020, our unrestricted cash and cash equivalents totaled $57.3 million and we had total debt of $347.6 million. Our foreign business locations held $38.7 million of our total unrestricted cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020. Our U.S. Revolving Credit Facility allows for nearly immediate borrowing of available capacity to fund cash requirements in the normal course of business, meaning that U.S. cash on hand is minimized to reduce borrowing costs. In general, our foreign cash balances are not available to fund our U.S. operations unless the funds are repatriated or used to repay intercompany loans made from the U.S. to foreign entities, which could expose us to taxes we presently have not made a provision for in our results of operations. We had approximately $33.7 million available for borrowings under the U.S. Revolving Credit Facility at December 31, 2020.
Cash used in operations was $40.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, which is primarily the result of the change in accounts payable. In the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operations was $176.3 million primarily due to funding settlements related to European B&W Renewable EPC contracts, progress against accrued losses on the six European B&W Renewable EPC loss contracts and working capital build within the B&W Thermal segment related to the timing of and mix of work.
Cash flows from investing activities provided net cash of $2.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to $8.0 million of proceeds received from the settlement of remaining escrows associated with the sale of Palm Beach Resource Recovery Corporation and MEGTEC and Universal businesses, $5.0 million of other investing activities, offset by the net change in available-for-sale securities and $8.2 million of capital expenditures. In the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by investing activities was $8.8 million, primarily from proceeds received from the sale of Loibl for $7.4 million.
Cash flows from financing activities provided net cash of $44.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to $70.0 million net borrowings from the Last Out Term Loans, offset by $14.7 million of net repayments of the U.S. Revolving Credit Facility and $10.6 million of financing fees. Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2019 was $167.0 million primarily related to $109.6 million net borrowings from the Last Out Term Loans, $34.1 million of net borrowings from the U.S. Revolving Credit Facility, and $40.4 million proceeds from the Rights Offering, partly offset by $16.6 million of financing fees.
A&R Credit Agreement
As described in Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report, on May 11, 2015, we entered into the Amended Credit Agreement with a syndicate of lenders in connection with our spin-off from BWXT which governs the U.S. Revolving Credit Facility and the Last Out Term Loans (as defined below). Since June 2016, we have entered into a number of waivers and amendments to the Amended Credit Agreement, including several to avoid default under the financial and other covenants specified in the Amended Credit Agreement.
On May 14, 2020, we entered into an agreement with our lenders amending and restating the Amended Credit Agreement (the “A&R Credit Agreement”). The A&R Credit Agreement refinances and extends the maturity of our U.S. Revolving Credit Facility and Last Out Term Loans.
Under the A&R Credit Agreement, B. Riley has committed to provide the Company with up to $70.0 million of additional Last Out Term Loans on the same terms as the term loans extended under the Amended Credit Agreement. An aggregate $30.0 million of this new commitment was funded upon execution of the A&R Credit Agreement. Of the remaining commitments, at least $35.0 million will be funded in installments, subject to reduction for the gross proceeds from certain equity offerings conducted by the Company, and $5.0 million will be funded upon request by the Company. The proceeds from the $30.0 million of new term loans were used to pay transaction fees and expenses and repay outstanding borrowings under the U.S. Revolving Credit Facility. Proceeds from the additional $40.0 million of term loans were used to repay outstanding borrowings under the U.S. Revolving Credit Facility, with any remaining amounts used for working capital, capital expenditures, permitted acquisitions and general corporate purposes. See Note 14 and Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional discussion of the A&R Credit Agreement, U.S. Credit Facility and Last Out Term Loans.
On February 8, 2021, we entered into Amendment No. 2 to the A&R, which among other things, permitted the issuance of the 8.125% senior notes due 2026. See Recent Developments in Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion of Amendment No. 2 to A&R Credit Agreement.
On March 4, 2021, we entered into A&R Amendment No. 3 with Bank of America. A&R Amendment No. 3, among other matters, at the date of effectiveness (i) permits the prepayment of certain term loans, (ii) reduces the revolving credit commitments to $130 million and removes the ability to obtain revolving loans under the credit agreement, and (iii) amends certain covenants and conditions to the extension of credit.
On March 4, 2021, effective with the execution of Amendment No. 3, we paid $75 million towards our existing Last Out Term Loans and paid $21.8 million of accrued and deferred fees related to the revolving credit facility.
U.S. Revolving Credit Facility
As of December 31, 2020, the U.S. Revolving Credit Facility provides for a senior secured revolving credit facility in an aggregate amount of up to $306.2 million, as amended and adjusted for completed asset sales. The proceeds from loans under the U.S. Revolving Credit Facility are available for working capital needs, capital expenditures, permitted acquisitions and other general corporate purposes, and the full amount is available to support the issuance of letters of credit, subject to the limits specified in the agreement.
At December 31, 2020, borrowings under the U.S. Revolving Credit Facility consisted of $164.3 million at a weighted average interest rate of 7.46%. Usage under the U.S. Revolving Credit Facility consisted of $164.3 million of revolving loan borrowings, $22.0 million of financial letters of credit and $86.2 million of performance letters of credit. At December 31, 2020, we had approximately $33.7 million available to meet letter of credit and borrowing requirements based on our overall facility size.
On October 23, 2020, we received $26.0 million under the settlement agreement described in Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report. As required by the Company’s U.S. Revolving Credit Facility, 50% of the net proceeds (gross proceeds less costs) or $8.0 million of the settlement received by the Company was applied as a permanent reduction of the U.S. Revolving Credit Facility in October 2020.
As described in Note 14 and Note 25 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report, on February 12, 2021, we received gross proceeds of $125 million from the 2021 Senior Notes offering. As required by the Company’s U.S. Revolving Credit Facility, 75% of the gross proceeds or $93.8 million received by the Company was applied as a permanent reduction of the U.S. Revolving Credit Facility as of February 12, 2021. Net proceeds received were approximately $120 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions, but before expenses.
Also on February 16, 2021, we prepaid $167.1 million towards the outstanding U.S. Revolving Credit Facility.
As of March 4, 2021, effective with Amendment No. 3 to the A&R Credit Agreement described above, the U.S. Revolving Credit Facility provides for an aggregate letters of credit amount of up to $130 million.
Last Out Term Loans
Last Out Term Loans are incurred under our A&R Credit Agreement and are pari passu with the U.S. Revolving Credit Facility except for certain payment subordination provisions. The Last Out Term Loans are subject to the same representations and warranties, covenants and events of default as the U.S. Revolving Credit Facility. Under U.S. GAAP, a debt modification with the same borrower that results in substantially different terms is accounted for as an extinguishment of the existing debt and a reborrowing of new debt. An extinguishment gain or loss is then recognized based on the fair value of the new debt as compared to the carrying value of the extinguished debt. The Company recognized a loss on debt extinguishment of $6.2 million in 2020, primarily representing the unamortized value of the original issuance discount and fees on the Tranche A-3 Last Out Term Loan. In connection with the effectiveness of the A&R Credit Agreement, the maturity date for the Last Out Term Loans was extended to December 30, 2022.
On December 31, 2020, September 30, 2020 and June 30, 2020, the Company issued 2,379,376, 2,334,002, and 1,192,371 unregistered shares of common stock to B. Riley in settlement of the Last Out Term Loans' quarterly interest payable in connection with the Fee and Interest Equitization Agreement further discussed in Note 14.
The total effective interest rate of Tranche A-3, Tranche A-4 and Tranche A-6 was 12.0% on December 31, 2020. Interest expense associated with the Last Out Term Loans is detailed in Note 16.
As of December 31, 2020, the Last Out Term Loans are presented as a non-current liability in our Consolidated Balance Sheets as a result of the extension of their maturity dates to December 30, 2022 granted under the A&R Credit Agreement. As of December 31, 2019, the Last Out Term Loans are presented as a current liability in our Consolidated Balance Sheets as a result of limited waivers granted to maintain compliance with the covenants in the previous Amended Credit Agreement. See Note 14 and Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional discussion of the A&R Credit Agreement, U.S. Credit Facility and Last Out Term Loans.
On February 12, 2021, we issued $35 million of Senior Notes to B. Riley Financial, Inc. in exchange for a deemed prepayment of our existing Last Out Term Loan' Tranche A-6. The interest rate on the remaining Last Out Term Loan Tranche A balances has been reduced to 6.625% from 12.0%. See Recent Developments in Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion of the exchange and deemed prepayment.
On March 4, 2021, effective with the execution of A&R Amendment No. 3, we paid $75 million towards our existing Last Out Term Loans..
Letters of Credit, Bank Guarantees and Surety Bonds
As described in Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report, certain subsidiaries primarily outside of the United States have credit arrangements with various commercial banks and other financial institutions for the issuance of letters of credit and bank guarantees in association with contracting activity. The aggregate value of all such letters of credit and bank guarantees opened outside of the U.S. Revolving Credit Facility as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 was $84.5 million and $88.5 million, respectively. The aggregate value of the letters of credit provided by the U.S. Revolving Credit Facility backstopping letters of credit or bank guarantees was $32.0 million as of December 31, 2020. Of the letters of credit issued under the U.S. Revolving Credit Facility, $34.9 million are subject to foreign currency revaluation.
Our ability to obtain and maintain sufficient capacity under our U.S. Revolving Credit Facility is essential to allow us to support the issuance of letters of credit, bank guarantees and surety bonds. Without sufficient capacity, our ability to support contract security requirements in the future will be diminished.
B. Riley Limited Guaranty
In connection with the Company’s entry into the A&R Credit Agreement, B. Riley entered into the B. Riley Guaranty (as defined in Note 14) for the benefit of the Administrative Agent and the lenders under the U.S. Revolving Credit Facility. The B. Riley Guaranty provides for the guarantee of all of the Company’s obligations with respect to the U.S. Revolving Credit Facility (other than with respect to letters of credit and contingent obligations), including the obligation to repay outstanding
revolving credit loans and pay earned interest and fees. See Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional discussion of the B. Riley Guaranty.
Fee and Interest Equitization Agreement
In connection with the B. Riley Guaranty, the Company entered into the Equitization Agreement (as defined in Note 14) with B. Riley and, solely for certain limited purposes under the Equitization Agreement, B. Riley FBR, Inc.
The Equitization Agreement provides that, in lieu of receiving (a) $13.4 million of interest payments with respect to Last Out Term Loans under the A&R Credit Agreement between May 14, 2020 and December 31, 2020 and (b) the B. Riley Guaranty Fee, B. Riley will receive unregistered shares of the Company’s Common Stock. See Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional discussion of the Equitization Agreement.
Equitization Transactions
In connection with Amendment No. 16 to the Amended Credit Agreement and the extension of Tranche A-3 of the Last Out Term Loans, the Company, B. Riley and Vintage, each related parties, entered into the “Letter Agreement” on April 5, 2019, pursuant to which the parties agreed to use their reasonable best efforts to effect a series of equitization transactions for a portion of the Last Out Term Loans, subject to, among other things, stockholder approval. Stockholder approval was received at the Company's annual stockholder meeting on June 14, 2019 and the contemplated transactions. See Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional discussion of the Equitization Transactions.
2019 Rights Offering
On June 28, 2019, we distributed to holders of our common stock one nontransferable subscription right to purchase 0.986896 common shares for each common share held at a subscription price of $0.30 per whole share of common stock (the “2019 Rights Offering”). The 2019 Rights Offering expired on July 18, 2019 and settled on July 23, 2019.
The 2019 Rights Offering resulted in the issuance of 13.9 million common shares as a result of the exercise of subscription rights in the offering. Gross proceeds from the 2019 Rights Offering were $41.8 million, $10.3 million which was used to fully repay Tranche A-2 of the Last Out Term Loans and the remaining $31.5 million was used to reduce outstanding borrowings under Tranche A-3 of the Last Out Term Loans. Concurrently with the closing of the 2019 Rights Offering, and in satisfaction of the Backstop Commitment, the Company issued an aggregate of 2.7 million common shares in exchange for a portion of the Tranche A-3 Last Out Term Loans totaling $8.2 million, to B. Riley, a related party. The 2019 Rights Offering was pursuant to the April 5, 2019 Letter Agreement and the Equitization Transactions and were approved by stockholders at the Company's annual stockholder meeting on June 14, 2019.
2021 Offerings of Common Stock and 8.125% Senior Notes due 2026
As described in Recent Developments of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, on February 12, 2021, we closed our underwritten public offerings of common stock and 8.125% senior notes due 2026. See the discussion in Recent Developments for additional information regarding these offerings.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
There were no significant off-balance sheet arrangements at December 31, 2020.
EFFECTS OF INFLATION AND CHANGING PRICES
Our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, using historical United States dollar accounting (“historical cost”). Statements based on historical cost, however, do not adequately reflect the cumulative effect of increasing costs and changes in the purchasing power of the United States dollar, especially during times of significant and continued inflation.
In order to minimize the negative impact of inflation on our operations, we attempt to cover the increased cost of anticipated changes in labor, material and service costs, either through an estimate of those changes, which we reflect in the original
price, or through price escalation clauses in our contracts. However, there can be no assurance we will be able to cover all changes in cost using this strategy.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Preparing financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are affected by management's application of accounting policies. We believe the following are our most critical accounting policies that we apply in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. These policies require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain.
Contracts and revenue recognition
A significant portion of our revenue is recognized over time using the cost-to-cost input method, which involves significant estimates. This method of revenue recognition uses costs incurred to date relative to total estimated costs at completion to measure progress toward satisfying our performance obligations. Incurred cost represents work performed, which corresponds with, and thereby best depicts, the transfer of control to the customer. Contract costs include labor, material, overhead, warranty and, when appropriate, SG&A expenses. Variable consideration in these contracts includes estimates of liquidated damages, contractual bonuses and penalties, and contract modifications.
We review contract price and cost estimates each reporting period as the work progresses and reflect adjustments proportionate to the costs incurred to date relative to total estimated costs at completion in income in the period when those estimates are revised. These changes in estimates can be material. For all contracts, if a current estimate of total contract cost indicates a loss on a contract, the projected contract loss is recognized in full through the statement of operations and an accrual for the estimated loss on the uncompleted contract is included in other accrued liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. In addition, when we determine that an uncompleted contract will not be completed on-time and the contract has liquidated damages provisions, we recognize the estimated liquidated damages we will incur and record them as a reduction of the estimated selling price in the period the change in estimate occurs. Losses accrued in advance of the completion of a contract are included in other accrued liabilities in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Contract modifications are routine in the performance of our contracts. Contracts are often modified to account for changes in the contract specifications or requirements. In most instances, contract modifications are for goods or services that are not distinct and, therefore, are accounted for as part of the existing contract, with cumulative adjustment to revenue.
We recognize claims receivable in contract revenues for extra work or changes in scope of work to the extent of costs incurred when we believe we have an enforceable right to the modification or claim and the amount can be estimated reliably, and its realization is probable. In evaluating these criteria, we consider the contractual/legal basis for enforcing the claim, the cause of any additional costs incurred and whether those costs are identifiable or otherwise determinable, the nature and reasonableness of those costs, the objective evidence available to support the amount of the claim, and our relevant history with the counter-party that supports our expectations about their willingness and ability to pay for the additional cost along with a reasonable margin. In our Consolidated Balance Sheets, claims receivable at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 were not significant.
Our revenue recognition policies, assumptions, changes in estimates and significant loss contracts are described in greater detail in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Warranty
We accrue estimated expense included in cost of operations on our Consolidated Statements of Operations to satisfy contractual warranty requirements when we recognize the associated revenues on the related contracts. In addition, we record specific provisions or reductions when we expect the actual warranty costs to significantly differ from the accrued estimates. Factors that impact our estimate of warranty costs include prior history of warranty claims and our estimates of future costs of materials and labor. Such changes could have a material effect on our consolidated financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. See Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for further discussion.
Loss contingencies
We estimate liabilities for loss contingencies when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of loss is reasonably estimable. We provide disclosure when there is a reasonable possibility that the ultimate loss will exceed the recorded provision or if such probable loss is not reasonably estimable. We are currently involved in some significant litigation. See Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for a discussion of this litigation. As disclosed, we have accrued estimates of the probable losses associated with these matters; however, these matters are typically resolved over long periods of time and are often difficult to estimate due to the possibility of multiple actions by third parties. Therefore, it is possible that future earnings could be affected by changes in our estimates related to these matters.
Income taxes
Income tax expense for federal, foreign, state, and local income taxes is calculated on taxable income based on the income tax law in effect at the latest balance sheet date and includes the cumulative effect of any changes in tax rates from those used previously in determining deferred tax assets and liabilities. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. We assess the need for valuation allowances on a quarterly basis. In determining the need for a valuation allowance, we consider relevant positive and negative evidence, including carryback potential, reversals of taxable temporary differences, future taxable income, and tax-planning strategies. As of December 31, 2020, we have a valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets in substantially all jurisdictions, as we do not believe it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized.
For those tax positions where it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will be sustained, we have recorded the largest amount of tax benefit with a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with a taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information. For those income tax positions where it is not more likely than not that a tax benefit will be sustained, no tax benefit has been recognized in our consolidated financial statements. We record interest and penalties (net of any applicable tax benefit) related to income taxes as a component of provision for income taxes on our Consolidated Statements of Operations.