Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated and combined financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those made, projected or implied in the forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed below. Please see “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for factors that could cause or contribute to such differences.
Overview
We are a pharmaceutical company primarily focused on developing and commercializing innovative products for hospital and related acute care settings. We believe that we can bring valuable therapeutic options for patients, prescribers and payers to the hospital and related acute care markets.
Our first commercial product, ANJESO, had its NDA approved by the FDA on February 20, 2020 for the management of moderate to severe pain, alone or in combination with other non-NSAID analgesics. ANJESO is a once daily IV, NSAID with preferential Cox-2 activity, which has successfully completed three Phase III studies, including two pivotal efficacy trials, a large double-blind Phase III safety trial and other safety studies for the management of moderate to severe pain. Overall, the total NDA program included over 1,400 patients. We have established sales management, marketing and reimbursement functions in connection with the commercialization of ANJESO in the United States.
We commenced our commercial launch of ANJESO in June of 2020. We utilize an internal sales team and collaborate with third parties who market ANJESO to health care professionals at our called-on institutions. We continue to evaluate strategic partnerships to commercialize ANJESO outside of the United States. In August 2020, the CMS established a new permanent J-code for ANJESO, which became effective on October 1, 2020, facilitating reimbursement of ANJESO in the hospital outpatient, ambulatory surgery center and physician office settings of care. We have also entered into agreements with leading group purchasing organizations in the U.S., including Vizient Inc., and Premier Inc., as well as one of the top 3 integrated delivery networks for terms for availability of ANJESO to their member institutions. Over 65 institutions added ANJESO to their formulary. The number of vials sold to end-customers has increased 58% in the fourth quarter of 2020 versus the third quarter of 2020. The number of vials sold to hospitals and ambulatory surgical centers increased over 80% during the same time period. The average quarterly orders per account increased over 60% in the fourth quarter of 2020 versus the third quarter of 2020 and the re-order rate is approximately 55% with a deepening usage pattern.
Our costs consist primarily of expenses incurred in conducting our manufacturing scale-up, commercialization of ANJESO, clinical trials and preclinical studies, regulatory activities, and public company and personnel costs. We expect to incur operating losses for at least the next few years. We expect substantially all of our operating losses to result from costs incurred in connection with our commercialization activities, including manufacturing costs, and development programs, including our clinical, non-clinical and formulation development activities. Our expenses over the next several years are expected to primarily relate to the commercialization of ANJESO and continuing to develop our other current and future product candidates. In addition, we may incur costs associated with the acquisition or in-license of products and successful commercialization of the acquired or in-licensed products.
Our pipeline also includes other early-stage product candidates, including two novel NMBAs and a related proprietary chemical reversal agent and Dex-IN, a proprietary intranasal formulation of dexmedetomidine, or Dex, an alpha-2 adrenergic agonist that we are evaluating for possible partnering.
COVID-19 Impact
Our efforts to commercialize ANJESO have been impacted and may continue to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Hospitals have reduced elective surgeries, and many have not yet returned to their prior number of surgeries even where the pandemic has, for a time, abated. In addition, COVID-19 has, in many cases, impacted revenue for hospitals, caused a reduction in hospital staffing, lead to a diversion in resources from other normal activities to patients suffering from COVID-19 and caused a limitation in hospital access for nonpatients, including our sales professionals, which we believe is impacting our marketing and commercialization efforts. We believe a reduction in elective surgeries during the COVID-19 pandemic has caused and may continue to result in decreased demand for ANJESO.
We anticipate that many hospitals and health care providers will continue to suffer negative financial consequences due to an increase in unexpected costs, personal protective equipment and ventilators, along with a dramatic reduction in revenue due to fewer elective procedures being performed, which may result in a decreased demand for ANJESO. While access restrictions have eased in some locations, cycling spikes of COVID-19 cases in certain states or regions may further impact our sales force as access to hospitals may be restricted and elective surgeries may be limited in those areas. In addition, the absence of hospital formulary meetings where new drugs can be adopted has impacted our efforts to commercialize ANJESO. Many hospital formularies recently resumed meetings after a 6-month absence. Despite the existence of a backlog of agents scheduled to be reviewed, we believe we will make progress getting
ANJESO added to additional hospital formularies in the near term. Due to the rapidly evolving environment, continued uncertainties from the impact of the COVID-19 global pandemic, and the recent regional outbreaks that are impacting the recovery, we cannot estimate the full extent to which our commercialization of ANJESO and financial results may be adversely impacted.
Separation from Recro Pharma, Inc.
In August 2019, Recro announced its plans to separate its acute care business from its contract manufacturing and development business through a pro rata distribution of our common stock to shareholders of Recro. As a part of the Separation, Recro transferred the assets, liabilities and operations of its acute care segment to us, pursuant to the terms of a Separation Agreement. On November 21, 2019, the distribution date, each Recro shareholder received one share of our common stock for every two and one-half shares of Recro common stock held of record at the close of business on November 15, 2019, the record date for the Distribution. As a result of the Distribution, we are now an independent public company whose shares of common stock are trading under the symbol “BXRX” on the Nasdaq.
Our historical combined financial statements for periods prior to the Separation have been prepared on a stand-alone basis and are derived from Recro’s consolidated financial statements and accounting records and are presented in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP. Our financial position, results of operations and cash flows historically operated as part of Recro’s financial position, results of operations and cash flows prior to and until the Distribution to Recro’s shareholders. These historical combined financial statements for periods prior to the Separation may not be indicative of our future performance and do not necessarily reflect what our combined results of operations, financial condition and cash flows would have been had we operated as a separate company during the periods presented.
Financial Overview
Revenue
Subsequent to regulatory approval for ANJESO from the FDA, we began selling ANJESO in the U.S. through a single third-party logistics provider, or 3PL, which takes title to and control of the goods. We recognize revenue from ANJESO product sales at the point the title to the product is transferred to the customer and the customer obtains control of the product. The transaction price that is recognized as revenue for products includes an estimate of variable consideration for reserves, which result from discounts, returns, chargebacks, rebates and other allowances that are offered within contracts between us and our end-customers, wholesalers, group purchasing organizations and other indirect customers.
Our estimates of variable consideration and determination of whether to include estimated amounts in the transaction price are based largely on an assessment of its anticipated performance and all information (historical, current and forecasted) that is reasonably available. These reserves reflect our best estimate of the amount of consideration to which we are entitled based on the terms of the contracts. The amount of variable consideration that is included in the transaction price may be constrained and is included in the net sales price only to the extent that is considered probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. If actual results in the future vary from our estimates, we will adjust these estimates, which would affect net product revenue and earnings in the period such variances become known.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales includes product costs, manufacturing costs, transportation and freight, royalty expense, qualification costs for a secondary manufacturing suite for increased available capacity to meet anticipated demand and indirect overhead costs associated with the manufacturing and distribution of ANJESO including supply chain and quality personnel costs. Cost of sales may also include period costs related to certain manufacturing services and inventory adjustment charges. We expensed a significant portion of the cost of producing ANJESO that we are using in the commercial launch as research and development expense prior to the regulatory approval of ANJESO. We expect cost of sales to increase as we deplete these inventories.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses currently consist primarily of costs incurred in connection with the development of ANJESO and other pipeline activities. These expenses consist primarily of:
•
expenses incurred under agreements with CROs, investigative sites and consultants that conduct our clinical trials and a substantial portion of our preclinical studies;
•
the cost of acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial drug supply and related manufacturing services and pre-commercial product validation and inventory manufacturing expenses;
•
costs related to facilities, depreciation and other allocated expenses;
•
acquired in-process research and development;
•
costs associated with non-clinical and regulatory activities; and
•
salaries and related costs for personnel in research and development and pre-commercial regulatory functions.
The majority of our external research and development costs have related to clinical trials, manufacturing of drug supply for pre-commercial products, analysis and testing of product candidates and patent costs. We expense costs related to clinical inventory and pre-commercial inventory until we receive approval from the FDA to market a product, at which time we commence capitalization of costs relating to that product to inventory. Costs related to facilities, depreciation and support are not charged to specific programs. Subsequent to regulatory approval of ANJESO, we allocated or recategorized certain personnel and overhead expenses related to medical affairs, supply chain, quality and regulatory support functions that had previously been recorded within research and development to cost of sales or selling, general and administrative expenses in support of the commercialization of ANJESO. Pre-commercial activities directly utilizing personnel and overhead expenses from the medical affairs, supply chain, quality and regulatory support function continue to be recorded within research and development.
The development of our other product candidates is highly uncertain and subject to a number of risks, including, but not limited to:
•
the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of a product candidate;
•
the duration of clinical trials, which varies substantially according to the type, complexity and novelty of the product candidate;
•
substantial requirements on the introduction of pharmaceutical products imposed by the FDA and comparable agencies in foreign countries, which require lengthy and detailed laboratory and clinical testing procedures, sampling activities and other costly and time-consuming procedures;
•
the possibility that data obtained from pre-clinical and clinical activities at any step in the testing process may be adverse and lead to discontinuation or redirection of development activity or may be susceptible to varying interpretations, which could delay, limit or prevent regulatory approval;
•
risk involved with development of manufacturing processes, FDA pre-approval inspection practices and successful completion of manufacturing batches for clinical development and other regulatory purposes;
•
the emergence of competing technologies and products, including obtaining and maintaining patent protections, and other adverse market developments, which could impede our commercial efforts; and
•
the other risks disclosed in the section titled “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Development timelines, probability of success and development costs vary widely. As a result of the uncertainties discussed above, we will assess our product candidate’s commercial potential and our available capital resources. As a result of these uncertainties surrounding the timing and outcome of any approval, we are currently unable to estimate precisely when, if ever, any of our product candidates will generate revenues and cash flows.
We expect our research and development costs to relate to ANJESO, including required pediatric post-marketing studies, as well as development and commercialization scale-up of our other product candidates. We may elect to seek collaborative relationships in order to provide us with a diversified revenue stream and to help facilitate the development and commercialization of our product candidate pipeline.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist of sales and marketing expenses and general and administrative expenses.
Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of compensation and benefits for our sales force and personnel that support our sales and marketing efforts as well as third party consulting costs for the promotion and sale of ANJESO. In addition, sales and marketing expenses include expenses related to communicating the clinical and economic benefits of ANJESO and educational programs for our indirect customers.
General and administrative expenses consist principally of salaries and related costs for personnel in executive, medical affairs, regulatory, finance and information technology functions. General and administrative expenses also include public company costs, directors and officer’s insurance, professional fees for legal, including patent-related expenses, consulting, auditing, and tax services.
We expect our selling, general and administrative expenses to increase in the future as a result of our commercial launch of ANJESO.
2020 Reduction in Force
Due to the impacts of COVID-19 and the resultant slower than expected commercial ramp of ANJESO, in November of 2020, we implemented a reduction in workforce by approximately 40 employees. We expect that the reorganization will result in annualized
savings of an estimated $10.6 million in personnel and other related costs. There were also significant cost reductions made for 2021 manufacturing and launch related activities. The reorganization was completed in November 2020 and we incurred approximately $1.7 million of charges for severance and other costs relating to such reorganization activities, primarily during the fourth quarter of 2020.
2019 Reduction in Force
Following the receipt of a second complete response letter from the FDA with regard to injectable meloxicam in March of 2019, we implemented a restructuring initiative, and corresponding reduction in workforce, aimed at reducing operating expenses, while maintaining key personnel needed to obtain FDA approval of injectable meloxicam. The restructuring initiative included a reduction of approximately 50 positions. In connection with the restructuring plan, we incurred approximately $7.2 million of costs, all of which were incurred in the first half of 2019. These costs included severance and related termination benefits and canceled marketing and production costs.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
In connection with the Separation, we entered into an Assignment and a Partial Assignment, Assumption and Bifurcation Agreement, or the Alkermes Agreements, relating to the Purchase and Sale Agreement for the acquisition of certain assets, including the worldwide rights to injectable meloxicam and Recro’s development, formulation and manufacturing business from Alkermes, or the Alkermes Transaction, as amended in December 2018 and August 2020. Pursuant to the Alkermes Agreements, we are required to pay up to $140.0 million in milestone payments, including $10.0 million that was paid during 2019, another $3.6 million paid in 2020, $1.4 million which becomes due June 20, 2021, and $45.0 million over seven years beginning one year after approval, as well as net sales milestones and a royalty percentage of future product net sales related to injectable meloxicam between 10% and 12% (subject to a 30% reduction when no longer covered by patent). The estimated fair value of the initial $54.6 million payment obligation was recorded as part of the purchase price for the Alkermes Transaction. We have continued to reevaluate the fair value each subsequent period and as of December 31, 2020 recorded a $65.0 million payment obligation, representing the estimated probability-adjusted fair value of the liability. Each reporting period, we revalue this estimated obligation with changes in fair value recognized as a non-cash operating expense or gain. As of December 31, 2020, we have paid $13.6 million in milestone payments to Alkermes.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the periods presented primarily includes interest expense incurred on our Credit Agreement with MAM Eagle Lender, the amortization of related financing costs, and interest expense on a promissory note with PNC Bank under the PPP of the CARES Act administered by the SBA.
Income Taxation
We maintained a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue, net. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net product revenue was $0.5 million, related to sales of ANJESO in the U.S. While utilizing the title model of distribution, product revenue represents shipments to our 3PL provider. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we did not recognize any product revenue.
Cost of sales. Our cost of sales was $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted of product costs, royalty expense and certain fixed costs associated with the manufacturing of ANJESO, including supply chain and quality costs. We expensed costs associated with the manufacturing of our products as research and development prior to regulatory approval. Certain product costs of ANJESO units recognized as revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 were incurred prior to FDA approval of ANJESO in February 2020, and therefore are not included in cost of sales during the period. We expect that over time, our cost of sales will increase as sales increase and as inventory values change to include all direct and indirect costs and expenses post FDA approval. No cost of sales was recorded for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Research and Development. Our research and development expenses were $9.1 million and $20.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Excluding $0.9 million and $2.8 million of costs associated with restructuring initiatives recorded for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, research and development expenses decreased $9.1 million. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in pre-commercial manufacturing and clinical costs of $5.9 million, a decrease of $1.3 million as a result of re-allocating costs related to supply chain, regulatory, quality and medical affairs associated with support of the commercial launch of ANJESO to cost of sales and selling, general and administrative expense, a decrease of $1.2 million in preclinical costs and a decrease of $0.7 million in other general expenses.
Selling, General and Administrative. Our selling, general and administrative expenses were $43.3 million and $27.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Excluding $0.8 million and $4.4 million of costs associated with the restructuring initiatives recorded for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, selling, general and administrative expenses increased $19.9 million. This increase was primarily due to the commercial launch of ANJESO, specifically, an increase in personnel related costs of $11.6 million, an increase in marketing and consulting costs of $6.4 million and an increase of $3.9 million attributable to medical affairs and regulatory support. Other general costs increased $0.9 million. These increases were partially offset by the decrease in costs associated with the separation from Recro of $2.9 million in 2019.
Amortization of Intangible Assets. Amortization expense was $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was related to the amortization of our intangible asset over its estimated useful life that commenced when ANJESO was approved in February 2020. There was no amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Change in Warrant Valuation. The change in warrant valuation was an increase in value of $16.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the warrants sold as part of the March 26, 2020 underwritten public offering, including the impact of the warrant exchange transaction in October 2020.
Change in Contingent Consideration valuation. Our change in contingent consideration valuation consisted of an increase of value of $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a reduction in value of $14.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The non-cash charge for contingent consideration in each period relates to the revaluation of the probability-adjusted fair value of the Alkermes Transaction payment obligation. The increase in the fair value of the liability of $2.2 million in 2020 was primarily due to the increase in probability of success of milestones tied to the FDA approval of ANJESO, partially offset by the adjusted timing of estimated milestone and royalty payments due to updated forecasts reflecting an estimate of the launch trajectory of ANJESO. The decrease in the fair value of the liability of $14.6 million in 2019 was due to the adjusted timing of estimated milestone and royalty payments after the receipt of the CRL from the FDA in March 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $30.3 million in cash and cash equivalents. Historically, prior to the Separation, the primary source of liquidity for our business was cash flow provided to us from Recro. Prior to the Separation, transfers of cash to and from Recro were reflected in Net Parent Investment in the historical combined balance sheets, statements of cash flows and statements of changes in Net Parent Investment.
On January 21, 2021, we entered into an agreement to issue and sell warrants exercisable for an aggregate of 10,300,430 shares of common stock (the “January Warrants”) at an offering price of $0.125 per warrant in exchange for the exercise of the institutional investor’s existing December Series A warrants that were issued to them on December 21, 2020, at an exercise price of $1.18 per warrant. The January Warrants have an exercise price of $1.60 per share. The January Warrants are immediately exercisable and will expire five years from the issuance date. As compensation to H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC, or the Placement Agent, as placement agent, we agreed to pay a cash fee of 6.0% of the aggregate gross proceeds raised in the January Offering (including the proceeds relating to the exercise of the December Series A Warrants), plus a management fee equal to 1.0% of the gross proceeds raised in the January
Offering (including the proceeds relating to the exercise of the December Series A Warrants) and reimbursement of certain expenses and legal fees. We also issued to designees of the Placement Agent warrants to purchase up to 618,026 shares of common stock (the “January Placement Agent Warrants”). The January Placement Agent Warrants have substantially the same terms as the January Warrants, except that the January Placement Agent Warrants have an exercise price equal to $2.00 per share.
On February 8, 2021, we entered into an agreement to issue and sell 11,000,000 shares of common stock (the “February Offering”) at an offering price of $1.60 per share. As compensation to the Placement Agent, as placement agent in connection with the February Offering, we agreed to pay the Placement Agent a cash fee of 6.0% of the gross proceeds raised in the February Offering, plus a management fee equal to 1.0% of the gross proceeds raised in the February Offering and reimbursement of certain expenses and legal fees. We also issued to designees of the Placement Agent warrants to purchase up to 660,000 shares of common stock (the “February Placement Agent Warrants”). The February Placement Agent Warrants have an exercise price of $2.00 per share. The February Placement Agent Warrants will be exercisable immediately upon approval by our board of directors and shareholders of an increase in the number of shares of our authorized common stock.
We expect to seek additional funding to sustain our future operations and while we have successfully raised capital in the past, the ability to raise capital in future periods is not assured. We may not be able to continue as a going concern. The report of our independent registered public accounting firm regarding our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 contained an explanatory paragraph regarding our ability to continue as a going concern based upon our history of net losses and dependence on future financing in order to meet our planned operating activities. See “Item 1A - Risk Factors” for more information.
On December 18, 2020, we closed a registered direct offering of 4,250,000 shares of common stock, warrants to purchase 10,300,430 shares of common stock, or the December Series A Warrants, at an exercise price of $1.18 per share, pre-funded warrants to purchase 6,050,430 shares of common stock, or the December Series B Warrants, at an exercise price of $0.01 per share, for net proceeds of $10.9 million. As compensation to the Placement Agent, we agreed to pay to the Placement Agent a cash fee of 6.0% of the aggregate gross proceeds, plus a management fee equal to 1.0% of the gross proceeds and reimbursement of certain expenses and legal fees. We also issued warrants to purchase 618,026 shares of common stock, or the December Placement Agent Warrants, at an exercise price of $1.45625 per share.
On November 24, 2020, we closed a registered direct offering of 2,850,000 shares of common stock, warrants to purchase 10,126,583 shares of common stock, or the November Series A Warrants, at an exercise price of $1.20 per share, pre-funded warrants to purchase 7,276,583 shares of common stock, or the November Series B Warrants, at an exercise price of $0.01 per share, for net proceeds of $10.8 million. As compensation to the Placement Agent, we agreed to pay to the Placement Agent a cash fee of 6.0% of the aggregate gross proceeds, plus a management fee equal to 1.0% of the gross proceeds and reimbursement of certain expenses and legal fees. We also issued warrants to purchase 607,595 shares of common stock, or the November Placement Agent Warrants, at an exercise price of $1.48125 per share.
On May 29, 2020, we entered in a $50.0 million Credit Agreement with MAM Eagle Lender, pursuant to which we have drawn $10.0 million as of the date of this Annual Report and may draw upon four additional tranches of term loans. The Tranche Two Loans in an amount not to exceed $5.0 million may be drawn upon on or before August 29, 2021 provided that we generate at least $5.0 million in net revenue in the three consecutive calendar months immediately preceding the date such Tranche Two Loans are funded. The Tranche Two Loans may also be drawn on a subsequent date with the satisfaction of the conditions for the Tranche Three Loans, Tranche Four Loans, or Tranche Five Loans, as applicable, provided that the Tranche Two Loans may not be drawn more than once. The Tranche Three Loans in an amount not to exceed $5.0 million may be drawn upon on or before November 29, 2021 provided that we generate at least $10.0 million in net revenue in the three consecutive calendar months immediately preceding such date such Tranche Three Loans are funded. The Tranche Three Loans may also be drawn on a subsequent date with the satisfaction of the conditions for the Tranche Four Loans or Tranche Five Loans, as applicable, provided that the Tranche Three Loans may not be drawn more than once. The Tranche Four Loans in an amount not to exceed $10.0 million may be drawn upon, subject to the consent of the Lenders, on or before August 29, 2022 provided that we generate at least $20.0 million in net revenue in the three consecutive calendar months immediately preceding the date such Tranche Four Loans are funded. The Tranche Four Loans may also be drawn on a subsequent date with the satisfaction of the conditions for the Tranche Five Loans provided that the Tranche Four Loans may not be drawn more than once. The Tranche Five Loans in an amount not to exceed $20.0 million may be drawn upon, subject to the consent of the Lenders, on or before March 1, 2023 provided that we generate at least $100.0 million in net revenue in the twelve consecutive calendar months immediately preceding the date such Tranche Five Loans are funded.
On May 8, 2020, we entered into a promissory note for $1.5 million under the PPP of the CARES Act administered by the SBA. We have used the loan proceeds for covered payroll costs in accordance with the relevant terms and conditions of the CARES Act. This Loan may be partially or fully forgiven if we comply with the provisions of the CARES Act including the use of Loan proceeds for payroll costs, rent, utilities and other expenses, and at least 60% of the loan proceeds must be used for payroll costs as defined by the CARES Act. Any forgiveness of the Loan will be subject to approval by the SBA and the Lender will require us to apply for such treatment in the future. Should we meet the requirements for forgiveness, we would extinguish the note upon receiving legal release from PNC Bank and record a gain on extinguishment in the period. We expect that the full $1.5 million balance of the PPP Loan will be forgiven, however, no assurance can be given that we will obtain forgiveness of the PPP Loan in whole or in part.
On March 26, 2020, we closed an underwritten public offering of 7,692,308 shares of our common stock, Series A Warrants to purchase 7,692,308 shares of our common stock, or the March Series A Warrants, at an exercise price of $4.59 per share and Series B Warrants to purchase 7,692,308 shares of our common stock, or the March Series B Warrants, at an exercise price of $3.25 per share, resulting in $23.1 million of net proceeds, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses. Subsequent to the closing of the underwritten public offering, the exercise of warrants related to the transaction has provided net proceeds of an additional $2.5 million. In October 2020, we executed Warrant Exchange Agreements with certain holders of our March Series A Warrants and March Series B Warrants. We issued 1,186,774 shares of common stock to the participating Holders as a result of the Exchange. See Note 13(c) to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements included in this Annual Report for additional information.
On February 13, 2020, we entered into a Sales Agreement with JMP Securities LLC, as sales agent, or the Agent, pursuant to which we may, from time to time, issue and sell shares of our common stock, in an aggregate offering price of up to $25.0 million through the Agent, or the ATM Program. As of December 31, 2020, 441,967 shares have been sold under the ATM Program for net proceeds of $3.6 million. The Agent was paid a sales commission of 3% for such sales under the Sales Agreement.
Under the terms of the Separation Agreement, Recro made a cash capital contribution of $19.0 million to us to fund our initial operations. Subsequent to the Separation, we no longer participate in Recro’s centralized cash management or benefit from direct funding from Recro. Our ability to fund our operations and capital needs will depend on our ability to raise additional funds through debt financings, bank or other loans, licensing, including out-licensing activities, sale of assets and/or marketing arrangements or through public or private sales of equity or debt securities from time to time. Financing may not be available on acceptable terms, or at all, and our failure to raise capital when needed could materially adversely impact our growth plans and our financial condition or results of operations. Additional debt or equity financing, if available, may be dilutive to the holders of our common stock and may involve significant cash payment obligations and covenants that restrict our ability to operate our business or access to capital.
We anticipate that our principal uses of cash in the future will be primarily to commercialize ANJESO and to fund our operations, pipeline development activities, working capital needs, capital expenditures and other general corporate purposes.
Sources and Uses of Cash
Cash used in operations was $44.1 million and $50.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which represents our operating losses less our non-cash items including: stock-based compensation, non-cash interest expense, depreciation, amortization, changes in warrant valuations, and changes in fair value of contingent consideration, as well as changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Cash used in investing activities was $0.6 million and $1.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our capital expenditures were $0.6 million and $1.3 million, respectively.
There was $57.3 million of cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 consisting of net proceeds of $23.1 million from the public offering of common stock and warrants, net proceeds of $21.9 million from registered direct offerings of common stock and warrants, net proceeds of $1.5 million from the issuance of the PPP Loan, net proceeds of $8.5 million from the incurrence of long-term debt under the Credit Agreement with MAM Eagle Lender, net proceeds of $3.6 million from our ATM Program, and net proceeds of $2.7 million from warrant exercises, partially offset by a payment of contingent consideration of $3.6 million. There was $69.3 million of cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2019 from net proceeds from parent company investment of $60.3 million in addition to the $19.0 million contributed by Recro upon the Distribution, which was partially offset by $10.0 million of contingent consideration payments.
Our future use of operating cash and capital requirements will depend on many forward-looking factors, including the following:
•
our relationships with Recro, third parties, licensors, collaborators and our employees;
•
our ability to continue to operate as a standalone company and execute our strategic priorities;
•
potential indemnification liabilities we may owe to Recro;
•
the timing of the Alkermes Transaction regulatory milestone payments and other contingent consideration;
•
the costs of continued manufacturing scale-up and commercialization activities, for ANJESO;
•
the level of market acceptance of ANJESO;
•
the scope, progress, results and costs of development for our other product candidates;
•
the cost, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our other product candidates;
•
the cost of manufacturing scale-up, acquiring drug product and other capital equipment for our other product candidates;
•
the extent to which we in-license, acquire or invest in products, businesses and technologies;
•
our ability to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or sale of certain assets;
•
the extent to which any holders of our warrants exercise their warrants resulting in the payment of cash proceeds to us;
•
our ability to have sufficient authorized shares of our common stock available;
•
the ability to effectuate a reverse stock split or other similar change to our capital structure;
•
the costs of preparing, submitting and prosecuting patent applications and maintaining, enforcing and defending intellectual property claims; and
•
the effect of any changes in our effective tax rate due to changes in the mix of earnings in countries with differing statutory tax rates, changes in the valuation of deferred tax assets and liabilities, tax impacts and net operating loss utilization related to the Separation and changes in tax laws.
We might use existing cash and cash equivalents on hand, debt, equity financing, sale of assets or out-licensing revenue or a combination thereof to fund our operations or product acquisitions. If we increase our debt levels, we might be restricted in our ability to raise additional capital and might be subject to financial and restrictive covenants. Our shareholders may experience dilution as a result of the issuance of additional equity or debt securities. This dilution may be significant depending upon the amount of equity or debt securities that we issue and the prices at which we issue any securities.
Contractual Commitments
The table below reflects our contractual commitments as of December 31, 2020:
(1)
Debt obligations consist of principal, an exit fee of 2.5% of that principal and interest on the $10.0 million outstanding term loan under our Credit Agreement in addition to principal and interest on a $1.5 million promissory note under the SBA Paycheck Protection Program of the CARES Act. See Note 11 to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2)
These obligations consist of cancelable and non-cancelable purchase commitments related to capital expenditures and other goods or services. The timing of certain purchase commitments cannot be estimated as it is dependent on the outcome of strategic evaluations and agreements. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, these obligations are not recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. See Note 12 to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(3)
We have become party to certain operating leases for the leased space in Malvern, Pennsylvania and Dublin, Ireland, as well as for office equipment, for which the minimum lease payments are presented. See Note 8 to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(4)
We are party to exclusive licenses with Orion for the development and commercialization of certain pipeline product candidates, under which we may be required to make certain milestone and royalty payments to Orion. See Note 12(a) to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The amount reflects only payment obligations that are fixed and determinable. We are unable to reliably estimate the timing of these payments
because they are dependent on the type and complexity of the clinical studies and intended uses of the products, which have not been established. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, these obligations are not recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(5)
We license the NMBAs from Cornell University pursuant to a license agreement under which we are obligated to make annual license maintenance fee payments, milestone payments and patent cost payments and to pay royalties on net sales of the NMBAs. The amount reflects only payment obligations that are fixed and determinable. We are unable to reliably estimate the timing of certain of these payments because they are dependent on the type and complexity of the clinical studies and intended uses of the products, which have not been established. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, certain of these obligations are not recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. See 12(a) to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(6)
Pursuant to the purchase and sale agreement governing the Alkermes Transaction, we agreed to pay to Alkermes milestone and royalty payments. The amount reflects only payment obligations that are fixed and determinable. We are unable to reliably estimate the timing of these payments because they are in some instances, events that are not in our control and dependent on the commercial success of the product. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, the fair value of these obligations is recorded as contingent consideration on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. See Note 12(b) to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(7)
We have entered into an employment agreement with our named executive officer. As of December 31, 2020, this employment agreement provided for, among other things, annual base salary in an aggregate amount of not less than this amount, from that date through June 2022. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, these obligations are not recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. See Note 12 (e) to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated and combined financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our combined financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to accrued expenses, stock-based compensation and contingent consideration. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue Recognition - Subsequent to regulatory approval for ANJESO from the FDA, we began selling ANJESO in the U.S. through a single 3PL which takes title to and control of the goods. We recognize revenue from ANJESO product sales at the point the title to the product is transferred to the customer and the customer obtains control of the product. The transaction price that is recognized as revenue for products includes an estimate of variable consideration for reserves which result from discounts, returns, chargebacks, rebates and other allowances that are offered within contracts between us and our end-customers, wholesalers, group purchasing organizations and other indirect customers. Our payment terms are generally between thirty to ninety days.
Impairment of Goodwill - We are required to review, on an annual basis, the carrying value of goodwill, to determine whether impairment may exist. For goodwill, the impairment model prescribes a one-step method for determining impairment. The one-step quantitative test calculates the amount of goodwill impairment as the excess of a reporting unit’s carrying amount over its fair value, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. Based on accounting standards, it is required that these assets be assessed at least annually for impairment unless a triggering event occurs between annual assessments which would then require an assessment in the period which a triggering event occurred.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets - We are required to review the carrying value of long-lived assets, including property and equipment and amortizable intangible assets, and for recoverability whenever events occur or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. The impairment test is a two-step test. Under step one we assess the recoverability of an asset (or asset group). The carrying amount of an asset (or asset group) is not recoverable if it exceeds the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected from the use and eventual disposition of the asset (or asset group). The impairment loss is measured in step two as the difference between the carrying value of the asset (or asset group) and its fair value. Assumptions and estimates used in the evaluation of impairment are subjective and changes in these assumptions may negatively impact projected
undiscounted cash flows, which could result in impairment charges in future periods. On an ongoing periodic basis, we evaluate the useful life of our long-lived assets and determine if any economic, governmental or regulatory event has modified their estimated useful lives.
Contingent Consideration - We revalue our contingent consideration on a quarterly basis using a discounted cash flow valuation model. The model uses significant unobservable inputs, including projected future revenue. We estimate injectable meloxicam net revenues based on estimated market share, pricing and customary trade discounts, taking into consideration variables such as, market acceptance of the product and the expected number of product competitors in the market.
On a periodic basis, we evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets and adjust such amounts in light of changing facts and circumstances, including but not limited to projections of future taxable income, the reversal of deferred tax liabilities, tax legislation, rulings by relevant tax authorities, tax planning strategies and the progress of ongoing tax examinations. As part of this evaluation, we consider whether it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. The ultimate realization of a deferred tax asset is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the period in which the related temporary difference becomes deductible or the net operating loss, or NOL, and credit carryforwards can be utilized.
We maintain a full valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets where realizability is not certain. We periodically evaluate the likelihood of the realization of deferred tax assets and adjust the carrying amount of these deferred tax assets by a valuation allowance based on the anticipated realizability. The valuation allowance can be reversed if objective negative evidence in the form of cumulative losses is no longer present and additional weight is given to subjective evidence, such as our projection of future growth. This determination depends on a variety of factors, some of which are subjective, including our current year taxable income in the United States, expectations of future taxable income, impact of tax reform, achievement of milestones, carryforward periods available to us for tax reporting purposes, various income tax strategies and other relevant factors. If we determine that the deferred tax assets realizability is impacted, we would record material changes to income tax expense in that period.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of new accounting pronouncements see Note 3 to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Transition from Recro and Costs to Operate as an Independent Company
The combined financial statements for periods prior to the Separation reflect our operating results and financial position as it was operated by Recro, rather than as an independent company. We are now incurring additional ongoing operating expenses to operate as an independent company. These costs will include the cost of various corporate headquarters functions, incremental insurance, audit and information technology-related costs and incremental costs to operate stand-alone accounting, legal and other administrative functions. We are now incurring non-recurring expenses and non-recurring capital expenditures.
As an independent company, our operating costs may be higher than the costs allocated in the historical combined financial statements prior to the Separation.
It is not practicable to estimate the costs that would have been incurred in each of the periods presented in the historical financial statements for the functions described above. Actual costs that would have been incurred if we operated as a stand-alone company during these periods would have depended on various factors, including organizational design, capital financing needs, status of threatened or pending lawsuits, regulatory outcomes, outsourcing and other strategic decisions related to corporate functions, information technology and back office infrastructure.