ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto and other financial information included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to the historical information, certain statements in this discussion are forward-looking statements based on current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results and the timing of certain events may differ significantly from those projected in such forward-looking statements.
As a result of the COVID-19 global pandemic, all of our gaming facilities were closed in mid-March 2020 in compliance with orders issued by state officials as precautionary measures intended to slow the spread of the COVID-19 virus. The properties were allowed to re-open on the dates indicated in the table below, subject to various health and safety measures, including occupancy limitations. While they are allowed to re-open, two of our properties in Las Vegas have remained closed to the public due to the current levels of the demand in the market and our cost containment efforts. No dates have been set for re-opening these properties. Eldorado, a third property in Las Vegas that had also remained closed, was sold in December 2020.
COVID-19 mitigation restrictions resulted in the temporary closures of our Par-A-Dice property in November 2020 and the Valley Forge property in December 2020. Both properties re-opened during January 2021. We cannot predict whether we will be required to temporarily close some or all of our re-opened casinos in the future. Further, we cannot currently predict the ongoing impact of the pandemic on consumer demand and the negative effects on our workforce, suppliers, contractors and other partners. In responding to these circumstances, the safety and well-being of our team members and customers is our utmost priority. We have developed and implemented a broad range of safety protocols at our properties to ensure the health and safety of our team members and our customers.
The closures of our properties had a material impact on our business, and the COVID-19 pandemic, the associated impacts on customer behavior and the requirements of health and safety protocols are expected to continue to have a material impact on our business. The severity and duration of such business impacts cannot currently be estimated and the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations is unknown and will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the duration of the COVID-19 outbreak, new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, its impact on the economy and consumer behavior and demand, and any additional preventative and protective actions that governments, or the Company, may direct, which may result in additional business disruptions, reduced customer traffic and reduced operations. Any resulting financial impact cannot be reasonably estimated at this time but is anticipated to have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
We have taken significant measures in response to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, including (i) reducing the offering of certain amenities (because such amenities must remain closed) and otherwise limiting the availability of certain offerings, such as deactivating a substantial number of gaming devices to maintain social distancing and substantially limiting restaurant seating, as well as substantially limiting the number of customers permitted to be in a property at any time; (ii) adjusting property and corporate staffing levels in response to operational refinements and business volumes present as we re-opened our properties; and (iii) suspending our quarterly cash dividend and share repurchase programs.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Boyd Gaming Corporation (the "Company," "Boyd Gaming," "we" or "us") is a multi-jurisdictional gaming company that has been in operation since 1975.
As of December 31, 2020, we operate 28 wholly owned gaming entertainment properties. Headquartered in Las Vegas, Nevada, we have geographically diversified gaming operations in Nevada, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, Ohio and Pennsylvania. We view each operating property as an operating segment. For financial reporting purposes, we aggregate our wholly owned properties into the following three reportable segments:
*Par-A-Dice was temporarily closed on November 20, 2020 and subsequently re-opened on January 16, 2021.
**Valley Forge was temporarily closed on December 12, 2020 subsequently re-opened on January 4, 2021.
We also own and operate a travel agency and a captive insurance company that underwrites travel-related insurance, each located in Hawaii. Financial results for these operations are included in our Downtown Las Vegas segment, as our Downtown Las Vegas properties concentrate their marketing efforts on gaming customers from Hawaii.
Our Midwest & South segment includes our wholly owned subsidiaries Valley Forge Casino Resort for the period following its September 17, 2018 acquisition, and Ameristar Casino Hotel Kansas City, Ameristar Casino Resort Spa St. Charles, Belterra Casino Resort and Belterra Park (together, the "Pinnacle Properties") for the period following their October 15, 2018 acquisition. See Note 2, Acquisitions and Divestitures, to our consolidated financial statements presented in Part II, Item 8.
Results for Lattner Entertainment Group Illinois, LLC ("Lattner"), our Illinois distributed gaming operator, and our online gaming initiatives are included in our Midwest & South segment.
In May 2016, we entered into an Equity Purchase Agreement to sell our 50% equity interest in the parent company of Borgata Hotel Casino and Spa ("Borgata") to MGM Resorts International. This transaction closed on August 1, 2016. We account for our investment in Borgata by applying the equity method and report its results as discontinued operations for all periods presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Most of our gaming entertainment properties also include hotel, dining, retail and other amenities. Our main business emphasis is on slot revenues, which are highly dependent upon the number of visits and spending levels of customers at our properties.
Our properties have historically generated significant operating cash flow, with the majority of our revenue being cash-based. While we do provide casino credit, subject to certain gaming regulations and jurisdictions, most of our customers wager with cash and pay for non-gaming services with cash or by credit card.
Our industry is capital intensive and we rely heavily on the ability of our properties to generate operating cash flow in order to fund maintenance capital expenditures, fund acquisitions, provide excess cash for future development, repay debt financing and associated interest costs, repurchase our debt or equity securities, and pay income taxes and dividends.
Our primary areas of focus are: (i) ensuring our existing operations are managed as efficiently as possible and remain positioned for growth; (ii) improving our capital structure and strengthening our balance sheet, including paying down debt, increasing cash flow, improving operations and diversifying our asset base; and (iii) successfully pursuing our growth strategy, which is built on identifying development opportunities and acquiring assets that are a good strategic fit and provide an appropriate return to our shareholders.
Our Strategy
Our overriding strategy is to increase shareholder value by pursuing strategic initiatives that improve and grow our business.
Strengthening our Balance Sheet
We are committed to finding opportunities to strengthen our balance sheet through diversifying and increasing our cash flows. We intend to take a balanced approach to our cash flows, with a current emphasis on debt repayment followed by investing in our business and returning capital to shareholders.
Operating Efficiently
We are committed to operating more efficiently. As we re-opened our properties and adjusted our operations to address the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, the efficiencies of our refined business model positioned us to flow a substantial portion of the revenue directly to the bottom line.
Evaluating Acquisition Opportunities
Our evaluations of potential investments and growth opportunities are strategic, deliberate, and disciplined. Our goal is to identify and pursue opportunities that grow our business and deliver a solid return for shareholders, and are available at the right price. These investments can take the form of expanding and enhancing offerings and amenities at existing properties, development of new properties, or acquisitions. Currently, the Company is primarily focused on enhancements to its existing properties.
Maintaining our Brand
The ability of our employees to deliver great customer service helps distinguish our Company and our brands from our competitors. Our employees are an important reason that our customers continue to choose our properties over the competition across the country. In addition, we have established a nationwide branding initiative and loyalty program. Our players use their "B Connected" cards to earn and redeem points at nearly all of our properties. The "B Connected" club, among other benefits, rewards players for their loyalty by entitling them to qualify for promotions and earn rewards toward gaming and nongaming activities.
Our Key Performance Indicators
We use several key performance measures to evaluate the operations of our properties. These key performance measures include the following:
•
Gaming revenue measures: slot handle, which means the dollar amount wagered in slot machines, and table game drop, which means the total amount of cash deposited in table games drop boxes, plus the sum of markers issued at all table games, are measures of volume and/or market share. Slot win and table game hold, which mean the difference between customer wagers and customer winnings on slot machines and table games, respectively, represent the amount of wagers retained by us and recorded as gaming revenues. Slot win percentage and table game hold percentage, which are not fully controllable by us, represent the relationship between slot handle to slot win and table game drop to table game hold, respectively.
•
Food & beverage revenue measures: average guest check, which means the average amount spent per customer visit and is a measure of volume and product offerings; number of guests served ("food covers"), which is an indicator of volume; and the cost per guest served, which is a measure of operating margin.
•
Room revenue measures: hotel occupancy rate, which measures the utilization of our available rooms; and average daily rate ("ADR"), which is a price measure.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
Total Revenues
Total revenues decreased $1,147.6 million, or 34.5%, for 2020 as compared to 2019 due primarily to the COVID-19 property closures that began in mid-March 2020 and lasted through May and June 2020, depending on the specific property's re-open date (the "Property Closures") and the decline in visitation after re-opening reflecting the limited capacity and reduced amenities offered to comply with restrictions dictated by the jurisdictions in which we operate.
Total revenues increased $699.4 million, or 26.6%, for 2019 as compared to 2018 due primarily to the acquisitions of Lattner on June 1, 2018, Valley Forge on September 17, 2018 and Ameristar Kansas City, Ameristar St. Charles, Belterra Resort and Belterra Park on October 15, 2018 (collectively, the "Acquisitions").
Operating Income
In 2020, our operating income decreased $458.3 million as compared to 2019 due to the Property Closures, along with an impairment charge of $174.7 million. Despite the significant decline in total revenues, the Company has been able to adjust operating and marketing costs in response to the post re-opening environment and increase overall operating margins by 1.7%.
In 2019, our operating income increased $117.3 million as compared to 2018 due primarily to the Acquisitions and cost control efforts surrounding our operating costs. In addition, project development, preopening and writedowns expense decreased $24.0 million from the prior year period, which included costs incurred related to the Acquisitions.
Income (Loss) from Continuing Operations, Net of Tax
Loss from continuing operations, net of tax was $134.7 million in 2020, as compared to income from continuing operations, net of tax of $157.6 million in 2019, a change of $292.3 million. This decrease was primarily attributable to the $458.3 million decrease in operating income, as discussed above. The decline is offset by (i) the realization in 2020 of a $40.0 million gain related to property closures, (ii) the incurrence in 2019 of $34.9 million in loss on early extinguishments of debt, and (iii) a change in the income tax provision from $44.5 million to a benefit of $36.3 million due to the Company's net loss.
Income from continuing operations, net of tax was $157.6 million in 2019, as compared to $114.7 million in 2018, an increase of $42.9 million. This increase was primarily attributable to the $117.3 million increase in operating income, as discussed above, offset by a $33.3 million increase in interest expense, net of amounts capitalized, due to an increase in the weighted average long-term debt balance of $536.0 million reflecting the incremental debt incurred to fund the Acquisitions, a 0.2 percentage point increase in the weighted average interest rate and by $34.9 million of loss on early extinguishments and modifications of debt due to our refinancing activities.
Income from Discontinued Operations, Net of Tax
Income from discontinued operations, net of tax, reflects the results of our equity method investment in Borgata, which we sold in August 2016. The 2018 results include cash received for our share of miscellaneous recoveries realized by Borgata of $0.3 million.
Net Income (Loss)
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net loss was $134.7 million, compared with net income of $157.6 million for the corresponding period of the prior year. The $292.3 million change is due solely to the decrease in income from continuing operations, net of tax, due to the reasons discussed above.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net income was $157.6 million, compared with net income of $115.0 million for the corresponding period of the prior year. The $42.6 million change is primarily due to the increase in income from continuing operations, net of tax, of $42.9 million, as discussed above, offset by a $0.3 million decrease in net income from discontinued operations, net of tax.
Operating Revenues
We derive the majority of our revenues from our gaming operations, which generated approximately 81%, 75% and 73% of our revenues for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Food & beverage revenues represent our next most significant revenue source, generating approximately 8% of revenues for 2020, 13% for 2019 and 14% for 2018. Room revenues and other revenues separately contributed less than 10% of revenues during each year. The shift in revenues to gaming from our non-gaming sources is primarily due to the impacts of COVID-19 on our operations, which has reduced and otherwise limited the availability of certain amenities (because such amenities must remain closed), as well as substantially limiting the number of customers permitted to be in a property at any time.
Gaming
Gaming revenues are comprised primarily of the net win from our slot machine operations and to a lesser extent from table games win. The $707.9 million, or 28.5%, decrease in gaming revenues during 2020 as compared to the prior year, was primarily due to the Property Closures and COVID-19-related restrictions after re-opening.
The $557.9 million, or 29.0%, increase in gaming revenues during 2019 as compared to the prior year, was primarily due to the Acquisitions.
Food & Beverage
Food & beverage revenues decreased $269.0 million, or 60.1%, during 2020 as compared to prior year, due primarily to the Property Closures and reduced food & beverage offerings available as the properties re-opened, as well as capacity restrictions on those offerings that have re-opened. Overall food & beverage margins declined from the prior year, due primarily to a 22.1% increase in cost per cover offset by a 11.1% increase in average check.
Food & beverage revenues increased $80.0 million, or 21.7%, during 2019 as compared to prior year due primarily to the Acquisitions. Overall food & beverage margins increased to 7.8% from 5.5% in the prior year, due primarily to an increase in average check of 10.8% while cost per cover increased by only 6.1%.
Room
Room revenues decreased $132.2 million, or 55.7%, in 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to the Property Closures and reduced visitations and capacity restrictions after properties re-opened. Overall room margins declined from 53.3% in the prior year to 49.3% in the current year, due primarily to a 11.9% increase in cost per room along with a 4.7% decline in average daily rate.
Room revenues increased $37.7 million, or 18.9%, in 2019 compared to 2018 due primarily to the Acquisitions. An increase in room revenue of $5.5 million in the Las Vegas Locals segment was driven by an increase in the hotel occupancy rate of 3.1% from the prior year, offset by a decrease of 0.8% in the average daily rate from the prior year.
Other
Other revenues relate to patronage visits at the amenities at our properties, including entertainment and nightclub revenues, retail sales, theater tickets and other venues, and revenue share payments received from our on-line gaming partners. Other revenues decreased by $38.5 million, or 24.4%, during 2020 as compared to the prior year, primarily due to the Property Closures along with limited entertainment offerings after property re-openings. The reductions from these sources were partially offset by increased revenue from our on-line gaming operations.
Other revenues increased by $23.9 million, or 17.8%, during 2019 as compared to the prior year due primarily to the Acquisitions.
Revenues and Adjusted EBITDAR by Reportable Segment
We determine each of our properties' profitability based upon Adjusted Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, Amortization and Rent expense related to the master lease ("Adjusted EBITDAR"), which represents earnings before interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, deferred rent, master lease rent expense, share-based compensation expense, project development, preopening and writedowns expenses, impairments of assets and other operating items, net, as applicable. Reportable Segment Adjusted EBITDAR is the aggregate sum of the Adjusted EBITDAR for each of the properties comprising our Las Vegas Locals, Downtown Las Vegas and Midwest & South segments before net amortization, preopening and other items. Results for Downtown Las Vegas include the results of our travel agency and captive insurance company in Hawaii. The results for our Illinois distributed gaming operator and our online gaming initiatives are included in our Midwest & South segment. Corporate expense represents unallocated payroll, professional fees, aircraft expenses and various other expenses not directly related to our casino and hotel operations. Furthermore, for purposes of this presentation, corporate expense excludes its portion of share-based compensation expense.
EBITDAR is a commonly used measure of performance in our industry that we believe, when considered with measures calculated in accordance with GAAP, provides our investors a more complete understanding of our operating results before the impact of investing and financing transactions and income taxes and facilities comparisons between us and our competitors. Management has historically adjusted EBITDAR when evaluating operating performance because we believe that the inclusion or exclusion of certain recurring and non-recurring items is necessary to provide a full understanding of our core operating results and as a means to evaluate period-to-period results.
The following table presents our total revenues and Adjusted EBITDAR by Reportable Segment:
(1) Refer to Note 14, Segment Information, in the notes to the consolidated financial statements for a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDAR to operating income, as reported in accordance with GAAP in our accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
Las Vegas Locals
Total revenues and Adjusted EBITDAR decreased $318.9 million, or 36.2%, and $84.3 million, or 29.8%, respectively, during 2020 as compared to the prior year, primarily due to the Property Closures.
Total revenues increased $7.4 million, or 0.9%, during 2019 as compared to the prior year, primarily due to revenue increases in food & beverage and room revenue. Food & beverage revenue increased $1.8 million due to an increase in average check of 7.8% over prior year. In addition, room revenue increased $5.5 million, as discussed above.
Downtown Las Vegas
Total revenues and Adjusted EBITDAR decreased $163.2 million, or 63.3%, and $61.3 million, or 98.3%, respectively, during 2020 as compared to the prior year, due to the Property Closures and, given that our Downtown properties cater to the Hawaiian market. Restrictions on travel to and from Hawaii due to the COVID-19 pandemic have reduced demand from this customer segment since re-opening.
Total revenues increased by $9.6 million, or 3.9%, in 2019 as compared to the prior year, reflecting revenue increases in all departmental categories except other revenue. Gaming revenue increased $5.8 million primarily due to a 6.8% increase in slot win. Food & beverage revenue increased $2.0 million primarily due to an increase in average check of 6.2% and a 1.1% increase in food covers. In addition, room revenue increased $1.8 million as the hotel occupancy rate increased 2.8% over prior year. We continue to tailor our marketing programs in the Downtown segment to cater to our Hawaiian market. Our Hawaiian market represented approximately 53% and 54% during both 2019 and 2018 of our occupied rooms in this segment.
Midwest & South
Total revenues and Adjusted EBITDAR decreased $665.5 million, or 30.4%, and $154.7 million, or 24.4%, respectively, in 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily due to the Property Closures, which was partially offset by increases resulting from the on-line gaming operations.
Total revenues increased $682.4 million, or 45.3%, in 2019 as compared to 2018, primarily due to the Acquisitions.
Other Operating Costs and Expenses
The following operating costs and expenses, as presented in our consolidated statements of operations, are further discussed below:
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses include marketing, technology, compliance and risk, surveillance and security. These costs, as a percentage of total revenues, were 16.1%, 13.8% and 14.1% for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in these costs as a percentage of revenues in 2020 versus prior years is due to the impact of the Property Closures on revenues, which exceeded the cost reductions we were able to achieve during those closures. We continue to focus on disciplined and targeted marketing spend and on our cost containment efforts.
Master Lease Rent Expense
Master lease rent expense represents rent expense incurred by those properties subject to a master lease agreement with a real estate investment trust. Master lease rent expense, as a percentage of revenues, was 4.7%, 2.9% and 0.8% for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in master lease rent expense in 2020 as compared to 2019 is due to the addition of Belterra Park real estate in the master lease in May 2020. The higher expense reported in 2019 versus 2018 is due to 2019 reflecting a full year of expense, versus 2018 which included a partial year after closing of the Acquisitions.
Maintenance and Utilities
Maintenance and utilities expenses, as a percentage of total revenues, were 5.3%, 4.7% and 4.8% for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense, as a percentage of total revenues, was 12.9%, 8.3% and 8.8% for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The dollar amount of depreciation and amortization expense remained consistent from period to period therefore the percentage increase is attributable to the revenue decline as a result of the Property Closures.
Corporate Expense
Corporate expense represents unallocated payroll, professional fees, rent and various other administrative expenses that are not directly related to our casino and/or hotel operations, in addition to the corporate portion of share-based compensation expense. Corporate expense, represented 3.5%, 3.2% and 4.0%, of total revenues, for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Project Development, Preopening and Writedowns
Project development, preopening and writedowns represent: (i) certain costs incurred and recoveries realized related to the activities associated with various acquisition opportunities, strategic initiatives, dispositions and other business development activities in the ordinary course of business; (ii) certain costs of start-up activities that are expensed as incurred; and (iii) asset write-downs. The project development, preopening and writedowns expense in 2020 reflects the net gain realized on the sale of the Eldorado Casino in December 2020, less Wilton Rancheria development costs of $6.2 million and the write off of a non-operating asset for $3.9 million. The project development, preopening and writedowns expense in 2019 and 2018 is primarily due to the Acquisitions, the Wilton Rancheria development and the launch of the redesigned B Connected player loyalty program.
Impairment of Assets
Impairment of assets in 2020 include non-cash impairment charges of $10.5 million for trademarks and $22.6 million for goodwill in our Las Vegas Locals segment and non-cash impairment charges of $10.0 million for trademarks, $42.2 million for gaming license rights and $89.4 million for goodwill in our Midwest & South segment.
There were no expenses related to the impairment of assets in 2019.
Impairment of assets in 2018 of $1.0 million includes non-cash impairment charges related to a nonoperating asset.
Other Operating Items, Net
Other operating items, net, is generally comprised of miscellaneous non-recurring operating charges, including certain non-recurring direct costs associated with the Property Closures, severance payments to separated employees, expenses arising from natural disasters and severe weather, including hurricane and flood expenses and subsequent recoveries of such costs, as applicable. During 2020, the Company realized a nonrecurring gain of $40.0 million related to the Property Closures. This gain is offset by $6.8 million of other operating items, net, related to incremental, non-recurring costs associated with the Property Closures and $5.4 million related to non-recurring costs associated with the hurricanes that impacted our Louisiana and Mississippi properties.
Other Expense (Income)
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net of capitalized interest and interest income decreased $7.0 million, or 3.0%, from 2019 to 2020 primarily due to a decrease in the weighted average interest rate percentage point of 0.7, as the underlying Eurodollar rate declined. The decline in interest rate is offset by an increase in the average long-term debt balance of $286.9 million, which is driven by the following: (i) issuance in December 2019 of the $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 4.750% senior notes due December 2027; and (ii) issuance in May 2020 of the $600.0 million aggregate principal amount of 8.625% senior notes due June 2025; offset by (iii) the retirement of our $750.0 million aggregate principal amount of 6.875% senior notes due May 2023; and (iv) reduction of the Term A Loan due to quarterly payments and the Amendment No. 4 refinancing.
Interest expense, net of capitalized interest and interest income, for 2019 increased $35.1 million, or 17.5%, was primarily due to an increase in the weighted average long-term debt balance of $536.0 million, reflecting the incremental debt incurred related to the Acquisitions. In addition, the weighted average interest rate increased by 0.2 percentage points over the prior year period, which was driven by an increase in the underlying Eurodollar rate.
Loss on Early Extinguishments and Modifications of Debt
The components of the loss on early extinguishments and modifications of debt, are as follows:
Income Taxes
The effective tax rate on income from continuing operations during 2020, 2019 and 2018 was 21.2%, 21.8% and 26.0%, respectively. Our effective tax rate for 2020 was favorably impacted by state audit settlements. The 2020 and 2019 effective tax rates were favorably impacted by benefits related to equity compensation and tax credits while our rate was unfavorably impacted by non-deductible expenses, including non-deductible compensation and employee benefits. Additionally, our 2019 effective tax rate was favorably impacted by the revaluation of our state tax deferred liabilities as a result of corporate restructuring. In 2018, our effective tax rate was unfavorably impacted by state taxes and certain nondeductible expenses which were partially offset by certain tax credits.
Income from Discontinued Operations, Net of Tax
Income from discontinued operations, net of tax, reflects the results of our equity method investment in Borgata, which we sold in August 2016. The 2018 results include cash received for our share of miscellaneous recoveries realized by Borgata of $0.3 million.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Financial Position
We generally operate with minimal or negative levels of working capital in order to minimize borrowings and related interest costs. Our cash and cash equivalents balances were $519.2 million and $250.0 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In addition, we held restricted cash balances of $15.8 million and $20.5 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our working capital surplus at December 31, 2020 was $126.3 million and our deficit at December 31, 2019 was $157.4 million. The increases in cash and working capital at December 31, 2020, versus the prior year are primarily due to the issuance in May 2020 of the $600 million aggregate principal amount of 8.625% senior notes to enhance our cash position.
We believe that current cash balances together with the available borrowing capacity under our Revolving Credit Facility and cash flows from operating activities will be sufficient to meet our liquidity and capital resource needs for the next twelve months, including our projected operating requirements and maintenance capital expenditures. See "Indebtedness", below, for further detail regarding funds available through our bank credit facility.
The Company may also seek to secure additional working capital, repay respective current debt maturities, or fund respective development projects, in whole or in part, through incremental bank financing and additional debt or equity offerings, to the extent such offerings are allowed under our debt agreements.
Cash Flows Summary
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
During 2020, 2019 and 2018, we generated net operating cash flow of $289.0 million, $549.0 million and $434.5 million, respectively. Generally, operating cash flows decreased $260.0 million in 2020 compared to 2019 due to the Property Closures in March through June 2020 and timing of working capital spend. Generally, operating cash flows increased $114.5 million in 2019 compared to 2018 due to the flow through effect of higher revenues, including the impact of the Acquisitions, and the timing of working capital spending.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Our industry is capital intensive and we use cash flows for acquisitions, facility expansions, investments in future development or business opportunities and maintenance capital expenditures.
During 2020, we incurred net cash outflows for investing activities of $171.1 million. Our cash outflows for investing activities include capital expenditures of $175.0 million which primarily relate to the purchase of real estate and property and equipment, including information technology purchases for new software and $11.2 million for acquisition-related costs. Our cash inflow from other investing activities includes the proceeds received from the sale of Eldorado.
During 2019, we incurred net cash outflows for investing activities of $231.5 million. Capital expenditures primarily related to the purchase of property and equipment, including information technology purchases for new software.
During 2018, we incurred net cash outflows for investing activities of $1,135.3 million which is primarily due to the Acquisitions.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
We rely upon our financing cash flows to provide funding for investment opportunities, repayments of obligations and ongoing operations.
In 2020 and 2018, our net cash inflows from financing activities totaled $146.7 million and $746.2 million, respectively. In 2019, our net cash outflows for financing activities totaled $320.3 million. The net cash inflows for financing activities in 2020 reflect primarily the proceeds received for the issuance of our 8.625% Senior Notes due June 2025. The net proceeds were used for general corporate purposes, including working capital and to pay fees and expenses related to the offering. The outflows in 2020 reflect the use of excess cash to reduce our outstanding debt, repurchase outstanding common stock under our share repurchase program and pay cash dividends to our shareholders. The net cash outflows for financing activities in 2019 reflect primarily the use of the proceeds from the issuance of our 4.750% Senior Notes due 2027 and a portion of our excess cash from operations to reduce our outstanding debt, repurchase outstanding common stock under our share repurchase program and pay cash dividends to our shareholders. The net cash inflows for financing activities in 2018 reflect primarily the proceeds received for the issuance of our 6.000% Senior Notes due August 2026 and the Joinder Agreement to our Credit Agreement. The net proceeds from the debt issuance were ultimately used to fund the Acquisitions. The outflows in 2018 reflect the use of excess cash to repurchase outstanding common stock under our share repurchase program and pay cash dividends to our shareholders.
Cash Flows from Discontinued Operations
Discontinued operations activities in 2018 represent Borgata, which we sold in August 2016. The net cash inflow of $0.5 million in 2018 represents cash received for our share of miscellaneous recoveries realized by Borgata.
Indebtedness
The outstanding principal balances of long-term debt, before unamortized discounts and fees, and the changes in those balances, are as follows:
The amount of current maturities includes certain non-extending balances scheduled to be repaid within the next twelve months under the bank credit facilities.
Bank Credit Facility
Credit Agreement
The outstanding principal amounts under the Credit Facility are comprised of the following:
With a total revolving credit commitment of $1,033.7 million available under the bank credit facility, the remaining contractual availability was $1,021.1 million after consideration that there were no borrowings on the Revolving Credit Facility and the Swing Loan and $12.6 million allocated to support various letters of credit.
The Company is party to a Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated as of August 14, 2013 (as amended, amended and restated, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time, the "Boyd Credit Agreement"), governing its senior secured revolving credit facility (the "Revolving Credit Facility"), senior secured term loan A facility (the "Term A Loan") and senior secured term loan B facility (collectively with the Revolving Credit Facility and the Term A Loan, the "Credit Facilities"). The Boyd Credit Agreement includes, for the benefit of the Revolving Credit Facility and the Term A Loan, certain financial covenants, including a maximum total net leverage ratio covenant, a maximum secured net leverage ratio covenant and a minimum interest coverage ratio covenant (collectively, the "Financial Covenants")
The calculations used to determine the Company’s compliance with the Financial Covenants are dependent on its Consolidated EBITDA, as defined by the Boyd Credit Agreement. Due to the closure in first quarter 2020 of the Company’s properties due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company’s Consolidated EBITDA was significantly affected whereby it became reasonably possible that the Company might be unable to maintain compliance with the Financial Covenants.
On May 8, 2020 (the "Amendment Effective Date"), the Company entered into an Amendment No. 3 to the Boyd Credit Agreement (the "Credit Agreement Amendment"), by and among the Company, the subsidiaries of the Company party thereto, the administrative agent and the lenders party thereto.
The Credit Agreement Amendment provides that during the period (the "Covenant Relief Period") beginning on March 30, 2020 and ending on the earlier of (x) the date on which the Company delivers to the administrative agent a covenant relief period termination notice, (y) the date on which the administrative agent receives a compliance certificate with respect to the Company’s fiscal quarter ending June 30, 2021, and (z) the date on which the Company fails to satisfy the conditions to covenant relief set forth in the Credit Agreement Amendment, the Financial Covenants under the Boyd Credit Agreement will not be tested. Instead, during the Covenant Relief Period, the Company will be required to maintain a minimum level of liquidity (calculated to include unrestricted cash and cash equivalents and unused commitments under the Revolving Credit Facility) of $250.0 million and, through the later of the end of the Covenant Relief Period and the date on which the company achieves a total net leverage ratio of no greater than 6.00 to 1.00, the Company will be subject to limitations on its ability to incur debt and liens, make investments and restricted payments and certain other transactions. In addition, the Credit Agreement Amendment, among other things, (i) amends the Financial Covenant levels that are applicable after the Covenant Relief Period and permits the Company to annualize Consolidated EBITDA for certain periods for purposes of the Financial Covenants, (ii) provides that, during the Covenant Relief Period, loans under the Revolving Credit Facility and the Term Loan A Facility shall bear interest at either (a) a base rate or (b) an adjusted LIBOR rate, in each case, plus an applicable margin, in the case of base rate loans, of 1.75%, and in the case of adjusted LIBOR rate loans, of 2.75%, (iii) provides for a 0.50% LIBOR floor and a 1.50% base rate floor, in each case, applicable to LIBOR rate loans and base rate loans under the Revolving Credit Facility and the Term Loan A Facility, (iv) provides that, for purposes of determining compliance with the conditions to credit extensions under the Revolving Credit Facility during the Covenant Relief Period, the definition of "Material Adverse Effect" shall not include effects, events, occurrences, facts, conditions or changes arising out of or resulting from or in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic and (v) makes certain other changes to the covenants and other provisions of the Existing Credit Agreement.
On August 6, 2020, the Company entered into an Amendment No. 4 to the Boyd Credit Agreement ("Amendment No. 4"), by and among the Company, certain direct and indirect subsidiary guarantors of the Company, the administrative agent and lenders party thereto. Amendment No. 4 modifies the existing Boyd Credit Agreement and provides for (i) certain amendments to the covenants and other provisions of the existing Boyd Credit Agreement as described in the amendment, (ii) an extension of the maturity dates of the Company’s existing Revolving Credit Facility and Term A Loan and (iii) a replacement of non-consenting lenders with the Replacement Lender and consenting lenders and a reallocation of a portion of the Term A Loan to commitments under the Revolving Credit Facility. Upon effectiveness of Amendment No. 4, (i) the Term A Loan will have quarterly amortization payments equal to 5% per annum, increasing to 10% per annum for the fiscal quarters ended June 30, 2021 and September 30, 2021 and 20% per annum for the fiscal quarters ended December 31, 2021 and thereafter and (ii) both facilities will mature on September 15, 2023, provided that if the maturity date of the Company’s existing Refinancing Term B Loans is not extended, then such facilities will mature 91 days before the maturity date of the Refinancing Term B Loans. The existing Revolving Credit Facility and Term A Loan will remain "Covenant Facilities" under the Boyd Credit Agreement and will be subject to minimum interest coverage ratio, maximum total leverage ratio and secured leverage ratio financial covenants as set forth in the Boyd Credit Agreement. Amendment No. 4 became effective on October 8, 2020.
Pursuant to the terms of the Credit Facility (i) the loans under the Term A Loan amortize in an annual amount equal to 5.00% of the original principal amount thereof, commencing December 31, 2020, payable on a quarterly basis, increasing to 10.00% per year for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2021 and September 30, 2021 and 20.00% per year for the fiscal quarter ended December 31, 2021 and thereafter, (ii) the loans under the Refinancing Term B Loans amortize in an annual amount equal to 1.00% of the original principal amount thereof, commencing June 30, 2017, payable on a quarterly basis, and (iii) beginning with the fiscal year ending December 31, 2016, the Company is required to use a portion of its annual Excess Cash Flow, as defined in the Credit Agreement, to prepay loans outstanding under the Credit Facility.
The Revolving Credit Facility, the Term A Loan and Refinancing Term B Loans mature on September 15, 2023 (or earlier upon occurrence or non-occurrence of certain events).
The interest rate on the outstanding balance from time to time of the Revolving Credit Facility and the Term A Loan is based upon, at the Company’s option, either: (i) the Eurodollar rate or (ii) the base rate, in each case, plus an applicable margin. Such applicable margin is a percentage per annum determined in accordance with a specified pricing grid based on the total leverage ratio and ranges from 1.75% to 2.75% (if using the Eurodollar rate) and from 0.75% to 1.75% (if using the base rate). A fee of a percentage per annum (which ranges from 0.25% to 0.50% determined in accordance with a specified pricing grid based on the total leverage ratio) will be payable on the unused portions of the Revolving Credit Facility.
The interest rate on the outstanding balance of the Refinancing Term B Loans under the Amended Credit Agreement is based upon, at the Company’s option, either: (i) the Eurodollar rate or (ii) the base rate, in each case, plus an applicable margin. Such applicable margin is a percentage per annum determined in accordance with the Company’s secured leverage ratio and ranges from 2.25% to 2.50% (if using the Eurodollar rate) and from 1.25% to 1.50% (if using the base rate).
The "base rate" under the Credit Agreement remains the highest of (x) Bank of America’s publicly-announced prime rate, (y) the federal funds rate plus 0.50%, or (z) the Eurodollar rate for a one-month period plus 1.00%.
The blended interest rate for outstanding borrowings under for the Credit Facility was 2.5% at December 31, 2020 and 3.8% at December 31, 2019.
Amounts outstanding under the Refinancing Amendment may be prepaid without premium or penalty, and the commitments may be terminated without penalty, subject to certain exceptions.
Subject to certain exceptions, the Company may be required to repay the amounts outstanding under the Credit Facility in connection with certain asset sales and issuances of certain additional secured indebtedness.
The Credit Facility contains certain financial and other covenants, including, without limitation, various covenants: (i) requiring the maintenance of a minimum consolidated interest coverage ratio 1.75 to 1.00; (ii) establishing a maximum permitted consolidated total leverage ratio; (iii) establishing a maximum permitted secured leverage ratio; (iv) imposing limitations on the incurrence of indebtedness; (v) imposing limitations on transfers, sales and other dispositions; and (vi) imposing restrictions on investments, dividends and certain other payments.
The Company's obligations under the Credit Facility, subject to certain exceptions, are guaranteed by certain of the Company's subsidiaries and are secured by the capital stock of certain subsidiaries. In addition, subject to certain exceptions, the Company and each of the guarantors will grant the administrative agent first priority liens and security interests on substantially all of their real and personal property (other than gaming licenses and subject to certain other exceptions) as additional security for the performance of the secured obligations under the Credit Facility.
The Credit Facility includes an accordion feature which permits an increase in the Revolving Credit Facility and the issuance and increase of senior secured term loans in an amount up to (i) $550.0 million, plus (ii) certain voluntary permanent reductions of the Revolving Credit Facility and certain voluntary prepayments of the senior secured term loans, plus (iii) certain reductions in the outstanding principal amounts under the term loans or the Revolving Credit Facility, plus (iv) any additional amount if, after giving effect thereto, the First Lien Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) would not exceed 4.25 to 1.00 on a pro forma basis, less (v) any Incremental Equivalent Debt (as defined in the Credit Agreement), in each case, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions. Per Amendment No. 3, this feature is temporarily suspended during the Covenant Relief Period.
Senior Notes
We currently have four issuances of senior notes (the “Senior Notes”) that are outstanding as described below.
8.625% Senior Notes due June 2025
On May 21, 2020, we issued $600 million aggregate principal amount of 8.625% senior notes due June 2025 (the "8.625% Notes"). The 8.625% Notes require semi-annual interest payments on June 1 and December 1 of each year, commencing on December 1, 2020. The 8.625% Notes will mature on June 1, 2025 and are fully and unconditionally guaranteed, on a joint and several basis, by certain of our current and future domestic restricted subsidiaries, all of which are 100% owned by us. The net proceeds from the 8.625% Notes were used for general corporate purposes, including working capital and to pay fees and expenses related to the offering.
In conjunction with the issuance of the 8.625% Notes, we incurred approximately $12.0 million in debt financing costs that have been deferred and are being amortized over the term of the 8.625% Notes using the effective interest method.
At any time prior to June 1, 2022, we may redeem the 8.625% Notes, in whole or in part, at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest and Additional Interest, if any, up to, but excluding, the applicable redemption date, plus a make whole premium. After June 1, 2022, we may redeem all or a portion of the 8.625% Notes at redemption prices (expressed as percentages of the principal amount) ranging from 104.313% in 2022 to 100% in 2024 and thereafter, plus accrued and unpaid interest and Additional Interest.
4.750% Senior Notes due December 2027
On December 3, 2019, we issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 4.750% senior notes due December 2027 (the "4.750% Notes"). The 4.750% Notes require semi-annual interest payments on June 1 and December 1 of each year, commencing on June 1, 2020. The 4.750% Notes will mature on December 1, 2027 and are fully and unconditionally guaranteed, on a joint and several basis, by certain of our current and future domestic restricted subsidiaries, all of which are 100% owned by us. The net proceeds from the 4.750% Notes were used to finance the redemption of all of its outstanding 6.875% senior notes due 2023 and prepay a portion of our Refinancing Term B Loans.
In conjunction with the issuance of the 4.750% Notes, we incurred approximately $15.7 million in debt financing costs that have been deferred and are being amortized over the term of the 4.750% Notes using the effective interest method.
At any time prior to December 1, 2022, we may redeem the 4.750% Notes, in whole or in part, at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest and Additional Interest, if any, up to, but excluding, the applicable redemption date, plus a make whole premium. After December 1, 2022, we may redeem all or a portion of the 4.750% Notes at redemption prices (expressed as percentages of the principal amount) ranging from 102.375% in 2022 to 100% in 2024 and thereafter, plus accrued and unpaid interest and Additional Interest.
In connection with the private placement of the 4.750% Notes, we entered into a registration rights agreement with the initial purchasers in which we agreed to file a registration statement with the SEC to permit the holders to exchange or resell the 4.750% Notes. We filed the required registration statement and commenced the exchange offer in July 2020. The exchange offer was completed on August 20, 2020 and our obligations under the registration agreement have been fulfilled.
6.000% Senior Notes due August 2026
On June 25, 2018, we issued $700.0 million aggregate principal amount of 6.000% senior notes due August 2026 (the "6.000% Notes"). The 6.000% Notes require semi-annual interest payments on February 15 and August 15 of each year, commencing on August 15, 2018. The 6.000% Notes will mature on August 15, 2026 and are fully and unconditionally guaranteed, on a joint and several basis, by certain of our current and future domestic restricted subsidiaries, all of which are or will be, as applicable, 100% owned by us. The net proceeds from the debt issuance were ultimately used to fund the acquisitions of Valley Forge and the Pinnacle Properties.
In conjunction with the issuance of the 6.000% Notes, we incurred approximately $11.3 million in debt financing costs that have been deferred and are being amortized over the term of the 6.000% Notes using the effective interest method.
At any time prior to August 15, 2021, we may redeem the 6.000% Notes, in whole or in part, at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest and Additional Interest (as defined in the indenture governing the 6.000% Notes), if any, up to, but excluding, the applicable redemption date, plus a make-whole premium. On or after August 15, 2021, we may redeem all or a portion of the 6.000% Notes at redemption prices (expressed as percentages of the principal amount) ranging from 103% in 2021 to 100% in 2024 and thereafter, plus accrued and unpaid interest and Additional Interest, if any, up to, but excluding, the applicable redemption date.
6.375% Senior Notes due April 2026
On March 28, 2016, we issued $750.0 million aggregate principal amount of 6.375% senior notes due April 2026 (the "6.375% Notes"). The 6.375% Notes require semi-annual interest payments on April 1 and October 1 of each year, commencing on October 1, 2016. The 6.375% Notes will mature on April 1, 2026 and are fully and unconditionally guaranteed, on a joint and several basis, by certain of our current and future domestic restricted subsidiaries, all of which are 100% owned by us. Net proceeds from the 6.375% Notes were used to pay down the outstanding amount under the Revolving Credit Facility and the balance was deposited in money market funds and classified as cash equivalents on the consolidated balance sheets.
In conjunction with the issuance of the 6.375% Notes, we incurred approximately $13.0 million in debt financing costs that have been deferred and are being amortized over the term of the 6.375% Notes using the effective interest method.
At any time prior to April 1, 2021, we may redeem the 6.375% Notes, in whole or in part, at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest and Additional Interest, if any, up to, but excluding, the applicable redemption date, plus a make whole premium. After April 1, 2021, we may redeem all or a portion of the 6.375% Notes at redemption prices (expressed as percentages of the principal amount) ranging from 103.188% in 2021 to 100% in 2024 and thereafter, plus accrued and unpaid interest and Additional Interest.
Redemption of 6.875% Senior Notes due May 2023
O n December 3, 2019, we redeemed all of our 6.875% senior notes due May 2023 (the " 6.875% Notes") at a redemption price o f 103.438% plus accrued and unpaid interest to the redemption date. The redemption was funded through the issuance of the 4.750% Notes . The Company used borrowings under its revolving credit facility to pay the redemption premium accrued and unpaid interest, fees, expenses and commissions related to this redemption.
Senior Notes Restrictive Covenants
Each of the Senior Notes contain certain restrictive covenants that, subject to exceptions and qualifications, among other things, limit our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries (as defined in the base and supplemental indentures governing the respective notes to incur additional indebtedness or liens, pay dividends or make distributions or repurchase our capital stock, make certain investments, and sell or merge with other companies. In addition, upon the occurrence of a change of control (as defined in the respective indenture), we will be required, unless certain conditions are met, to offer to repurchase the Senior Notes at a price equal to 101% of the principal amount of the Senior Notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest and Additional Interest (as defined in the respective indenture), if any, to, but not including, the date of purchase. If we sell assets, we will be required under certain circumstances to offer to purchase the Senior Notes.
Other Notes
On October 15, 2018, Boyd completed the acquisition of the Pinnacle Properties. Concurrently with the acquisition, Boyd (Ohio) PropCo, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Boyd TCIV, LLC, ("Boyd PropCo"), acquired the real estate associated with Belterra Park in Cincinnati, Ohio (the "Belterra Park Real Property Sale") utilizing mortgage financing from a subsidiary of Gaming and Leisure Properties, Inc. ("GLPI"), pursuant to a purchase agreement, dated December 17, 2017 ("Belterra Park Purchase Agreement), by and among Penn, Gold Merger Sub, a wholly owned subsidiary of GLPI, Belterra Park and Pinnacle Entertainment, and a Novation and Amendment Agreement, dated October 15, 2018 (the "Novation Agreement"), by and among Penn, Gold Merger Sub, Boyd PropCo, Belterra Park and Pinnacle Entertainment. Pursuant to the Novation Agreement, Gold Merger Sub, the original purchaser under the Belterra Park Purchase Agreement, assigned, transferred and conveyed to Boyd PropCo and Boyd PropCo accepted Gold Merger Sub’s rights, title and interest in the Belterra Park Purchase Agreement ("Belterra Park Note").
The total Belterra Park Note payable to Gold Merger Sub is $57.7 million. The Belterra Park Note provides for interest at a per annum for any monthly period equal to (a) the sum of (i) the building base rent, as defined in the master lease agreement, payable for such period annualized, plus (ii) the land base rent, as defined in the master lease agreement, payable for such period annualized, plus (iii) the percentage rent, as defined in the master lease agreement, payable for such period annualized divided by (b) the outstanding principal balance of this Belterra Park Note, divided by (c) the number twelve. Interest payments are due monthly with a balloon payment for the outstanding principal due at the maturity date. The maturity date is the earlier to occur of (a) the expiration of the master lease term or (b) the termination of the master lease agreement.
On May 6, 2020 we entered into an agreement with Gold Merger Sub, a wholly owned subsidiary of GLPI, for the acquisition of Boyd (Ohio) PropCo, LLC, the entity that owns the Real Estate, with the merger consummated and the transaction closed at the time of the execution of the merger agreement. That agreement provided that Gold Merger Sub would acquire Boyd PropCo via a Merger, which would be treated for income tax purposes as a taxable asset acquisition consisting of the exchange of the Real Estate by us in satisfaction of the $57.7 million Note and mortgage executed in connection with GLPI’s initial financing of our acquisition of the Real Estate in October 2018.
Prior to the Merger, PNK (Ohio), LLC ("BP OpCo"), which owns the business operations of Belterra Park, leased the Real Estate from Boyd PropCo pursuant to a master lease that is the same in all material respects as the Master Lease between Boyd TCIV, LLC and Gold Merger Sub (the "BP Master Lease" and "GLP Master Lease," respectively). Rent paid under the BP Master Lease to Boyd PropCo by BP OpCo was then paid by Boyd PropCo to Gold Merger Sub as interest on the Note. As a result of the Merger, Gold Merger Sub has become the Landlord under the BP Master Lease and now receives rent payable under the BP Master Lease (equal to, and in lieu of, the interest payments on the Note received prior to consummation of the Merger). As an additional step in connection with the Merger, we expect to add BP OpCo as a subtenant to the GLP Master Lease (in connection with the termination of the BP Master Lease), resulting in a single Master Lease with GLPI, subject to the prior receipt of all required governmental approvals. As a result of the transaction, the Company recorded an operating lease right-of-use-asset and operating lease liability of $40.9 million on the consolidated balance sheet as of the transaction date. The operating lease right-of-use asset and operating lease liability were valued by utilizing a discount rate of 11.1% and a maturity date of April 30, 2031. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the cost and operating cash flow outflow related to the lease was $3.9 million.
Covenant Compliance
As of December 31, 2020, we believe that we were in compliance with the financial and other covenants contained in our debt instruments.
Scheduled Maturities of Long-Term Debt
The scheduled maturities of long-term debt, as discussed above, are as follows:
Guarantor Financial Information
In connection with the issuance of our 6.375% senior notes due April 2026 ("6.375% Notes"), our 6.000% senior notes due August 2026 ("6.000% Notes"), our 4.750% senior notes due December 2027 ("4.750% Notes") and our 8.625% senior notes due June 2025 ("8.625% Notes") (collectively, the "Guaranteed Notes"), certain of the Company's wholly owned subsidiaries (the "Guarantors") provide guarantees of those indentures. These Guaranteed Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed, on a joint and several basis, by certain of our current and future domestic restricted subsidiaries, all of which are 100% owned by us. With the exception of one subsidiary, the guarantors of the 6.375% Notes are the same as for our 6.000% Notes, 4.750% Notes and 8.625% Notes (collectively, the "Other Notes").
Summarized combined balance sheet information for the parent company and the Guarantors are as follows:
Summarized combined results of operations for the parent company and the Guarantors are as follows:
Dividends
Dividends are declared at the discretion of our Board of Directors. We are subject to certain limitations regarding payment of dividends, such as restricted payment limitations related to our outstanding notes and our Credit Facility. On May 2, 2017, the Company announced that its Board of Directors had authorized the reinstatement of the Company’s cash dividend program. The dividends declared by the Board under this program are:
On March 25, 2020, the Company announced that the cash dividend program has been suspended to help mitigate the financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Share Repurchase Program
Subject to applicable corporate securities laws, repurchases under our stock repurchase program may be made at such times and in such amounts as we deem appropriate. We are subject to certain limitations regarding the repurchase of common stock, such as restricted payment limitations related to our outstanding notes and our bank credit facility. Purchases under our stock repurchase program can be discontinued at any time that we feel additional purchases are not warranted. We intend to fund the repurchases under the stock repurchase program with existing cash resources and availability under our Credit Facility.
In July 2008, our Board of Directors authorized an amendment to our existing share repurchase program to increase the total amount of common stock available to be repurchased to $100 million. The Board reaffirmed this program in May 2017 (the "2008 Plan"). On December 12, 2018, our Board of Directors authorized a new share repurchase program of $100 million which is in addition to the existing repurchase authorization (the "2018 Plan"). We are not obligated to purchase any shares under our stock repurchase program. There were 0.7 million shares, 1.1 million shares and 1.9 million shares repurchased during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. We are currently authorized to repurchase up to an additional $61.4 million in shares of our common stock under the 2018 share repurchase program. The 2008 share repurchase program has been depleted.
On March 16, 2020, the Company suspended share repurchases under the program in order to preserve liquidity due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
We have in the past, and may in the future, acquire our debt or equity securities through open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, tender offers, exchange offers, redemptions or otherwise, upon such terms and at such prices as we may determine.
Other Items Affecting Liquidity
We anticipate the ability to fund our capital requirements using our free cash flow from operations and availability under our Credit Facility, to the extent availability exists after we meet our working capital needs for the next twelve months. Any additional financing that is needed may not be available to us or, if available, may not be on terms favorable to us. The outcome of the following specific matters, including our commitments and contingencies, may also affect our liquidity.
Commitments
Capital Spending and Development
We continually perform on-going refurbishment and maintenance at our facilities to maintain our standards of quality. Certain of these maintenance costs are capitalized, if such improvement or refurbishment extends the life of the related asset, while other maintenance costs that do not so qualify are expensed as incurred. The commitment of capital and the related timing thereof are contingent upon, among other things, negotiation of final agreements and receipt of approvals from the appropriate regulatory bodies. We must also comply with covenants and restrictions set forth in our debt agreements.
We currently estimate that our annual cash capital requirements to perform on-going refurbishment and maintenance at our properties to maintain our quality standards ranges from between $150 million and $170 million. We intend to fund such capital expenditures through our credit facility and operating cash flows.
In addition to the capital spending discussed above, we continue to pursue other potential development projects that may require us to invest significant amounts of capital. For example, we continue to work with Wilton Rancheria to develop and manage a gaming entertainment complex to be located about 15 miles southeast of Sacramento, California. In January 2017, we funded the acquisition of land that is the intended site of the Wilton Rancheria casino for $35.1 million. We expect to be reimbursed for this cost. In September 2017, the California State Legislature unanimously approved, and the Governor of California executed, a tribal-state gaming compact with Wilton Rancheria allowing the development of the casino. In October 2018, the National Indian Gaming Commission ("NIGC") approved the Company's management contract with Wilton Rancheria. With the compact now in place and the design and project budget finalized, Wilton Rancheria has secured third-party financing to fund construction. Construction of the project is expected to begin in first quarter 2021, and it is expected to open in the second half of 2022.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
The following summarizes our undiscounted contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1)
Estimated interest payments are based on principal amounts and scheduled maturities of debt outstanding at December 31, 2020. Estimated interest payments for variable-rate debt are based on rates at December 31, 2020.
(2) Purchase obligations include various contracted amounts, including construction contracts and information technology, advertising, maintenance and other service agreements.
Other Opportunities
We regularly investigate and pursue additional expansion opportunities in markets where casino gaming is currently permitted. We also pursue expansion opportunities in jurisdictions where casino gaming is not currently permitted in order to be prepared to develop projects upon approval of casino gaming. Such expansions will be affected and determined by several key factors, which may include the following:
•
the outcome of gaming license selection processes;
•
the approval of gaming in jurisdictions where we have been active but where casino gaming is not currently permitted;
•
identification of additional suitable investment opportunities in current gaming jurisdictions; and
•
availability of acceptable financing.
Additional projects may require us to make substantial investments or may cause us to incur substantial costs related to the investigation and pursuit of such opportunities, which investments and costs we may fund through cash flow from operations or availability under our Credit Facility. To the extent such sources of funds are not sufficient, we may also seek to raise such additional funds through public or private equity or debt financings or from other sources. No assurance can be given that additional financing will be available or that, if available, such financing will be obtainable on terms favorable to us. Moreover, we can provide no assurances that any expansion opportunity will result in a completed transaction.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
Our off balance sheet arrangements consist of the following:
Indemnification
We have entered into certain agreements that contain indemnification provisions, as well as indemnification agreements involving certain of our executive officers and directors. These agreements provide indemnity insurance pursuant to which directors and officers are indemnified or insured against liability or loss under certain circumstances, which may include liability or related loss under the Securities Act and the Exchange Act. In addition, our Restated Articles of Incorporation and Restated Bylaws contain provisions that provide for indemnification of our directors, officers, employees and other agents to the maximum extent permitted by law.
Outstanding Letters of Credit
At December 31, 2020, we had outstanding letters of credit totaling $12.6 million.
Other Arrangements
We have not entered into any transactions with special purpose entities, nor have we engaged in any derivative transactions.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Our discussion and analysis of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources are based on our consolidated financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, or GAAP. In accordance with GAAP, we are required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts included in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. On an ongoing basis, management reviews and refines those estimates, the following of which materially impact our consolidated financial statements: the recoverability of long-lived assets; application of acquisition method of accounting; valuation of indefinite-lived intangible assets and goodwill; determination of self-insured reserves; and provisions for deferred tax assets, certain tax liabilities and uncertain tax positions.
Judgments are based on information including, but not limited to, historical experience, industry trends, conventional practices, expert opinions, terms of existing agreements and information from outside sources. Judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty, and therefore actual results could differ from these estimates.
We believe the following critical accounting policies require a higher degree of judgment and complexity, the sensitivity of which could result in a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Recoverability of Long-Lived Assets
Our long-lived assets were carried at $2.5 billion at December 31, 2020, or 38.5% of our consolidated total assets. We evaluate the carrying value of long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such assets may not be recoverable. If triggering events are identified, we then compare the estimated undiscounted future cash flows of the asset to the carrying value of the asset. The asset is not impaired if the undiscounted future cash flows exceed its carrying value. If the carrying value exceeds the undiscounted future cash flows, then an impairment charge is recorded, typically measured using a discounted cash flow model, which is based on the estimated future results of the relevant reporting unit discounted using our weighted-average cost of capital and market indicators of terminal year free cash flow multiples.
A long-lived asset shall be tested for recoverability whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that its carrying amount may not be recoverable. The following are examples of such events or changes in circumstances:
i.
a significant decrease in the market price of a long-lived asset;
ii.
a significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which a long-lived asset is being used or in its physical condition;
iii.
a significant adverse change in legal factors or in the business climate that could affect the value of a long-lived asset, including an adverse action or assessment by a regulator;
iv.
an accumulation of costs significantly in excess of the amount originally expected for the acquisition or construction of a long-lived asset;
v.
a current-period operating or cash flow loss combined with a history of operating or cash flow losses or a projection or forecast that demonstrates continuing losses associated with the use of a long-lived asset; and/or
vi.
a current expectation that, more likely than not, a long-lived asset will be sold or otherwise disposed of significantly before the end of its previously estimated useful life.
We reconsider changes in circumstances on a frequent basis, and if a triggering event related to potential impairment has occurred, we solicit third party valuation expertise to assist in the valuation of our investment. There are three generally accepted approaches available in developing an opinion of value: the cost, sales comparison and income approaches. We generally consider each of these approaches in developing a recommendation of the fair value of the asset; however, the reliability of each approach is dependent upon the availability and comparability of the market data uncovered, as well as, the decision-making criteria used by market participants when evaluating a property. We will bifurcate our investment and apply the most indicative approach to overall fair valuation, or in some cases, a weighted analysis of any or all of these methods.
Developing an opinion of land value is typically accomplished using a sales comparison approach by analyzing recent sales transactions of similar sites. Potential comparables are researched and the pertinent facts are confirmed with parties involved in the transaction. This process fosters a general understanding of the potential comparable sales and facilitates the selection of the most relevant comparables by the appraiser. Valuation is typically accomplished using a unit of comparison such as price per square foot of land or potential building area. Adjustments are applied to the unit of comparison from an analysis of comparable sales, and the adjusted unit of comparison is then used to derive a value for the property.
The cost approach is based on the premise that a prudent investor would pay no more for an asset of similar utility than its replacement or reproduction cost. The cost to replace the asset would include the cost of constructing a similar asset of equivalent utility at prices applicable at the time of the valuation date. To arrive at an estimate of the fair value using the cost approach, the replacement cost new is determined and reduced for depreciation of the asset. Replacement cost new is defined as the current cost of producing or constructing a similar new item having the nearest equivalent utility as the property being valued.
The income approach focuses on the income-producing capability of the asset. The underlying premise of this approach is that the value of an asset can be measured by the present worth of the net economic benefit (cash receipts less cash outlays) to be received over the life of the subject asset. The steps followed in applying this approach include estimating the expected before-tax cash flows attributable to the asset over its life and converting these before-tax cash flows to present value through capitalization or discounting. The process uses a rate of return that accounts for both the time value of money and risk factors. There are two common methods for converting net income into value, those methods are the direct capitalization and discounted cash flow methods ("DCF"). Direct capitalization is a method used to convert an estimate of a single year's income expectancy into an indication of value in one direct step by dividing the income estimate by an appropriate capitalization rate. Under the DCF method, anticipated future cash flows and a reversionary value are discounted to an opinion of net present value at a specific internal rate of return or a yield rate, because net operating income of the subject property is not fully stabilized.
Application of Acquisition Method of Accounting
We follow the guidance of ASC 805 to account for our acquisitions. We completed three acquisitions in 2018, as described in Note 2, Acquisitions and Divestitures, to our consolidated financial statements presented in Part II, Item 8, for an aggregate net purchase price of approximately $940.4 million. For purposes of these consolidated financial statements, for each of the acquisitions we have allocated the purchase price to the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed based on their fair values as determined by us with the assistance from third-party specialists. The excess of the purchase price over those fair values was recorded as goodwill.
The assets and liabilities of each of the acquisitions are included in our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the results of their operations and cash flows are reported in our consolidated statements of operations and cash flows, respectively, from the respective dates of acquisition through December 31, 2020.
Valuation of Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Gaming license rights represent the value of the license to conduct gaming in certain jurisdictions, which is subject to highly extensive regulatory oversight and a limitation on the number of licenses available for issuance with these certain jurisdictions. Gaming license rights are tested for impairment using a discounted cash flow approach. The value of gaming licenses is determined using a multi-period excess earnings method, which is a specific discounted cash flow model. The value is determined at an amount equal to the present value of the incremental after-tax cash flows attributable only to future gaming revenue, discounted to present value at a risk-adjusted rate of return. With respect to the application of this methodology, we used the following significant projections and assumptions: gaming revenues; gaming operating expenses; general and administrative expenses; tax expense; terminal value; and discount rate. These projections are modeled for a five-year period.
Trademarks are based on the value of our brand, which reflects the level of service and quality we provide and from which we generate repeat business. Trademarks are valued using the relief from royalty method, which presumes that without ownership of such trademarks, we would have to make a stream of payments to a brand or franchise owner in return for the right to use their name. By virtue of this asset, we avoid any such payments and record the related intangible value of our ownership of the brand name. We used the following significant projections and assumptions to determine value under the relief from royalty method: total revenues; royalty rate; tax expense; terminal growth rate; discount rate; and the present value of tax benefit. The projections underlying this discounted cash flow model were forecasted for fifteen years. Applying the selected pretax royalty rates to the applicable revenue base in each period yielded pretax income for each property's trademarks and trade name. These pretax totals were tax effected utilizing the applicable tax rate to arrive at net, after-tax cash flows. The net, after-tax flows were then discounted to present value utilizing an appropriate discount rate. The present value of the after-tax cash flows was then added to the present value of the amortization tax benefit (considering the 15-year amortization of intangible assets pursuant to recent tax legislation) to arrive at the recommended fair values for the trademarks and trade names.
Gaming license rights and trademarks are indefinite-lived intangible assets and are not subject to amortization, but are subject to an annual impairment test and between annual test dates in certain circumstances. If the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying amount, an impairment loss is recognized equal to the difference. As part of our annual impairment testing, management assesses the likelihood of impairment and solicits third party valuation expertise to assist in the valuation of indefinite-lived intangible assets that are deemed to have a greater likelihood of impairment. Our annual impairment tests, performed as of October 1, 2020, resulted in trademark impairment charges of $3.6 million. Due to the adverse impacts of COVID-19 on our business, we assessed the recoverability of our assets as of the end of first quarter 2020 considering our then current expectations of the timing of re-openings and the expected level of operations to be achieved post re-opening. Based on this review, we recognized pre-tax, non-cash impairment charges of $16.9 million for trademarks and $42.2 million for gaming license rights in first quarter 2020.
We evaluate whether any triggering events or changes in circumstances had occurred subsequent to our annual impairment test that would indicate an impairment condition may exist. This evaluation required significant judgment, including consideration of whether there had been any significant adverse changes in legal factors or in our business climate, adverse action or assessment by a regulator, unanticipated competition, loss of key personnel or likely sale or disposal of all or a significant portion of a reporting unit. Based upon this evaluation, we concluded that there had not been any triggering events or changes in circumstances that indicated an impairment condition existed as of December 31, 2020. If an event described above occurs, and results in a significant impact to our revenue and profitability projections, or any significant assumption in our valuations methods is adversely impacted, the impact could result in a material impairment charge in the future.
Valuation of Goodwill
The authoritative guidance related to goodwill impairment requires goodwill to be tested for impairment at the reporting unit level at least annually. The guidance permits an entity to make a qualitative assessment, referred to as “Step Zero,” of whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. If the carrying value of the goodwill is considered impaired, a loss is measured as the excess of the reporting unit's carrying value over the fair value, with a limit of the goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
As part of our annual impairment testing, management assesses the likelihood of impairment and solicits third party valuation expertise to assist in valuations of goodwill for those reporting units that are deemed to have a greater likelihood of impairment. We perform the test annually as of October 1 using a weighting of two different approaches to determine fair value: (i) the income approach; and (ii) the market approach.
The income approach is based on a discounted cash flow method, which focuses on the expected cash flow of the subject company. In applying this approach, the cash flow available for distribution is calculated for a finite period of years. Cash flow available for distribution is defined, for purposes of this analysis, as the amount of cash that could be distributed as a dividend without impairing the future profitability or operations of the subject company. The cash flow available for distribution and the terminal value (the value of the subject company at the end of the estimation period) are then discounted to present value to derive an indication of value of the business enterprise.
In the valuation of an asset, the income approach focuses on the income-producing capability of the subject asset. The underlying premise of this approach is that the value of an asset can be measured by the present worth of the net economic benefit (cash receipts less cash outlays) to be received over the life of the subject asset. The steps followed in applying this approach include estimating the expected after-tax cash flows attributable to the asset over its life and converting these after-tax cash flows to present value through "discounting." The discounting process uses a rate of return which accounts for both the time value of money and investment risk factors. Finally, the present value of the after-tax cash flows over the life of the asset is totaled to arrive at an indication of the fair value of the asset.
The market approach is comprised of the guideline company method, which focuses on comparing the subject company to selected reasonably similar, or "guideline", publicly-traded companies. Under this method, valuation multiples are: (i) derived from the operating data of selected guideline companies; (ii) evaluated and adjusted based on the strengths and weaknesses of the subject company relative to the selected guideline companies; and (iii) applied to the operating data of the subject company to arrive at an indication of value. In the valuation of an asset, the market approach measures value based on what typical purchasers in the market have paid for assets which can be considered reasonably similar to those being valued. When the market approach is utilized, data are collected on the prices paid for reasonably comparable assets. Adjustments are made to the similar assets to compensate for differences between reasonably similar assets and the asset being valued. The application of the market approach results in an estimate of the price reasonably expected to be realized from the sale of the subject asset.
The two methodologies were weighted 75.0% toward the income approach and 25.0% toward the market approach, to arrive at an overall fair value. At October 1, 2020, the fair value of our reporting units exceeded their carrying value. At December 31, 2020, we evaluated whether any triggering events or changes in circumstances had occurred subsequent to our annual impairment test that would indicate an impairment condition may exist. This evaluation required significant judgment, including consideration of whether there had been any significant adverse changes in legal factors or in our business climate, adverse action or assessment by a regulator, unanticipated competition, loss of key personnel or likely sale or disposal of all or a significant portion of a reporting unit. Based upon this evaluation, we concluded that there had not been a triggering event or change in circumstances that indicated an impairment condition existed at December 31, 2020. Due to the adverse impacts of COVID-19 on our business, we assessed the recoverability of our assets as of the end of first quarter 2020 considering our then current expectations of the timing of re-openings and the expected level of operations to be achieved post re-opening. Based on this review, we recognized pre-tax, non-cash impairment charges of $112.0 million for goodwill in first quarter 2020.
Although we satisfied the impairment analysis requirements for each reporting unit tested, changes to certain underlying assumptions and variables, many of which are derived from external factors, could greatly impact the results of future tests. We cannot control or influence the impact of these factors from a fair valuation perspective, but they could nonetheless have a material effect on the results of valuation, particularly the guideline company method under the market approach, in the future.
Additionally, several of the assumptions underlying the discounted cash flow method under the income approach could pose a high degree of sensitivity to the resulting fair value. These factors include, but are not limited to, the following: total revenue, operating expenses, depreciation expense, depreciation overhang, tax expense and effective rates, debt-free net working capital, capital additions, terminal year growth factor, discount rate and the capitalization rate. A change in any of these variables that cause our undiscounted cash flows or terminal value or both to adversely and materially change could result in the failure of the impairment test, and a resulting impairment of our goodwill in an amount up to its book value of $971.3 million.
The Company has determined that each of its properties is a reporting unit for goodwill impairment testing, since discrete financial information is available at the property level.
Accounting for Leases
The determination of lease liabilities requires us to estimate the present value of our future lease commitments over their reasonably assured remaining lease term using a weighted average incremental borrowing rate commensurate with the rate of interest we would have to pay to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term an amount equal to our future lease payments in a similar economic environment. The determination of the interest rate could materially impact our lease liabilities.
We estimate the expected term of a lease by assuming the exercise of renewal options, in addition to the initial non-cancelable lease term, if the renewal is reasonably assured. Generally, “reasonably assured” relates to our contractual right to renew and the existence of an economic penalty that would preclude the abandonment of the lease at the end of the initial non-cancelable lease term. The determination of the expected term could also materially impact our lease liabilities.
The determination of the expected term of a lease requires us to apply judgment and estimates concerning the number of renewal periods that are reasonably assured. If a lease is terminated prior to reaching the end of the expected term, this may result in the acceleration of depreciation or impairment of the lease right-of-use asset and related long-lived assets.
Provisions for Deferred Tax Assets, Certain Tax Liabilities and Uncertain Tax Positions
Income taxes are recorded under the asset and liability method, whereby deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized based on the future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, and attributable to operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. We reduce the carrying amounts of deferred tax assets by a valuation allowance, if based on the available evidence it is more likely than not that such assets will not be realized. Accordingly, the need to establish valuation allowances for deferred tax assets is assessed periodically based on more-likely-than-not realization threshold. This assessment considers, among other matters, the nature, frequency and severity of current and cumulative losses, forecasts of future profitability, the duration of statutory carryforward periods, our experience with the usability of operating loss and tax credit carryforwards before expiration, and tax planning alternatives.
The Company's income tax returns are subject to examination by the Internal Revenue Service ("IRS") and other tax authorities in the locations where it operates. The Company assesses potentially unfavorable outcomes of such examinations based on accounting standards for uncertain income taxes, which prescribe a minimum recognition threshold a tax position is required to meet before being recognized in the financial statements.
We recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only when it is more likely than not, based on the technical merits of the position, that the tax position will be sustained upon examination, including the resolution of any related appeals or litigation. The tax benefits recognized in the consolidated financial statements from such a position are measured as the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate resolution. While we believe our uncertain tax benefits, if any, are adequate to cover reasonably expected tax risks, there can be no assurance that, in all instances, an issue raised by a taxing authority will be resolved at a financial cost that does not exceed its related reserve.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For information with respect to recent accounting pronouncements and the impact of these pronouncements on our consolidated financial statements, see Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements, in the notes to the consolidated financial statements.