ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis or Plan of Operations includes a number of forward-looking statements that reflect Management’s current views with respect to future events and financial performance. You can identify these statements by forward-looking words such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate” and “continue,” or similar words. Those statements include statements regarding the intent, belief or current expectations of us and members of our management team as well as the assumptions on which such statements are based. Prospective
investors are cautioned that any such forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risk and uncertainties, and that actual results may differ materially from those contemplated by such forward-looking statements.
Readers are urged to carefully review and consider the various disclosures made by us in this report and in our other reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Important factors currently known to management could cause actual results to differ materially from those in forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to update or revise forward-looking statements to reflect changed assumptions, the occurrence of unanticipated events or changes in the future operating results over time. We believe that our assumptions are based upon reasonable data derived from and known about our business and operations. No assurances are made that actual results of operations or the results of our future activities will not differ materially from our assumptions. Factors that could cause differences include, but are not limited to, expected market demand for our products, fluctuations in pricing for our products, and competition.
The following discussion provides information that management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our past financial condition and plan of operations. The discussion below should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this annual report.
About Beyond Commerce
Beyond Commerce, Inc. was formed in the State of Nevada on January 12, 2006.
We operate within two markets: (1) the Business-to-Business Internet Marketing Technology and Services market and (2) the Information Management market. Our goal is to develop proprietary software for digital transformation of clients’ existing content. We believe our planned platform, strategy, and suite of software products and services will provide secure and scalable information control solutions for global companies. We believe our planned software will assist organizations in finding, utilizing, and sharing business information between devices in ways that are intuitive, efficient and productive. We believe that our business model will ensure that information will remain secure and private, as necessitated by the current market climate.
In addition, we provide solutions which facilitate the exchange of information and data transactions between supply chain participants, such as manufacturers, retailers, distributors and financial institutions with the ultimate goal of automating potential client internal processes thereby increasing productivity and lowering costs. We plan to develop proprietary algorithms which it will embed in the planned software to enable clients to access data and gain insight into their business, through that data, leading to improved internal decision making.
We plan to offer the proposed software through traditional on-premise solutions, SaaS as a cloud based solution, or a combination of on-premise, SaaS or cloud based solutions. We plan to work with our clients and their needs as to which delivery method they prefer. We believe giving clients a choice and flexibility will help us to obtain long-term client value.
Management believes that the Company will require additional capital to manage its operations over the next 12 months. See “Plan of Operations” below for a more complete discussion of the Company’s capital requirements.
Impact of Virus Outbreak and Management’s Plans
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of a respiratory disease caused by a new coronavirus as a “pandemic”. First identified in late 2019 and known now as COVID-19, the outbreak has impacted thousands of individuals worldwide. In response, many countries have implemented measures to combat the outbreak which have impacted global business operations.
The majority of the states within the United States have issued a stay at home order to its residents. Accordingly, the Company’s revenues associated with our business model has drastically declined through date of the financial statements and its results of operations, cash flows and financial condition have been negatively impacted by the pandemic.
The impact of the disease outbreak, as of the date of the financial statements, remains highly fluid and uncertain. The Company is unable to predict, with any sort of certainty the timing for the end of the restrictions. Accordingly, the financial impact on the results of operations, cash flows and financial condition cannot be reasonably estimated at this time. No impairments were recorded as of the balance sheet date; however, due to significant uncertainty surrounding the situation, management's judgment regarding this could change in the future.
The Company continues to maintain the business working with customers to fit their needs - We are also offering COVID type services. We have clients in the medical field and are offering to do survey work for them regarding their response for the COVID outbreak so they can document how they are doing as a company. We are in touch with our customers daily, we have even discussed switching them from phone calls to web surveys until this has passed. Along with the above, the Company, Service 800, was approved on April 16, 2020 for $500,000 from the Paycheck Protection and approved on February 2, 2021 for $625,000 from the Paycheck Protection Round Two, which provided funds to assist in maintaining our employee base.
Service 800 Agreement
On December 14, 2017, we entered into an agreement with Service 800 and the sole shareholder of Service 800 (the “Shareholder”), and on March 4, 2019 we purchased all of the issued and outstanding shares of common stock of Service 800 from the Shareholder (the “Transaction”). Service 800 operates as a premium provider of Customer Feedback Management Platforms to their Fortune 500 and 1000 clients on a global basis. Service 800 provides survey authoring, response rates, feedback types and data analysis on their proprietary, cloud based, automated and centralized platform. Service 800 has currently 25 full time employees that provide services to 130 companies and 300 service organizations. Service 800’s current operations and strategic business plan is to further develop its marketing and Customer Experience platform to use within the framework of its current Fortune 500 and 1000 clients.
Upon the closing of the business combination, Jean Mork Bredeson, Founder and President of Service 800, Inc., received $2,100,000 in cash, and $2,100,000 in a three-year 5.5% promissory note. The $2,100,000 promissory note is personally guaranteed by the estate of George Pursglove whose executor is Geordan Pursglove Beyond Commerce’s President, CEO. On July 18, 2018 Jean Mork Bredeson received 2,000,000 shares of Beyond Commerce’s restricted common stock. On July 18, 2018 Allen Bredeson, Vice President of Marketing and Client Relations, received 1,000,000 shares of Beyond Commerce’s restricted common stock. On July 18, 2018 Derick White, Vice President of Sales received 1,000,000 shares of Beyond Commerce’s restricted common stock, and Jeff Schwendinger, Vice President of Operations on July 18, 2018 received 1,000,000 shares of Beyond Commerce’s restricted common stock. The effective date of this business combination between Beyond Commerce and Service 800, is February 28, 2019, when Beyond Commerce received 100% of Service 800 stock, assets consisting of the company’s website, customer lists, current customer base, and customer’s in the company’s pipeline and proprietary software.
Discover Growth Fund, LLC
On August 7, 2018, we entered into a securities purchase agreement (“SPA”) with Discover Growth Fund, LLC (“Discover”), pursuant to which we issued a senior secured redeemable convertible debenture in the principal amount of $2,717,391 (of which $217,391 was retained by Discover as an original issue discount) (the “Debenture”), in exchange for $500,000 cash consideration and a promissory note issued by BYOC in the amount of $2,000,000 (the “Note”). Pursuant to the terms of the SPA, we issued to Discover a warrant to purchase up to 16,666,667 shares of our common stock, exercisable beginning on the six (6) month anniversary from the date of issuance for a period of three (3) years at an exercise price of $0.15 per share (the “Warrant”). The Debenture is subject to interest at a rate of 8.0% per annum and be converted into shares of the Company’s common stock at a price equal to the lower (i) $0.15 per share of common stock, and (ii) if there has never been a trigger event (as defined in the Debenture), (A) the average of the 5 lowest individual trades of the shares of common stock, less $0.01 per share, or following any such trigger event, (B) 60% of the foregoing. Further, pursuant to the SPA we agreed to issue 2,500,000 shares of our common stock to Discover at close of the transaction, and that Discover would fund $2,000,000 in cash upon effectiveness of the Company’s registration statement. The Discover transaction closed on August 16, 2018. We issued the 2,500,000 shares of common stock to Discover in 2019.
On February 12, 2019, after effectiveness of its registration statement the Company entered into the second tranche of funding from the Discover Growth Fund, LLC for $2,000,000 of which funds were utilized in the cash component of the Service 800, Inc. transaction.
TCA Special Situations Credit Strategies ICAV
On December 31, 2019, Beyond Commerce, Inc., a Nevada corporation (the “Company”), entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “Securities Purchase Agreement”) with TCA Special Situations Credit Strategies ICAV, an Irish collective asset vehicle (the “Buyer” or “TCA ICAV”), and TCA Beyond Commerce, LLC, a Wyoming limited liability company (“TCA Beyond Commerce”), pursuant to which the Buyer purchased from the Company a senior secured
redeemable debenture having an initial principal amount of $900,000 and an interest rate of 16% per annum (the “Initial Debenture”). Additional Debentures may be issued and funded, subject to and upon the approval of the Company and the Buyer, provided that the total value of the Initial Debenture and the Additional Debentures together shall not exceed $5,000,000.
In May 2020, the SEC appointed a Receiver to close down the TCA Global Master Fund, L.P. over allegations of accounting fraud. The amount recorded by the Company as being owed to TCA was based on TCA’s application of prior payments made by the Company. The Company believes that prior payments of principal and interest may have been applied to unenforceable investment banking and other fees and charges. It is the Company’s position that the amount owed to TCA is less than the amount set forth above.
The Securities Purchase Agreement was entered into as part of a larger financing transaction between the Company and the Buyer. As part of this financing transaction, the Company and the Buyer formed TCA Beyond Commerce as a special purpose vehicle to complete the Company’s acquisition of Customer Centered Strategies, L.L.C., a Minnesota limited liability company (“CCS”), while using the funds generated through the Company’s sale of the Initial Debenture. The Company owns 80% of the outstanding common membership interests of TCA Beyond Commerce (the “Common Units”) and the Buyer owns 2,000 Common Units, comprising the remaining 20% of the Common Units issued, as well as 100% of the 250,000 Series A Preferred Units issued and the sole Series B Preferred Unit issued (which is the sole class of equity with voting rights). The Common Units and the Series A Preferred Units are convertible into shares of the Company’s common stock at a 10% discount to the lowest closing bid price during the preceding 20 trading days and such equity will be redeemed pursuant to the Company’s making of installment payments, in accordance with the Operating Agreement of TCA Beyond Commerce. The Company has pledged its interests in TCA Beyond Commerce to TCA ICAV as security for the repayment of the Initial Debenture.
TCA Beyond Commerce entered into a Membership Interest Purchase Agreement (the “Membership Interest Purchase Agreement”), whereby TCA Beyond Commerce acquired 100% of the authorized and issued membership interests of CCS from its sole member (the “CCS Seller”). TCA Beyond Commerce acquired the membership interests for a purchase price $525,000 (the “CCS Purchase Price”), with $175,000 to be paid in cash and the remaining $350,000 to be paid through TCA Beyond Commerce’s issuance of a convertible promissory note with an original principal of $350,000 and a conversion feature that provides the CCS Seller with the right to convert outstanding principal and accrued interest into shares of the Company’s common stock at a price based on the 10-day trailing average price of the Company’s stock (the “CCS Purchase Note”).
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations are based upon its consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the related disclosure of contingent liabilities. On an on-going basis, management evaluates past estimates and judgments, including those related to bad debts, accrued liabilities, derivative liabilities, and contingencies. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The Company believes the following critical accounting policies affect its more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of its consolidated financial statements.
Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include but are not limited to those discussed below and elsewhere in this filing, particularly in the section entitled “Risk Factors” beginning on page 14.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Estimates are used in the determination of depreciation and amortization and the valuation for non-cash issuances of equity instruments, web site, income taxes, and contingencies, among others. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company classifies as cash and cash equivalents amounts on deposit in banks and cash temporarily in various instruments with original maturities of three months or less at the time of purchase. The Company’s cash management system is currently integrated within one banking institution.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The carrying value of the current assets and liabilities approximate fair value due to their relatively short maturities.
Fair Value Measurements
Statement of financial accounting standard FASB Topic 820, Disclosures about Fair Value of Financial Instruments, requires that the Company disclose estimated fair values of financial instruments. The carrying amounts reported in the statements of financial position for assets and liabilities qualifying as financial instruments are a reasonable estimate of fair value.
The Company applies the fair value hierarchy as established by GAAP. Assets and liabilities recorded at fair value in the consolidated balance sheets are categorized based upon the level of judgment associated with the inputs used to measure the fair value as follows.
• Level 1 - quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
• Level 2 - other significant observable inputs for the assets or liabilities through corroboration with market data at the measurement date.
• Level 3 - significant unobservable inputs that reflect management’s best estimate of what market participants would use to price the assets or liabilities at the measurement date.
Management considers all of its derivative liabilities to be Level 3 liabilities. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had outstanding derivative liabilities, including those from related parties of $1,005,617 and $1,433,403, respectively.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company does not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market or foreign currency risks. The Company evaluates all of its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and then is revalued at each reporting date, with changes in fair value reported in the consolidated statement of operations. For stock based derivative financial instruments, Fair value accounting requires bifurcation of embedded derivative instruments such as conversion features in convertible debt or equity instruments, and measurement of their fair value for accounting purposes. In determining the appropriate fair value, the Company uses the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. In assessing the convertible debt instruments, management determines if the convertible debt host instrument is conventional convertible debt and further if there is a beneficial conversion feature requiring measurement. If the instrument is not considered conventional convertible debt, the Company will continue its evaluation process of these instruments as derivative financial instruments.
Once determined, derivative liabilities are adjusted to reflect fair value at the end of each reporting period. Any increase or decrease in the fair value from inception is made quarterly and appears in results of operations as a change in fair market value of derivative liabilities.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
The Company accounts for long-lived assets in accordance with the provisions of ASC 360-10-35-21, Accounting for the Impairment of Long-Lived Assets. This statement requires that long-lived assets and certain identifiable intangibles be reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to future net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell. Fair values are determined based on quoted market value, discounted cash flows or internal and external appraisals, as applicable. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company did not recognize any impairment charges.
Leases
In February 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), which requires lessees to recognize on the balance sheet assets and liabilities for leases with lease terms of more than 12 months. Consistent with prior GAAP, the recognition, measurement, and presentation of expenses and cash flows arising from a lease by a lessee will depend primarily on its classification as a finance or operating lease. However, unlike prior GAAP-which required only finance (formerly capital) leases to be recognized on the balance sheet-the new ASU requires both types of leases to be recognized on the balance sheet. The ASU took effect for public companies for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2018. This standard could be applied at the beginning of the earliest period presented using the modified retrospective approach, which includes certain practical expedients that an entity may elect to apply, including an election to use certain transition relief. In July 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-10, Codification Improvements to Topic 842, Leases and ASU No. 2018-11, Leases (Topic 842): Targeted Improvements, which made improvements to Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 842 and allow entities to not restate comparative periods in transition to ASC 842 and instead report the comparative periods under ASC 840.
In accordance with ASC 842, the Company determines if an arrangement is a lease at inception. The Company has an operating lease for the Company’s subsidiary Service 800 corporate office. Operating leases are included in operating lease ROU assets and operating lease liabilities, current and noncurrent, on the consolidated balance sheet. Lease liabilities are initially recorded at the present value of the lease payments by discounting the lease payments by the IBR and then recording accretion over the lease term using the effective interest method. Operating lease classification results in a straight-line expense recognition pattern over the lease term and recognized lease expense as a single expense component, which results in amortization of the ROU asset that equals the difference between lease expense and interest expense. Operating lease expense is included in selling, general and administrative expense, based on the use of the leased asset, on the consolidated statement of income. Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the balance sheet and are not material; the Company recognizes lease expense for these leases on a straight-line basis over the remaining lease term.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under ASC 740-10-30. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined based upon differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent management concludes it is more likely than not that the assets will not be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income of the consolidated statements of operations in the period that includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets may not be realized.
The Company follows the guidance of ASC 740-10-25 in determining whether tax benefits claimed or expected to be claimed on a tax return should be recorded in the financial statements. The Company may recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position should be measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent (50%) likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. The Company recognizes interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions in income tax expense. The Company had no material adjustments to its liabilities for unrecognized income tax benefits.
Stock Based Compensation
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company did not issue any stock options. This Company’s existing stock plan expired on September 11, 2018.
Employee Benefits
The Company during 2020 mainly attributable to the Service 800, Inc acquisition had approximately twenty five (25) full time employees within this organization and offers certain healthcare benefits to remain competitive within the market place.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The Company reviews all of the Financial Accounting Standard Board’s updates periodically to ensure the Company’s compliance of its accounting policies and disclosure requirements to the Codification Topics.
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-04, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (Topic 350)-Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment (“ASU 2017-04”). ASU 2017-04 simplifies the accounting for goodwill impairments by eliminating the requirement to compare the implied fair value of goodwill with its carrying amount as part of step two of the goodwill impairment test referenced in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (“ASC 350”). As a result, an entity should perform its annual, or interim, goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount. An impairment charge should be recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value. However, the impairment loss recognized should not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. ASU 2017-04 is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019, including any interim impairment tests within those annual periods, with early application permitted for interim or annual goodwill impairment tests performed on testing dates after January 1, 2017. In January 2020, we elected to early adopt ASU 2017-04, and the adoption had no impact on our consolidated financial statements. We will perform future goodwill impairment tests according to ASU 2017-04.
In April 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-04 Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses, Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging, and Topic 825, Financial Instruments, which provides updates and clarifications to three previously-issued ASUs: 2016-01 Financial Instruments - Overall (Subtopic 825-10): Recognition and Measurement of Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities; 2016-13 Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, described further above and which the Company has not yet adopted; and 2017-12 Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815): Targeted Improvements to Accounting for Hedging Activities, which the Company early adopted effective January 1, 2018. The updates related to ASU 2016-13 have the same transition as ASU 2016-13 and are effective for periods beginning after December 15, 2019, with adoption permitted after the issuance of ASU 2019-04. The updates related to ASU 2017-12 are effective for the Company on January 1, 2020. The updates related to ASU 2016-01 are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019. The Company adopted ASU 2017-12 and it did not have an impact on the condensed consolidated financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2018-13, “Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework - Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement.” This ASU modifies the disclosure requirements on fair value measurements by removing, modifying, or adding certain disclosures. ASU 2018-13 is effective for the Company beginning after December 31, 2019. Certain disclosures in ASU 2018-13 are required to be applied on a retrospective basis and others on a prospective basis. The Company adopted ASU 2018-13 and it did not have an impact on the condensed consolidated financial statements.
The FASB has issued ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. The new guidance is intended to simplify the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles of ASC 740. The guidance also improves consistent application by clarifying and amending existing guidance from ASC 740. This guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods therein and is to be applied on a retrospective, modified retrospective or prospective approach, depending on the specific amendment. Early adoption is permitted. We are currently evaluating the impact of adopting the new guidance on the consolidated financial statements, but it is not expected to have a material impact.
Financial Presentation
The following sets forth a discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Form 10k. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in “Risk Factors” beginning on page 14 of this Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Through our Service 800 Inc subsidiary, many of our clients; GE Healthcare, Audiology System, Inc 3M Healthcare, Johnson & Johnson Vision Care, Albany Molecular Research Inc., Sakura Finetek, Abbott Diagnostics, Biosense Webster, a Johnson & Johnson Company and Medtronic to name a few took the time during pandemic to begin strategic planning with Service 800 to grow their business with the company by renewals, expansion, and better ways to grow our programs with each and every one of them for the future. This select market segment continues to be a major source of revenue for the Company as we expand our services within this business segment. We anticipate revenue getting back in line with exceeding our expectations as the economy recovers from the Covid-19 pandemic and we progress further into the year. All renewals that have taken place are on a minimum of a one to two-year term with an auto renewal taking place when the contract expires. During the pandemic, it made our customers realize the value that Service 800 brings to the clients in the form of providing valuable information to not only help their growth within their own companies, but it also helps them be better providers to their customers as well. We continue to look forward to growth into each division of these companies and expansion to exceed expectations that have been set. We value these customers and are looking for all of the positive growth we have set for the remainder of the year and moving onwards to future years to come.
For the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Revenue generated for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was $4,188,782 as we began reporting revenue being created from both the Service 800 and Customer Centered Strategies acquisition which was closed in 2019 for the full twelve months, compared to $4,099,925 for the twelve-month period ended December 31, 2019.
Operating Expenses
For twelve months ended December 31, 2020, operating expenses were $6,523,861 and for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, operating expenses were $6,222,167. There was a $324,841 increase in cost of goods sold from $1,400,146 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1,075,305 in the comparable period which corresponds to the increase in revenue. This increase is mainly attributable to the Customer Centered Strategies acquisition and the related costs associated with these operations. Professional Fees decreased $773,714 from $1,506,081 to $732,367 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, due to the Service 800 legal proceedings and accounting and audit expenses related to the acquisition by the Company of Service 800. General and administrative costs increased $191,287 once again due to the Service 800 and Customer Centered Strategies additions and increase in computers & IT departments.
Non-operating income (expense)
The Company reported non-operating expense of $8,468,487 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $5,298,688 compared to $3,169,799 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 mainly attributable to the changes in the derivative liability and debt fees associated with our convertible notes, along with an increase in interest expense of $1,077,287 due to the increase in debt level and default interest rates the Company is currently paying.
Consolidated Net Loss
For twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred a consolidated net loss of $10,452,866 as compared to a consolidated net loss of $5,464,520 for the twelve months ended December 31,2019, which was primarily due to a loss on derivative related income from the changes in liability and debt fees associated with our convertible notes. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had an accumulated deficit of $58,645,834 and as of December 31, 2019, the Company had an accumulated deficit of $48,227,200.
Purchase of Significant Equipment
We do not anticipate the purchase or sale of any plant or significant equipment during the next twelve (12) months.
Going Concern
There is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $58,645,834. Since we discontinued operations in 2012 the continuity of our future operations is dependent upon our ability to increase sales and brand awareness. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We intend to continue relying upon the issuance of debt and equity securities to finance our operations. In this regard, we are restricted by the number of shares available for issuance in an equity financing, and we will likely need to increase our authorized capital in order to take advantage of such financing. However, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in obtaining shareholder approval to increase our authorized capital, that we will be successful in raising the funds necessary to maintain operations, or that a self-supporting level of operations will ever be achieved. The likely outcome of these future events is indeterminable. Our financial statements do not include any adjustment to reflect the possible future effect on the recoverability and classification of the assets or the amounts and classification of liabilities that may result should we cease to continue as a going concern.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent on our ability to raise additional capital and implement our business plan. Since inception, we have been funded by related parties through capital investment and borrowing of funds.
We had total current assets of $1,276,871 and $2,070,851 as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Current assets would consist primarily of cash, accounts receivable and current assets held for sale of $0 and $113,470 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company had a $58,645,834 accumulated deficit on its balance sheet as of December 31, 2020.
We had total current liabilities of $7,025,541 and $9,123,640 as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Current liabilities consisted primarily of the derivative liability, accounts payable, accrued payroll and payroll taxes, contingent acquisition liabilities, related party debt, convertible debt and interest, and the accrued interest, and current liabilities associated with the sale of PathUX of $0 and $3,158,645, respectively as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. In addition to the decrease in current liabilities resulting from the sale of PathUX , there was an increase of $1,013,888 attributable to accrued interest, salary accruals and short-term debt incurred as part of the Service 800 and Customer Centered Strategies and our derivative liability.
We had a working capital deficit of $5,748,670 and $7,052,790 as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The decrease of $1,304,119 for the period as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 was due to a decrease of $3,158,645 in current liabilities associated with the forfeiture of PathUX offset partially by an increase in accrued interest, salary accruals and derivative liability.
Cash Flow from Operating Activities
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, cash used in operating activities was $888,650 and cash provided by operations of $106,948 respectively. This increase of cash used is attributable to the Service 800 and Customer Centered Strategies acquisitions and the increase in payroll expenses.
Cash Flow from Investing Activities
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, cash used in investing activities was $16,230 and $2,501,499 respectively, which represents cash used in the Service 800 and Customer Centered Strategies acquisition transactions.
Cash Flow from Financing Activities
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, cash provided by financing activities was $403,803 and $2,900,000, respectively, which represents $500,000 in cash from the PPP loan received by the Company offset by the payment of certain notes.
Contractual Obligations
As a “smaller reporting company,” we are not required to provide tabular disclosure of contractual obligations.
Inflation
Inflation and changing prices have not had a material effect on our business and we do not expect that inflation or changing prices will materially affect our business in the foreseeable future.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity or capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to an investor in our securities.
Seasonality
In the past, our operating results and operating cash flows historically have not been subject to seasonal variations. This pattern may change, however, in the event that we succeed in bringing our planned products to market.