ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
OVERVIEW
The following discussion and analysis is intended to help you understand us, our operations and our financial performance, and should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, which are included in Item 8 of this report.
Our results for the year underscore the increasing demand for our products generally and for our Byrna HD personal security device in particular. They also illustrate, however, how our business has been and is continuing to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Our supply chain and extended supply chain in particular have been significantly affected. Pandemic related shortages, delays, and reduction in air freight capacity complicated and added expense to our efforts to bring our new United States production facility online. Our South African manufacturing facility was shut down for several weeks before being deemed an “essential business” and allowed to reopen. Our production and distribution operations have been periodically interrupted and delayed as a result of government mandated lock down orders, outbreaks of illness, shelter in place regulations, and new cleaning and disinfection protocols. In order to reduce our dependence on third parties for production and our vulnerability to delays in shipments of finished goods between South Africa and our U.S. distribution center, we purchased our South African supplier Roboro Industries Pty LTD (“Roboro”) and signed a new lease for an additional approximately 14,000 square feet in Fort Wayne, Indiana to expand its manufacturing and distribution capabilities. The exponential expansion of our work force, acquisition of our South African manufacturer, expansion of our US distribution operations, and opening of a US production center to meet the increased demand for our products, and personal protection protocols and equipment for our work force have added to our costs of operations. We were backordered through the end of the fiscal year as we worked to increase production while our access to cash was restricted until orders were filled. The pandemic continues to be our biggest challenge in the short term, particularly with respect to filling orders for third-party manufactured ammunition and accessories.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year ended November 30, 2020, as compared to year ended November 30, 2019:
Revenue
Revenues were $16.6 million for the year ended November 30, 2020 which represents an increase of $15.6 million or approximately 1744.4% as compared to prior year revenues of $0.9 million. This increase was primarily due to rapid growth in sales of the Byrna® HD which was introduced and only on the market for approximately 6 months during the fiscal year ended November 30, 2019. Sales of the new product were driven by increased market awareness and grew rapidly, particularly during the second half of fiscal year 2020.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold was $9.1 million in the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020 compared to $0.8 million in the fiscal year ended November 30, 2019. This $8.2 million increase is primarily due to the increase in production and sales of the Byrna® HD and related products.
Gross Profit
Gross profit is calculated as total revenue less cost of goods sold and gross margin is calculated as gross profit divided by total revenue. Included as cost of goods sold are costs associated with the production and procurement of products, such as labor, inbound freight costs, manufacturing depreciation, purchasing and receiving costs, and inspection costs. Gross profit was $7.5 million for the year ended November 30, 2020, or approximately 45.2% of net revenue as compared to $0.1 million, or 16.1% of net revenue in the year ended November 30, 2019. The increase in gross profit in fiscal 2020 is due to the increase in the sales volume of Byrna® HD products.
Operating Expenses/Operating Loss
Operating expenses were $11.8 million in the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020, which represents an increase of $8.4 million or approximately 247.1% over 2019 operating expenses of $3.4 million. This increase was driven by the rapid growth in revenue and the selling, general and administrative structure necessary to manage it. Approximately $5.4 million of the increase was in payroll and stock compensation cost which increased from $1.1 million in 2019 to $6.5 million in the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020. The fiscal year ended November 30, 2020 included a one-time expense of $0.7 million for sales taxes not collected from customers on orders paid before state sales level thresholds triggered the requirement. There was no such expense in the fiscal year ended November 30, 2019. The increase in size and complexity of the organization and its transactions drove an increase in regulatory, accounting and auditing fees to $0.8 million from $0.2 million in the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020 from 2019, respectively. Marketing costs rose by $0.7 million from $0.4 million in the fiscal year ended November 30, 2019 to $1.0 million in the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020. General office expenses increased by $0.5 million, as the business expanded into new facilities, from $0.3 million to $0.8 million. Bank fees for processing of credit card sales transactions increased by $0.2 million due to the increase in sales volume. The increase in operating expenses resulted in a loss from operations of $4.3 million in the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020 as compared to a loss from operations of $3.3 million in the fiscal year ended November 30, 2019.
Accretion of Debt Discounts and Interest Expense
Accretion of debt discounts decreased by approximately $0.3 million in the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020 to $0.8 million from $1.1 million in the fiscal year ended November 30, 2019. Interest expense decreased $0.2 million to $0.2 million in 2020 from $0.4 million in 2019. These decreases resulted from the exchange in April 2020 which eliminated interest expense for the year ended November 30, 2020, resulting in the write-off of all unamortized debt discounts and a decrease in interest expense. See Note 13, “Convertible Notes Payable and Derivative Liabilities,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Report for further discussion.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt was $6.0 million and $0 for the fiscal years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively and relates to the debt exchanged for preferred stock discussed above. See Note 13, “Convertible Notes Payable and Derivative Liabilities,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Report for further discussion.
Warrant Inducement Expense
Warrant inducement expense was $0.8 million and $0 during the fiscal years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively and relates to the difference in fair value of warrants exercised at the reduced price of $0.16 per warrant as compared to the $0.25 contractual exercise price. See Note 14, “Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit),” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Report for further discussion.
Change in Fair Value of Derivative Liabilities
Change in fair value of derivative liabilities decreased $0.4 million from $0.4 million in 2019 to $0 in 2020. The amount recognized in 2019 related to the Canadian debentures which were repaid on May 31, 2019. See Note 13, “Convertible Notes Payable and Derivative Liabilities,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Report for additional information.
Income Tax Expense
Due to the loss before income taxes, there was no income tax in 2019. However, in 2020 the South African subsidiary did have taxable profits and recognized income tax expense of $0.3 million.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Cash and restricted cash as of November 30, 2020 was approximately $9.7 million, an increase of approximately $8.5 million from the balance as of November 30, 2019 of $1.2 million. Approximately $6.4 million of the cash on hand at year end was restricted due to holds placed on its use by the Company’s merchant services vendor pending fulfillment of backorders prepaid by credit cards.
Despite a net loss of $12.6 million for the year ended November 30, 2020, operating activities provided $2.5 million of net cash because the loss was driven by $10.4 million of non-cash expenses including $1.3 million stock-based compensation expense, $0.8 million accretion of debt discounts, $6.0 million loss on extinguishment of debt, $0.8 million warrant inducement, $0.4 million issuance of stock for services and $0.2 million depreciation and amortization expense. Moreover, restricted cash increased due to the $4.9 million increase in deferred revenue. The rapid growth of the Company’s operations increased working capital balances but increases in accounts receivable, prepaid expenses and inventory were offset by increases in accounts payable and other liabilities such that the net change in these working capital balances added $0.3 million to cash.
The $2.6 million of cash provided by operating activities for the year ended November 30, 2020 was offset by use $2.0 invested in business assets including $1.4 million for property and equipment, $0.5 million for the acquisition of Roboro and $0.1 million for the acquisition of patent rights.
Financing activities provided $7.8 million of the increase in cash for the year ended November 30, 2020. This included $7.2 million from the exercise of warrants, $0.5 million reduction of the purchase price of Roboro in exchange for common stock, $0.2 million proceeds from the Paycheck Protection Program loan offset by $0.1 million from repayment of notes payable. Management believes that increasing cash provided by operations due to the significant increases in revenue, and production levels, order fulfillment, and reduction of material restrictions or limits on cash by its credit card processors, together with the availability of a new $6.5 million credit facility consisting of a $5 million revolving line of credit and a $1.5 million equipment line of credit closed subsequent to the year-end will be adequate to provide for its liquidity requirements. See Note 24, “Subsequent Events” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Report for additional information.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
The Company had no off-balance sheet arrangements as of November 30, 2020 and 2019.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
See Note 4, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for a discussion of recently issued and adopted accounting standards.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our Consolidated Financial Statements are based on the selection and application of significant accounting policies, which require management to make significant estimates and assumptions. Our significant accounting policies are outlined in Note 4, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report. We believe that the following are the more critical judgmental areas in the application of our accounting policies that currently affect our financial position and results of operations:
Revenue Recognition
Product Sales
The Company generates revenue through the wholesale distribution of its products and accessories to dealers/distributors, large end-users such as security companies and law enforcement agencies, and through an e-commerce portal to consumers. Revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of goods to the customer, which generally occurs when title to goods is passed and risk of loss transfers to the customer. Depending on the contract terms, transfer of control is upon shipment of goods to or upon the customer’s pick-up of the goods. Payment terms to customers other than e-commerce customers are generally 30-60 days for established customers, whereas new wholesale and large end-user customers have prepaid terms for their first order. The amount of revenue recognized is net of returns and discounts that the Company offers to its customers. Products purchased include a standard warranty that cannot be purchased separately. This allows customers to return defective products for repair or replacement within one year of sale. The Company also sells an extended warranty for the same terms over three years. The extended 3-year warranty can be purchased separately from the product and therefore, must be classified as a service warranty. Since a warranty for the first year after sale is included and non-separable from all launcher purchases, the Company considers this extended warranty to represent a service obligation during the second and third years after sale. Therefore, the Company accumulates billings of these transactions on the balance sheet as deferred revenue, to be recognized on a straight-line basis during the second and third year after sale. The Company recognizes an estimated reserve based on its analysis of historical experience, and an evaluation of current market conditions. The Company’s returns under warranties have been immaterial.
The Company also has a 60-day money back guarantee, which allows for a full refund of the purchase price, excluding shipping charges, within 60 days from the date of delivery. The right of return creates a variable component to the transaction price and needs to be considered for any possible constraints. The Company estimates returns using the expected value method, as there will likely be a range of potential return amounts. The Company’s returns under the 60-day money back guarantee have been immaterial.
The Company excludes from revenue taxes collected from customers and remitted to government authorities related to sales of the Company’s products. Shipping and handling costs that occur after control of goods has been transferred to the customer and that are not billed to the customer are accounted for as fulfillment costs and are included in cost of goods sold in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss.
The Company accounts for shipping and handling activities related to contracts with customers as costs to fulfill the promise to transfer the associated products. Shipping and handling costs associated with the distribution of finished products to customers, are recorded in operating expenses in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss and are recognized when the product is shipped to the customer. Shipping and handling costs included in operating expenses were $1.4 million and $21,487 during the years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Costs to obtain a contract consist of commissions paid to employees and are included in operating expenses in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss. Commissions were $0.6 million and $0 for the years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Included as cost of goods sold are costs associated with the production and procurement of products, such as labor and overhead, inbound freight costs, manufacturing depreciation, purchasing and receiving costs, and inspection costs.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements. Under this method, the Company determines deferred tax assets and liabilities on the basis of the differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities by using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
Deferred tax assets are recognized to the extent the Company believes that these assets are more likely than not to be realized. In making such a determination, the Company considers all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. If the Company determines that it would be able to realize its deferred tax assets in the future in excess of their net recorded amount, it would make an adjustment to the deferred tax asset valuation allowance, which would reduce the provision for income taxes.
The Company records uncertain tax positions in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes, on the basis of a two-step process in which (1) it determines whether it is more likely than not that the tax positions will be sustained on the basis of the technical merits of the position and (2) for those tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, the Company recognizes the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50 percent likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement with the related tax authority. The Company records uncertain tax positions as liabilities and adjusts these liabilities when its judgment changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available. Because of the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from the Company’s current estimate of the unrecognized tax benefit liabilities. These differences will be reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense in the period in which new information is available. As of November 30, 2020 and 2019, the Company has not recorded any uncertain tax positions in our financial statements.
The Company recognizes interest and penalties related to unrecognized income taxes on the income tax expense line in the accompanying Consolidated Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Loss. As of November 30, 2020 and 2019, no accrued interest or penalties related to unrecognized income taxes are included in the Consolidated balance sheet.
The Company files tax returns as prescribed by the tax laws of the jurisdictions in which it operates. In the normal course of business, the Company is subject to examination by federal and state jurisdictions, where applicable. There are currently no pending tax examinations. The Company’s tax years are still open under statute from November 30, 2017, to the present. The resolution of tax matters is not expected to have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
On March 27, 2020, then President Trump signed into law the $2 trillion bipartisan CARES Act. The CARES Act includes a variety of economic and tax relief measures intended to stimulate the economy, including loans for small businesses, payroll tax credits/deferrals, and corporate income tax relief. Due to the Company’s history of net operating losses and full valuation allowance, the CARES Act did not have a significant effect to the income tax provision, as the corporate income tax relief was directed towards cash taxpayers.
Business Combination
Business combinations are accounted for at fair value. The Company allocates the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values at the acquisition dates. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from the utilization of trade names from a market participant perspective, useful lives and discount rates. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. During the measurement period, which is not to exceed one year from the acquisition date, the Company may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
Goodwill is not amortized but is reviewed for impairment annually or more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. The Company has the option to perform a qualitative assessment over goodwill when events occur or circumstances change that would, more likely than not, reduce the fair value of a reporting unit. If the Company concludes, based on the qualitative assessment, that a reporting unit would more likely than not exceed its fair value, a quantitative assessment is performed which is based upon a comparison of the reporting unit’s fair value to its carrying value. The fair values used in this evaluation are estimated based upon future discounted cash flow projections for the reporting unit. An impairment charge is recognized for any amount by which the carrying amount of goodwill exceeds its fair value.
The Company performs its review for impairment during the third quarter of each year. The Company assesses goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment, referred to as a component. At November 30, 2020, the Company determined that there was no impairment of goodwill.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for all stock-based payment awards granted to employees and non-employees as stock-based compensation expense at their grant date fair value. The Company’s stock-based payments include stock options, restricted stock units, and incentive warrants. The measurement date for employee awards is the date of grant, and stock-based compensation costs are recognized as expense over the employees’ requisite service period, on a straight-line basis. The measurement date for non-employee awards is generally the date the services were completed, resulting in financial reporting period adjustments to stock-based compensation during the vesting terms for changes in the fair value of the awards. Stock-based compensation costs for non-employees are recognized as expense over the vesting period on a straight-line basis. Stock-based compensation is classified in the accompanying Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss based on the function to which the related services are provided, which is included in operating expenses in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss. Forfeitures are accounted for as they occur.
To determine the grant-date fair value of our stock-based payment awards, we use a Black-Scholes, Binomial Lattice model or the quoted stock price on the date of grant, unless the awards are subject to market conditions, in which case we use the Monte Carlo simulation model. Due to our limited history, the expected term of the Company’s stock options granted to employees has been determined utilizing the method as prescribed by the SEC’s Staff Accounting Bulletin, Topic 14. The expected term for stock options granted to non-employees is equal to the contractual term of the options. The risk-free interest rate is determined by reference to the US Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant of the award for time periods approximately equal to the expected term of the award. Expected dividend yield is based on the fact that the Company has never paid cash dividends on common stock and does not expect to pay any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
Long-lived assets to be held and used are analyzed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the related carrying amounts may not be recoverable. The Company evaluates at each balance sheet date whether events and circumstances have occurred that indicate possible impairment. If there are indications of impairment, the Company uses future undiscounted cash flows of the related asset or asset group over the remaining life in measuring whether the assets are recoverable. In the event such cash flows are not expected to be sufficient to recover the recorded asset values, the assets are written down to their estimated fair value.