ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on September 9, 2020. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar Business Combination with one or more businesses or entities.
Our Sponsor is 200 Park Avenue Partners, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company. The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on January 11, 2021. On January 14, 2021, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 28,750,000 Units (and the Class A Common Stock included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), including 3,750,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $287.5 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $6.2 million.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement of 777,500 Private Placement Units at a price of $10.00 per Private Placement Unit to the Sponsor, PA 2 Co-Investment (an affiliate of Cowen and Company, LLC, a representative of the underwriters), and Craig-Hallum (a representative of the underwriters) and its affiliate, generating proceeds of approximately $7.8 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $287.5 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement was placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”), located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested only in U.S. “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”) having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, until the earlier of (i) the completion of the Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or January 14, 2023 (the “Combination Period”), we will (1) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (2) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than 10 business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to the Company to pay its franchise and income taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law; and (3) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and the board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to the Company’s obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception through December 31, 2020 related to our formation, and the preparation for the Initial Public Offering. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. Subsequent to the closing of the Initial Public Offering our activity includes the search for a prospective initial Business Combination and generation of non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from September 9, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020 we had net loss of approximately $11,000, which consisted solely of general and administrative expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $202,000 in cash and working capital deficit of approximately $325,000.
Through December 31, 2020, our liquidity needs were satisfied through the receipt of $25,000 from our Sponsor in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares, the proceeds of the Note (as defined below) from our Sponsor of $300,000, and approximately $13,000 in advances from a related party. We repaid the Note in full on January 14, 2021 and reimbursed the advances from the related party in full in February 2021. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement, our liquidity needs have been satisfied with the proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor, members of our management team or any of their affiliates or other third parties, may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans.
Based on the foregoing, our management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of our operations and/or our search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
In October 2020, our Sponsor purchased 7,187,500 shares of our Founder Shares for an aggregate price of $25,000. The initial stockholders agreed to forfeit up to 937,500 Founder Shares to the extent that the over-allotment option was not exercised in full by the underwriters, so that the Founder Shares would represent 20% of our issued and outstanding shares after the Initial Public Offering (excluding the shares comprising the Private Placement Units). The underwriter exercised its over-allotment option in full on January 14, 2021; thus, the 937,500 Founder Shares were no longer subject to forfeiture.
The initial stockholders agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of the Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of the initial Business Combination or (B) subsequent to the initial Business Combination, (x) if the last reported sale price of the Class A Common Stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial Business Combination, or (y) the date following the completion of the initial Business Combination on which the Company completes a liquidation, merger, stock exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction that results in all of the stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of Class A Common Stock for cash, securities or other property.
Private Placement
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 777,500 Private Placement Units at a price of $10.00 per Private Placement Unit to the Sponsor, PA 2 Co-Investment, and Craig-Hallum and its affiliate, generating proceeds of approximately $7.8 million.
The Private Placement Units (including the shares comprising the Private Placement Units and the Private Placement Warrants (as defined below) and shares of Class A Common Stock issuable upon exercise of such Private Placement Warrants) are not transferable or salable until 30 days after the completion of the initial Business Combination.
Each whole private placement warrant underlying the Private Placement Units (the “Private Placement Warrants”) is exercisable for one whole share of Class A Common Stock at a price of $11.50 per share. A portion of the proceeds from the Private Placement Units has been added to the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering to be held in the Trust Account. If we do not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the Private Placement Units and the underlying securities will expire worthless.
Our Sponsor, officers and directors agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Private Placement Units until 30 days after the completion of the initial Business Combination.
Related Party Loans
On October 15, 2020, our Sponsor agreed to loan us an aggregate of up to $300,000 to cover expenses related to the Initial Public Offering pursuant to a promissory note (the “Note”). This loan was non-interest bearing and payable upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering. The Company borrowed $300,000 under the Note as of December 31, 2020 and repaid the Note in full on January 14, 2021. In addition, an affiliate of our Sponsor advanced approximately $13,000 to cover for certain expenses on behalf of us and we reimbursed the advances from the affiliate of our Sponsor in full in February 2021.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor, members of our management team or any of their affiliates or other third parties may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination or, at the lenders’ discretion, up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into units of the post-Business Combination entity at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the Private Placement Units. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. To date, the Company had no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Units and units that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A Common Stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Units and units that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed upon the consummation of the Initial Public Offering. These holders are entitled to make up to certain demands, excluding short form demands, that we registered such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial Business Combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or approximately $5.8 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering.
Administrative Support Agreement
Commencing on the date of the listing of the Units on the Nasdaq Capital Market through the earlier of the consummation of the initial Business Combination or our liquidation, we will pay the Sponsor $20,000 per month for office space, utilities, general office and secretarial support, and administrative and support services.
In addition, the Sponsor, executive officers and directors, or any of their respective affiliates will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on our behalf such as identifying potential partner businesses and performing due diligence on suitable Business Combinations. Our audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made by us to the Sponsor, executive officers or directors, or the Company's or their affiliates. Any such payments prior to an initial Business Combination will be made using funds held outside the Trust Account.
Recent accounting standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our unaudited condensed financial statements.
Off-balance sheet financing arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K as of December 31, 2020.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies.
Recent accounting pronouncements
Our management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.