Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is intended to help the reader understand our Company, business, operations and present business environment and is provided as a supplement to, and should be read together with the sections entitled “Risk Factors,” “Selected Financial Data,” and the financial statements and the accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
In addition, the statements in this discussion and analysis regarding industry outlook, our expectations regarding the performance of our business, anticipated financial results, liquidity and the other non-historical statements are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risks and uncertainties described in “Forward-Looking Statements” and in “Risk Factors” above. Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements.
Executive Overview and Outlook
Market Conditions
The demand for new and existing homes is dependent on a variety of demographic and economic factors, including job and wage growth, household formation, consumer confidence, mortgage financing, and overall housing affordability. As we began our fiscal 2021, the U.S. economy had begun to recover from the severe impacts of the initial onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in early 2020, and housing market conditions were generally healthy.
Demand for new homes in our markets was strong throughout fiscal 2021. Many factors contributed to this level of demand, including historically low mortgage interest rates, a structural shortage of homes to purchase, favorable demographics, as well as workplace changes as a result of the pandemic. The strong demand also contributed to a rise in home prices. Fiscal 2021 was also impacted by a variety of supply chain disruptions, including increases in labor and direct building costs, as well as lack of availability of certain materials and construction labor. In response to elongated construction cycle times caused by supply chain disruptions, we proactively limited sales in a number of communities during the latter half of the fiscal year to better align sales pace with our production capacity. While we have been carefully managing our sales pace, the supply chain for labor and materials continues to negatively impact construction cycle times.
The magnitude and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic remains unknown. If economic conditions deteriorate, we may experience material declines in our net new orders, closings, revenues, cash flow and/or profitability in fiscal 2022, compared to the corresponding prior-year periods, and compared to our expectations. In addition, if conditions in the overall housing market or in a specific market worsen in the future beyond our current expectations, if future changes in our business strategy significantly affect any key assumptions used in our projections of future cash flows, or if there are material changes in any of the other items we consider in assessing recoverability, we may recognize charges in future periods for inventory impairments related to our current inventory assets. Any such charges could be material to our consolidated financial statements. For further discussion of the potential impacts on our business from the COVID-19 pandemic, see Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors above.
Balanced Growth Strategy
Fiscal 2021 represented continued progress towards the execution of our balanced growth strategy. Specifically, we believe our strong improvements in sales pace, homes in backlog, average selling price, homebuilding gross margin, operating margin, lot count, and use of lot option agreements have positioned us well for fiscal 2022 growth. We have also successfully improved our balance sheet by reducing our debt balance, which puts us closer to our goal of having less than $1.0 billion of outstanding debt by the end of fiscal 2022.
As we begin to look to 2022, we see continued strength in market demand, although higher home prices relative to income growth and disciplined industry-wide mortgage underwriting are likely to moderate the extent of home price appreciation. We believe the combination of demographics, household formation, workplace changes, and the structural deficit in new home supply will keep housing market fundamentals strong for some time to come. Our focus for fiscal 2022 will be to increase our land acquisition and development investments and continue our use of lot option agreements to support future community count growth. In addition to growing our land position, we expect to emphasize the following strategic business objectives in fiscal 2022:
•Improve operating margin - Our operating margin increased by 320 basis points to 6.9% for the year ended September 30, 2021 from 3.7% for the year ended September 30, 2020. We remain focused on improving overhead cost management in relation to our revenue growth to drive operating margin improvement.
•Deliver extraordinary customer experience - We regularly survey our customers throughout the homebuyer journey to measure and improve the customer experience, including through use of third-party customer surveys such as Trustbuilder and GuildQuality. In fiscal 2022, we remain focused on delivering extraordinary value and a great customer experience for our homebuyers.
•Encourage employee well-being - We believe that our employees are critical to our continued growth and success. We consistently measure employee engagement and remain focused on delivering programs that enhance employee engagement and work-life balance.
Overview of Results for Our Fiscal 2021
The following is a summary of our performance against certain key operating and financial metrics during fiscal 2021:
•Sales per community per month was 3.7 and 3.2 for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in sales pace is reflective of the high demand for new homes primarily driven by low interest rates, short supply of homes, and consumers' reassessment of living arrangements. Given the high demand and construction cycle time constraints, we have deliberately slowed down sales in a number of our communities during the latter half of the fiscal year to better align sales pace with production capacity, to ensure a positive customer experience, and to drive price appreciation to maximize margins.
•During the year ended September 30, 2021, our net new orders decreased to 5,564, down 11.6% from the prior year. Our average active community count of 127 was down 22.3% from the prior year. We ended the year with an active community count of 117 in part due to strong sales pace experienced during fiscal 2021 as well as the temporary reduction in land spend during fiscal 2020. We are working to rebuild community counts by investing in new communities. We invested $595.5 million and $440.8 million in land acquisition and land development during the year ended September 30, 2021 and September 30, 2020, respectively.
•As of September 30, 2021, our land position includes 21,987 controlled lots, up 23.3% from 17,830 from the prior year. Excluding land held for future development and land held for sale lots, we controlled 21,422 active lots, up 26.7% from a year earlier. Through expansion of our use of lot option agreements, as of September 30, 2021, we had 9,992 lots, or 46.6% of our total active lots, under option contracts as compared to 5,878 lots, or 34.8% of our total active lots, under option contracts as of September 30, 2020.
•Aggregated dollar value of homes in backlog as of September 30, 2021 was $1,284.0 million, up 29.0% compared to the prior year. As a result of our strong sales pace, we ended the year with 2,786 homes in backlog, up 11.0% compared to the prior year. ASP in backlog as of September 30, 2021 has risen 16.2% versus the prior year to $460.9 thousand.
•Homebuilding gross margin for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 was 18.9%, up from 16.4% in the prior year. Homebuilding gross margin excluding impairments, abandonments, and interest for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 was 23.0%, up from 21.0% in the prior year. Our homebuilding gross margin has been favorably impacted by the strong demand and price appreciation, although cost pressures and the availability of labor has affected and may continue to temper gross margin expansion in the future.
•SG&A for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 was 11.4% of total revenue compared with 11.9% a year earlier. We remain focused on improving overhead cost management in relation to our revenue growth, contributing to our balanced growth strategy.
Seasonal and Quarterly Variability: Our homebuilding operating cycle historically has reflected escalating new order activity in the second and third fiscal quarters and increased closings in the third and fourth fiscal quarters. However, these seasonal patterns may be impacted or reduced by a variety of factors. During fiscal 2021, supply chain disruptions as well as our efforts to actively manage sales pace resulted in a shift from our typical seasonal trend such that higher levels of new order activity were observed during the first and second quarters of fiscal 2021, which led to increased closing levels starting in the second fiscal quarter.
The following tables present new order and closings data for the periods presented:
RESULTS OF CONTINUING OPERATIONS
The following table summarizes certain key income statement metrics for the periods presented:
(a) Homebuilding gross margin for fiscal 2019 was impacted by $110.0 million of impairments primarily related to impairments recorded in the second quarter for certain projects in progress in California. Excluding impairments, abandonments, and interest amortized to cost of sales, homebuilding gross margin was 23.0%, 21.0%, and 19.7% for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Please see "Homebuilding Gross Profit and Gross Margin" section below for a reconciliation of homebuilding gross profit and the related gross margin excluding impairments and abandonments and interest amortized to cost of sales to homebuilding gross profit and gross margin, the most directly comparable GAAP measure.
(b) Calculated as land sales and other gross profit (loss) divided by land sales and other revenue. Land sales and other gross margin is shown as a significant negative percentage for fiscal 2019 due to the $38.6 million of impairments recorded in the second quarter related to land held for sale assets in California.
(c) Calculated as tax expense (benefit) for the period divided by income (loss) from continuing operations. Due to a variety of factors, our income tax expense (benefit) is not always directly correlated to the amount of pre-tax income (loss) for the associated periods. Our effective tax rate was impacted by, among other factors, energy efficiency tax credits of $12.1 million, $0.9 million and $14.9 million for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Please see Note 13 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K for details of significant items that impact our effective tax rate.
Reconciliation of Net Income (Loss) to Adjusted EBITDA
Reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to total company net income (loss), the most directly comparable GAAP measure, is provided for each period discussed below. Management believes that Adjusted EBITDA assists investors in understanding and comparing the operating characteristics of homebuilding activities by eliminating many of the differences in companies' respective capitalization, tax position, and level of impairments. These EBITDA measures should not be considered alternatives to net income (loss) determined in accordance with GAAP as an indicator of operating performance.
The following table reconciles our net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented:
(a) In periods during which we impaired certain of our inventory assets, capitalized interest that is impaired is included in the line above titled “Interest amortized to home construction and land sales expenses and capitalized interest impaired."
Homebuilding Operations Data
The following table summarizes new orders and cancellation rates by reportable segment for the periods presented:
Net new orders for the year ended September 30, 2021 decreased to 5,564, down 11.6% from the year ended September 30, 2020. The decrease in net new orders was driven primarily by a decrease in active community count from 163 in the prior year to 127, partially offset by an increase in sales pace from 3.2 sales per community per month in the prior year to 3.7, and a decrease in cancellation rates from 15.8% in the prior year to 11.1%. We are working to grow community counts by investing in new communities, and we are also actively managing sales pace, in part by selectively increasing prices and limiting lot releases in some communities, to optimize margins and lot supply.
The table below summarizes backlog units by reportable segment as well as the aggregate dollar value and ASP of homes in backlog as of September 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Backlog reflects the number of homes for which the Company has entered into a sales contract with a customer but has not yet delivered the home. Homes in backlog have historically been delivered within three to six months following commencement of construction. Due to the stronger than expected demand for new homes during the economic recovery, we have seen disruptions in our supply chain during the latter half of fiscal 2021, including the availability of certain materials and construction labor, which has led to extended construction cycle times. As a result, homes in backlog are currently delivered within four to nine months following commencement of construction. The aggregate dollar value of homes in backlog as of September 30, 2021 increased 29.0% compared to the prior year due to a 16.2% increase in the ASP of homes in backlog and an 11.0% increase in backlog units.
Homebuilding Revenue, Average Selling Price, and Closings
The table below summarizes homebuilding revenue, ASP of our homes closed, and closings by reportable segment for the periods presented:
The slight increase in our overall homebuilding revenue for fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 is the result of an increase in ASP, partially offset by a decrease in closings. The ASP changes were impacted primarily by price appreciation due to strong demand and short supply of homes, as well as a change in mix of closings between geographies, products, and among communities within each individual market as compared to the prior year. On average, we anticipate that our ASP will continue to increase in the near-term as indicated by the ASP for homes in backlog as of September 30, 2021.
West Segment: Homebuilding revenue decreased by 6.0% for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year due to a 8.1% decrease in closings, partially offset by a 2.4% increase in ASP. The decrease in closings is due to a decrease in backlog conversion rates as a result of longer production cycle times compared to the prior year, partially offset by higher units in beginning backlog for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020.
East Segment: Homebuilding revenue increased by 18.9% for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year due to a 13.4% increase in closings as well as a 4.8% increase in ASP. The year-over-year increase in closings in the East segment was primarily the result of higher units in beginning backlog for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020.
Southeast Segment: Homebuilding revenue decreased by 1.9% for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year due to a decrease in closings of 6.8%, partially offset by a 5.2% increase in ASP. The decrease in closings is due to a decrease in backlog conversion rates as a result of longer production cycle times compared to the prior year, partially offset by higher units in beginning backlog for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020.
Homebuilding Gross Profit and Gross Margin
The following tables present our homebuilding (HB) gross profit and gross margin by reportable segment and in total. In addition, such amounts are presented excluding inventory impairments and abandonments and interest amortized to cost of sales (COS). Homebuilding gross profit is defined as homebuilding revenue less home cost of sales (which includes land and land development costs, home construction costs, capitalized interest, indirect costs of construction, estimated warranty costs, closing costs, and inventory impairment and abandonment charges).
Reconciliation of homebuilding gross profit and the related gross margin excluding impairments and abandonments and interest amortized to cost of sales to homebuilding gross profit and gross margin, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, is provided for each period discussed below. Management believes that this information assists investors in comparing the operating characteristics of homebuilding activities by eliminating many of the differences in companies' respective level of impairments and level of debt. These measures should not be considered alternatives to homebuilding gross profit and gross margin determined in accordance with GAAP as an indicator of operating performance.
(a) Corporate and unallocated includes capitalized interest and capitalized indirect costs expensed to homebuilding cost of sale related to homes closed, as well as capitalized interest and capitalized indirect costs impaired in order to reflect projects in progress assets at fair value.
Our homebuilding gross profit increased by $53.6 million to $401.7 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, from $348.1 million in the prior year. The increase in homebuilding gross profit was primarily driven by growth in homebuilding revenue of $10.8 million, and an increase in gross margin of 250 basis points to 18.9%. However, as shown in the tables above, the comparability of our gross profit and gross margin was modestly impacted by impairment and abandonment charges which decreased by $0.8 million and interest amortized to homebuilding cost of sales which decreased by $7.8 million year-over-year (refer to Note 5 and Note 6 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K for additional details). When excluding the impact of impairment and abandonment charges and interest amortized to homebuilding cost of sales, homebuilding gross profit increased by $45.0 million compared to the prior year while homebuilding gross margin increased by 200 basis points to 23.0%. The year-over-year improvement in gross margin for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2021 is primarily driven by lower sales incentives and pricing increases, although cost pressures and the availability of labor has affected and may continue to temper gross margin expansion in the future.
West Segment: Compared to the prior fiscal year, homebuilding gross profit increased by $12.0 million primarily due to higher gross margin. Homebuilding gross margin, excluding impairments and abandonments, increased to 24.4%, up from 22.0% in the prior year. The increase in gross margin was driven primarily by lower sales incentives and pricing increases.
East Segment: Compared to the prior fiscal year, homebuilding gross profit increased by $27.5 million due to the increase in homebuilding revenue and higher gross margin. Homebuilding gross margin, excluding impairments and abandonments, increased to 22.3%, up from 20.7% in the prior year. The increase in gross margin was driven primarily by lower sales incentives and pricing increases.
Southeast Segment: Compared to the prior fiscal year, homebuilding gross profit increased by $10.6 million due to higher gross margin. Homebuilding gross margin, excluding impairments and abandonments, increased to 21.9%, up from 19.2% in the prior year. The increase in gross margin was driven primarily by lower sales incentives and pricing increases.
Measures of homebuilding gross profit and gross margin after excluding inventory impairments and abandonments, interest amortized to cost of sales, and other non-recurring items are not GAAP financial measures. These measures should not be considered alternatives to homebuilding gross profit and gross margin determined in accordance with GAAP as an indicator of operating performance.
In particular, the magnitude and volatility of non-cash inventory impairment and abandonment charges for the Company and other homebuilders have been significant historically and, as such, have made financial analysis of our industry more difficult. Homebuilding metrics excluding these charges, as well as interest amortized to cost of sales and other similar presentations by analysts and other companies, are frequently used to assist investors in understanding and comparing the operating characteristics of homebuilding activities by eliminating many of the differences in companies' respective level of impairments and levels of debt. Management believes these non-GAAP measures enable holders of our securities to better understand the cash implications of our operating performance and our ability to service our debt obligations as they currently exist and as additional indebtedness is incurred in the future. These measures are also useful internally, helping management to compare operating results and to measure cash available for discretionary spending.
In a given period, our reported gross profit is generated from both communities previously impaired and communities not previously impaired. In addition, as indicated above, certain gross profit amounts arise from recoveries of prior period costs, including warranty items that are not directly tied to communities generating revenue in the period. Home closings from communities previously impaired would, in most instances, generate very low or negative gross margins prior to the impact of the previously recognized impairment. Gross margin for each home closing is higher for a particular community after an impairment because the carrying value of the underlying land was previously reduced to the present value of future cash flows as a result of the impairment, leading to lower cost of sales at the home closing. This improvement in gross margin resulting from one or more prior impairments is frequently referred to in the aggregate as the “impairment turn” or “flow-back” of impairments within the reporting period. The amount of this impairment turn may exceed the gross margin for an individual impaired asset if the gross margin for that asset prior to the impairment would have been negative. The extent to which this impairment turn is greater than the reported gross margin for the individual asset is related to the specific historical cost basis of that individual asset.
The asset valuations that result from our impairment calculations are based on discounted cash flow analyses and are not derived by simply applying prospective gross margins to individual communities. As such, impaired communities may have gross margins that are somewhat higher or lower than the gross margins for unimpaired communities. The mix of home closings in any particular quarter varies to such an extent that comparisons between previously impaired and never impaired communities would not be a reliable way to ascertain profitability trends or to assess the accuracy of previous valuation estimates. In addition, since any amount of impairment turn is tied to individual lots in specific communities, it will vary considerably from period to period. As a result of these factors, we review the impairment turn impact on gross margin on a trailing 12-month basis rather than a quarterly basis as a way of considering whether our impairment calculations are resulting in gross margins for impaired communities that are comparable to our unimpaired communities. For fiscal 2021, our homebuilding gross margin was 18.9% and excluding interest and inventory impairments and abandonments, it was 23.0%. For the same period, homebuilding gross margin was as follows in those communities that have previously been impaired, which represented 8.2% of total closings during fiscal 2021:
For a further discussion of our impairment policies and communities impaired during the current and prior two fiscal years, refer to Note 2 and Note 5 of the notes to consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K.
Land Sales and Other Revenue and Gross Profit (Loss)
Land sales relate to land and lots sold that do not fit within our homebuilding programs and strategic plans. We also have other revenue related to title examinations provided for our homebuyers in certain markets. The following tables summarize our land sales and other revenue and related gross profit (loss) by reportable segment for the periods presented:
(a) Corporate and unallocated includes capitalized interest and capitalized indirect costs expensed to land cost of sale related to land sold, as well as capitalized interest and capitalized indirect costs impaired in order to reflect land held for sale assets at net realizable value.
To further support our efforts to reduce leverage, we continued to focus on closing a number of land sales for land positions that did not fit within our strategic plans. Future land and lot sales will depend on a variety of factors, including local market conditions, individual community performance, and changing strategic plans.
Operating Income (Loss)
The table below summarizes operating income (loss) by reportable segment for the periods presented:
(a) Corporate and unallocated includes amortization of capitalized interest, capitalization and amortization of indirect costs, impairment of capitalized interest and capitalized indirect costs, expenses related to numerous shared services functions that benefit all segments but are not allocated to the operating segments, and certain other amounts that are not allocated to our operating segments.
(b) Operating income (loss) is impacted by impairment and abandonment charges incurred during the periods presented (see Note 5 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K).
Our operating income increased by $67.8 million to $146.9 million for the year ended September 30, 2021, compared to operating income of $79.1 million for year ended September 30, 2020, primarily driven by the previously discussed increase in gross profit. Additionally, SG&A as a percentage of total revenue decreased year-over-year by 50 basis points from 11.9% to 11.4%.
West Segment: The $19.5 million increase in operating income compared to the prior year was primarily due to the increase in gross profit previously discussed, lower commissions expense on lower homebuilding revenue, lower sales and marketing expenses, and lower remaining G&A expenses in the segment.
East Segment: The $28.3 million increase in operating income compared to the prior year was primarily due to the increase in gross profit previously discussed and lower sales and marketing expenses, partially offset by higher commissions expense on higher homebuilding revenue in the segment.
Southeast Segment: The $16.8 million increase in operating income compared to the prior year was primarily due to the increase in gross profit previously discussed, lower commissions expense on lower homebuilding revenue, lower sales and marketing expenses, and lower remaining G&A expenses in the segment.
Corporate and Unallocated: Our Corporate and unallocated results include amortization of capitalized interest, capitalization and amortization of indirect costs, impairment of capitalized interest and capitalized indirect costs, expenses for various shared services functions that benefit all segments but are not allocated, including information technology, treasury, corporate finance, legal, branding and national marketing, and certain other amounts that are not allocated to our operating segments. For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, corporate and unallocated net expenses decreased by $3.1 million from the prior fiscal year, primarily due to a decrease in capitalized interest amortized to cost of sales, partially offset by higher incentive compensation expenses.
Below operating income (loss), we had two noteworthy fluctuations between fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 as follows: (1) we experienced a decline in other expense, net, primarily attributable to a year-over-year decrease in interest expense not qualified for capitalization; and (2) we recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of $2.0 million during fiscal 2021 as compared to no such loss in fiscal 2020. See Note 6 and Note 7 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K for further discussion of these items.
Income Taxes
Our income tax assets and liabilities and related effective tax rate are affected by various factors, the most significant of which is the valuation allowance recorded against a portion of our deferred tax assets. Due to the effect of our valuation allowance adjustments beginning in fiscal 2008, a comparison of our annual effective tax rates must consider the changes in our valuation allowance. As such, our effective tax rates have not been meaningful metrics, as our income tax expense/benefit was not directly correlated to the amount of pretax income or loss for the associated periods.
We recognized income tax expense from continuing operations of $21.5 million in our fiscal 2021, compared to income tax expense from continuing operations of $18.0 million in our fiscal 2020 and income tax benefit from continuing operations of
$37.2 million in our fiscal 2019. The income tax expense in our fiscal 2021 and 2020 primarily resulted from income generated in the fiscal year and permanent book/tax differences, partially offset by the generation of additional federal tax credits. The income tax benefit recorded in our fiscal 2019 primarily resulted from the loss generated in the fiscal year and the generation of additional federal tax credits.
Refer to Note 13 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K for a further discussion of our income taxes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our sources of liquidity include, but are not limited to, cash from operations, proceeds from Senior Notes, our Secured Revolving Credit Facility (the Facility) and other bank borrowings, the issuance of equity and equity-linked securities, and other external sources of funds. Our short-term and long-term liquidity depends primarily upon our level of net income, working capital management (cash, accounts receivable, accounts payable and other liabilities), and available credit facilities.
Cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash increased as follows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $31.7 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. The primary drivers of operating cash flows are typically cash earnings and changes in inventory levels, including land acquisition and land development spending. Net cash provided by operating activities during the period was primarily driven by income before income taxes of $143.5 million, which included $28.1 million of non-cash charges, a net decrease in non-inventory working capital of $7.6 million, partially offset by an increase in inventory of $147.5 million resulting from of land acquisition, land development, and house construction spending to support continued growth.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $289.1 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, primarily driven by income before income taxes of $69.9 million, which included $28.2 million of non-cash charges, a net decrease in non-inventory working capital of $36.1 million, and a decrease in inventory of $154.9 million as a result of from home sales, partially offset by land acquisition, land development, and house construction spending to support continued growth.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 and September 30, 2020, was $14.2 million and $10.2 million, respectively, primarily driven in both periods by capital expenditures for model homes.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $85.9 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 primarily driven by installment payment of the Senior Unsecured Term Loan (the Term Loan), partial extinguishment of our 2027 Senior Notes, the payment of cash for debt issuance costs, and tax payments for stock-based compensation awards vesting.
Net cash used in financing activities was $59.2 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 driven by installment payment of the Term Loan, common stock repurchases under our share repurchase program, tax payments for stock-based compensation awards vesting, cash settlement of performance-based restricted stock, the repayment of other secured notes payable, and payment of debt issuance costs.
Financial Position
As of September 30, 2021, our liquidity position consisted of $246.7 million in cash and cash equivalents and $250.0 million of remaining capacity under the Facility.
While we believe we possess sufficient liquidity, we are mindful of potential short-term or seasonal requirements for enhanced liquidity that may arise to operate and grow our business. As of the date of this report, we believe we have adequate capital resources and sufficient access to external financing sources to satisfy our current and reasonably anticipated requirements for funds to conduct our operations and meet other needs in the ordinary course of our business.
During this time, we may also engage in capital markets, bank loan, project debt or other financial transactions, including the repurchase of debt or potential new issuances of debt or equity securities to support our business needs. The amounts involved in these transactions, if any, may be material. In addition, as necessary or desirable, we may adjust or amend the terms of and/or expand the capacity of the Facility, or enter into additional letter of credit facilities, or other similar facility arrangements, in each case with the same or other financial institutions, or allow any such facilities to mature or expire.
Debt
We generally fulfill our short-term cash requirements with cash generated from our operations and available borrowings. Additionally, our Secured Revolving Credit Facility provides working capital and letter of credit capacity of $250.0 million. As of September 30, 2021, no borrowings and no letters of credit were outstanding under the Facility, resulting in $250.0 million remaining capacity.
We have also entered into a number of stand-alone, cash-secured letter of credit agreements with banks. These combined facilities provide for letter of credit needs collateralized by either cash or assets of the Company. We currently have $21.8 million of outstanding letters of credit under these facilities, which are secured by cash collateral that is maintained in restricted accounts totaling $22.3 million.
To provide greater letter of credit capacity, the Company has also entered into a reimbursement agreement, which provides for the issuance of performance letters of credit, and an unsecured credit agreement that provides for the issuance of up to $50.0 million of standby letters of credit to backstop the Company's obligations under the reimbursement agreement (collectively, the "Bilateral Facility"). As of September 30, 2021, the total stated amount of performance letters of credit issued under the reimbursement agreement was $11.8 million (and the stated amount of the backstop standby letter of credit issued under the credit agreement was $40.0 million).
In the future, we may from time to time seek to continue to retire or purchase our outstanding debt through cash repurchases or in exchange for other debt securities, in open market purchases, privately-negotiated transactions, or otherwise. In addition, any material variance from our projected operating results could require us to obtain additional equity or debt financing. There can be no assurance that we will be able to complete any of these transactions in the future on favorable terms or at all. See Note 8 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K for additional details related to our borrowings.
Supplemental Guarantor Information
As discussed in Note 8 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K, the Company's obligations to pay principal and interest under certain debt agreements are guaranteed on a joint and several basis by substantially all of the Company's subsidiaries. Some of the immaterial subsidiaries do not guarantee the Senior Notes. The guarantees are full and unconditional.
The following summarized financial information is presented for Beazer Homes USA, Inc. and the guarantor subsidiaries on a combined basis after elimination of intercompany transactions between entities in the combined group and amounts related to investments in any subsidiary that is a non-guarantor.
Credit Ratings
Our credit ratings are periodically reviewed by rating agencies. In June 2021, S&P upgraded the Company’s corporate rating to a B from a B- and reaffirmed the Company's positive outlook. In August 2021, Moody's upgraded the Company's issuer corporate family rating from B3 to B2 and revised the Company's outlook from positive to stable. These ratings and our current credit condition affect, among other things, our ability to access new capital. Negative changes to these ratings may result in more stringent covenants and higher interest rates under the terms of any new debt. Our credit ratings could be lowered, or rating agencies could issue adverse commentaries in the future, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations, and liquidity. In particular, a weakening of our financial condition, including any further increase in our leverage or decrease in our profitability or cash flows, could adversely affect our ability to obtain necessary funds, could result in a credit rating downgrade or change in outlook, or could otherwise increase our cost of borrowing.
Stock Repurchases and Dividends Paid
During the first quarter of fiscal 2019, the Company's Board of Directors approved a share repurchase program that authorizes the Company to repurchase up to $50.0 million of its outstanding common stock. As part of this program, the Company has repurchased common stock during fiscal 2019 and 2020 through open market transactions, 10b5-1 plans, and accelerated share repurchase (ASR) agreements. All shares have been retired upon repurchase. The aggregate reduction to stockholders’ equity related to share repurchases during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 and September 30, 2019 was $3.3 million and $34.6 million, respectively. No share repurchases were made during fiscal 2021. As of September 30, 2021, the remaining availability of the share repurchase program was $12.0 million.
The indentures under which our Senior Notes were issued contain certain restrictive covenants, including limitations on our payment of dividends. There were no dividends paid during our fiscal years ended September 30, 2021, 2020, or 2019.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Commitments
Lot Option Agreements
We historically have attempted to control a portion of our land supply through lot option agreements. As of September 30, 2021, we controlled 21,987 lots, which includes 272 lots of land held for future development and 293 lots of land held for sale. Of the total 21,422 active lots, we owned 11,430, or 53.4%, of these lots and the remaining 9,992 of these lots, or 46.6%, were under option contracts, primarily through lot option agreements with land developers and land bankers, which generally require the payment of cash or the posting of a letter of credit for the right to acquire lots during a specified period of time at a certain price. In comparison, we controlled 5,878 lots, or 34.8% of our total active lot position, through option contracts as of September 30, 2020. As a result of the flexibility that these options provide us, upon a change in market conditions, we may renegotiate the terms of the options prior to exercise or terminate the agreement. Under option contracts, purchase of the properties is contingent upon satisfaction of certain requirements by us and the sellers, and our liability is generally limited to forfeiture of the non-refundable deposits and other non-refundable amounts incurred, which totaled approximately $114.7 million as of September 30, 2021. The total remaining purchase price, net of cash deposits, committed under all options was $676.1 million as of September 30, 2021. Based on market conditions and our liquidity, we may further expand our use of option agreements to supplement our owned inventory supply.
We expect to exercise, subject to market conditions and seller satisfaction of contract terms, most of our option contracts. Various factors, some of which are beyond our control, such as market conditions, weather conditions, and the timing of the completion of development activities, will have a significant impact on the timing of option exercises or whether lot options will be exercised at all.
We have historically funded the exercise of lot options with operating cash flows. We expect these sources to continue to be adequate to fund anticipated future option exercises. Therefore, we do not anticipate that the exercise of our lot options will have a material adverse effect on our liquidity.
Investments in Unconsolidated Entities
Occasionally, we use legal entities in which we have less than a controlling interest. We enter into the majority of these arrangements with land developers, other homebuilders, and financial partners to acquire attractive land positions, to manage our risk profile, and to leverage our capital base. The underlying land positions are developed into finished lots for sale to the unconsolidated entity’s members or other third parties. We account for our interest in unconsolidated entities under the equity method.
Historically, we and our partners have provided varying levels of guarantees of debt or other obligations of our unconsolidated entities. As of September 30, 2021, we had no repayment guarantees outstanding related to the debt of our unconsolidated entities. See Note 2 and Note 4 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K for more information.
Letters of Credit and Surety Bonds
In connection with the development of our communities, we are frequently required to provide performance, maintenance, and other bonds and letters of credit in support of our related obligations with respect to such developments. The amount of such obligations outstanding at any time varies in accordance with our pending development activities. In the event any such bonds or letters of credit are drawn upon, we would be obligated to reimburse the issuer of such bonds or letters of credit. We had outstanding letters of credit and surety bonds of $33.6 million and $282.3 million, respectively, as of September 30, 2021, primarily related to our obligations to local governments to construct roads and other improvements in various developments.
Contractual Commitments
The following table summarizes our aggregate contractual commitments as of September 30, 2021:
(a) For a listing of our borrowings, refer to Note 8 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K.
(b) Interest on variable rate obligations is based on rates effective as of September 30, 2021.
(c) Based on its current inventory of uncertain tax positions and tax carryforward attributes, the Company does not expect a cash settlement of unrecognized tax benefits related to uncertain tax positions in future years. See Note 13 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K for additional information regarding the Company's unrecognized tax benefits related to uncertain tax positions as of September 30, 2021.
We had outstanding letters of credit and surety bonds of $33.6 million and $282.3 million, respectively, as of September 30, 2021, primarily related to our obligations to local governments to construct roads and other improvements in various developments.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our critical accounting policies require the use of judgment in their application and in certain cases require estimates of inherently uncertain matters. Although our accounting policies are in compliance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP), a change in the facts and circumstances of the underlying transactions could significantly change the application of the accounting policies and the resulting financial statement impact. It is also possible that other professionals applying reasonable judgment to the same set of facts and circumstances could reach a different conclusion. Listed below are those policies that we believe are critical and require the use of complex judgment in their application.
Inventory Valuation - Projects in Progress
Projects in progress inventory includes homes under construction and land under development grouped together as communities. Generally, upon the commencement of land development activities, it may take three to five years (depending on, among other things, the size of the community and its sales pace) to fully develop, sell, construct and close all the homes in a typical community. Projects in progress are stated at cost unless facts and circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable.
We assess our projects in progress inventory for indicators of impairment at the community level on a quarterly basis. We evaluate, among other things, the average sales price and margins on recent home closings, homes in backlog and expected future home sales for each community. If indicators of impairment are present for a community with more than ten homes remaining to close, we perform a recoverability test by comparing the expected undiscounted cash flows for the community to its carrying value. For those communities whose carrying values exceed the aggregate undiscounted cash flows, we perform a discounted cash flow analysis to determine the fair value of the community, and impairment charges are recorded if the fair value of the community's inventory is less than its carrying value.
There is uncertainty associated with preparing the undiscounted cash flow analyses because future market conditions will almost certainly be different, either better or worse, than current conditions. Significant valuation assumptions include expected pace of closings, average sales price, expected costs for land development, direct construction, overhead, and interest. The risk of over or under-stating any of the important cash flow variables is greater with longer-lived communities and within markets that have historically experienced greater home price volatility. To address these risks, we consider home price and construction cost appreciation in future years for certain communities that are expected to be selling for more than a year and/or if the market has typically exhibited high levels of price volatility. Absent these assumptions on cost and sales price appreciation, we believe the long-term cash flow analysis would be unrealistic. Finally, we also ensure that the pace of sales and closings used in our undiscounted cash flow analyses are reasonable by considering seasonal variations in sales and closings, our development schedules and what we have achieved historically, and by comparing to those achieved by our competitors for comparable communities.
The fair value of the community is estimated based on the present value of the estimated future cash flows using discount rates commensurate with the risk associated with the underlying community. The discount rate used may be different for each community. The factors considered when determining an appropriate discount rate for a community include, among others: (1) community specific factors such as product types, development stage and expected duration of the project, and the competitive factors influencing the sales performance of the community and (2) local market factors such as employment levels, consumer confidence and the existing supply of new and used homes for sale. The assumptions used in the determination of fair value of projects in progress communities are based on factors known to us at the time such estimates are made and our expectations of future operations and market conditions. Due to uncertainties in the estimation process, the significant volatility in market conditions, the long life cycles of many communities, and potential changes in our strategy related to certain communities, actual results could differ significantly from our estimates.
Warranty Reserves
The adequacy of our warranty reserves is based on historical experience and management's estimate of the costs to remediate any claims. Our review includes a quarterly analysis of the historical data and trends in warranty expense by division. An analysis by division allows us to consider market specific factors such as our warranty experience, the number of home closings, the prices of homes, product mix, and other data in estimating our warranty reserves. In addition, our analysis also factors in the existence of any non-recurring or community-specific warranty matters that might not be contemplated in our historical data and trends that may need to be separately estimated based on management's judgment of the ultimate cost of repair for that specific issue.
At September 30, 2021, our warranty reserve was $12.9 million, reflecting an accrual range of 0.3% to 1.0% of total revenue recognized for each home closed depending on our loss history in the division in which the home was built. A ten basis point increase in our warranty reserve rate would have increased our accrual and corresponding cost of sales by $2.3 million as of September 30, 2021.
There were no material changes in assumptions in calculating our reserve balance for the year ended September 30, 2021.
Our estimation process is discussed in Note 9 of notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K. While we believe that our current warranty reserves are adequate, there can be no assurances that historical data and trends will accurately predict our actual warranty costs or that future developments might not lead to a significant change in the reserve.
Income Taxes - Valuation Allowance
The carrying amounts of deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance if an assessment of their components indicates that it is more likely than not that all or some portion of these assets will not be realized. Judgment is required in estimating valuation allowances for deferred tax assets. The realization of a deferred tax asset ultimately depends on the existence of sufficient taxable income in either the carryback or carryforward periods under tax law. We assess the need for valuation allowances for deferred tax assets based on more-likely-than-not realization threshold criteria. In our assessment, appropriate consideration is given to all positive and negative evidence related to the realization of the deferred tax assets. This assessment considers, among other matters, (1) the nature, frequency and severity of any current and cumulative losses; (2) forecasts of future profitability; (3) the duration of statutory carryforward periods; (4) our experience with operating loss and tax credit carryforwards not expiring unused; (5) the Section 382 limitation on our ability to carryforward pre-ownership change net operating losses; (6) recognized built-in losses or deductions; and (7) tax planning alternatives.
Our assessment of the need for the valuation of deferred tax assets includes assessing the likely future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns. We base our estimate of deferred tax assets and liabilities on current tax laws and rates and, in certain cases, business plans and other expectations about future outcomes. Changes in existing tax laws or rates could affect actual tax results and future business results may affect the amount of deferred tax liabilities or the valuation of deferred tax assets over time. Our analysis includes several scenarios with both increases and decreases in our estimates of operating income across future periods. Routine or cyclical reductions in our pre-tax earnings would not have changed our assessment of our ability to utilize various tax carryforwards. In addition to various company-specific factors, we consider several positive and negative external factors that may impact our estimates. These factors may include broad economic considerations such as mortgage interest rates, the relative health of the U.S. economy and employment levels, as well as industry or market specific factors such as housing supply and demand outlook.
In fiscal 2021, our conclusions about our ability to more likely than not realize all of our federal and certain state tax attributes remain consistent with our prior determinations. We considered positive factors including significant increases in our current earnings, interest savings from our debt reduction strategies, housing demand and price appreciation, and our backlog. The negative factors included the overall health of the broader economy, labor shortages and unemployment levels, as well as potential increases in mortgage interest rates.
Our accounting for deferred tax consequences represents our best estimate of future events. It is possible there will be changes that are not anticipated in our current estimates. If those changes resulted in significant and sustained reduction in our pre-tax earnings or our utilization of existing tax carryforwards, it is likely such changes would have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. The nature and amounts of the various tax attributes comprising our deferred tax assets are discussed in Note 13 of notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K.