ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our accompanying audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as the discussion in the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K entitled “Business.” This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may vary materially from those expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K entitled “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors.”
Throughout this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” all totals, percentages and year-over-year changes are calculated using exact numbers. Minor differences may exist due to rounding.
Any discussion of consolidated results or performance is inclusive of the Clearwave, Fidelity and Valu-Net operations from their respective acquisition dates and excludes the Anniston System from its contribution date. The results of Fidelity for the first three quarters of 2020 and the results of Valu-Net since its acquisition are collectively referred to as the “incremental operations.”
Overview
We are a fully integrated provider of data, video and voice services in 21 Western, Midwestern and Southern states as of December 31, 2020. We provided these broadband services to residential and business customers in approximately 950 communities as of December 31, 2020. The markets we serve are primarily non-metropolitan, secondary and tertiary markets, with approximately 78% of our customers located in seven states as of December 31, 2020: Arizona, Idaho, Illinois, Mississippi, Missouri, Oklahoma and Texas. Our biggest customer concentrations are in the Mississippi Gulf Coast region and in the greater Boise, Idaho region. We provided service to approximately 969,000 residential and business customers out of approximately 2.3 million homes passed as of December 31, 2020. Of these customers, approximately 857,000 subscribed to data services, 260,000 subscribed to video services and 124,000 subscribed to voice services as of December 31, 2020.
We generate substantially all of our revenues through three primary product lines. Ranked by share of our total revenues during 2020, they are residential data (50.5%), residential video (25.1%) and business services (data, voice and video: 17.7%). The profit margins, growth rates and/or capital intensity of these three product lines vary significantly due to competition, product maturity and relative costs.
In 2020, our Adjusted EBITDA margins for residential data and business services were approximately eight and nine times greater, respectively, than for residential video. We define Adjusted EBITDA margin for a product line as Adjusted EBITDA attributable to that product line divided by revenue attributable to that product line (see “Use of Adjusted EBITDA” below for the definition of Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income, which is the most directly comparable GAAP measure). This margin disparity is largely the result of significant programming costs and retransmission fees incurred to deliver residential video services, which in each of the last three years represented between 61% and 66% of total residential video revenues. Neither of our other primary product lines has direct costs representing as substantial a portion of revenues as programming costs and retransmission fees represent for residential video, and indirect costs are generally allocated on a per PSU basis.
We focus on growing our higher margin businesses, namely residential data and business services. Beginning in 2013, we began our shift away from our prior concentration on growing revenues through subscriber retention and maximizing customer PSUs. We adapted our strategy to face the industry-wide trends of declining profitability of residential video services and declining revenues from residential voice services. The declining profitability of residential video services is due primarily to increasing programming costs and retransmission fees and competition from other content providers, and the declining revenues from residential voice services are due primarily to the increasing use of wireless voice services instead of residential voice services. Separately, we have also focused on retaining customers who are likely to produce higher relative value over the life of their service relationships with us, are less attracted by discounting, require less support and churn less. This strategy focuses on increasing Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA less capital expenditures and margins.
Excluding the effects of our recently completed acquisitions and divestitures and any potential future acquisitions and divestitures, the trends described above and the COVID-19 pandemic have impacted, and are expected to further impact, our three primary product lines in the following ways:
●
Residential data. We have experienced growth in residential data customers and revenues every year since 2013, and that growth accelerated during 2020, in part as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and our associated responses discussed below. During 2020, we organically added over 50% more residential data customers than we did during the four-and-a-half-year period between our July 2015 spin-off from GHC and the end of 2019. We expect growth for this product line to continue over the long-term as upgrades in our broadband capacity, our ability to offer higher access speeds than many of our competitors, the reliability and flexibility of our data service offerings and our Wi-Fi support service will enable us to capture additional market share from both data subscribers who use other providers as well as households in our footprint that do not yet subscribe to data services from any provider.
●
Residential video. Residential video service is an increasingly costly and fragmenting business, with programming costs and retransmission fees continuing to escalate in the face of a proliferation of streaming content alternatives. We intend to continue our strategy of focusing on the higher-margin businesses of residential data and business services while de-emphasizing our residential video business. We experienced a slightly accelerated decline in organic residential video customers and revenues during 2020 in connection with our response to the COVID-19 pandemic due to a temporary suspension of in-home installations. As a result of our video strategy, we expect that residential video customers and revenues will decline further in the future. In 2021, we announced that we are launching Sparklight TV, an IPTV video service that allows customers to stream our video channels from the cloud through a new app. This transition from linear to IPTV video service will enable us to reclaim bandwidth, freeing up network capacity to increase data speeds and capacity across our network.
●
Business services. We have experienced significant growth in business data customers and revenues, and we expect this growth to continue over the long-term. We attribute this growth to our strategic focus on increasing sales to business customers and our efforts to attract enterprise business customers. Margins for products sold to business customers have remained attractive, which we expect will continue. During 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic and our associated responses, including business sales associates working from home, resulted in suppressed sales growth from small business customers while at the same time the pandemic presented additional subscriber acquisition and upgrade opportunities primarily for mid-market and enterprise businesses in need of faster and more reliable data and voice services.
We continue to experience increased competition, particularly from telephone companies, cable and municipal overbuilders, OTT video providers and DBS television providers. Because of the levels of competition we face, we believe it is important to make investments in our infrastructure. In addition, a key objective of our capital allocation process is to invest in initiatives designed to drive revenue and Adjusted EBITDA expansion. More than 50% of our total capital expenditures since 2017 were focused on infrastructure improvements that were intended to grow these measures. We continue to invest capital to, among other things, increase our plant and data capacities as well as network reliability. As of December 31, 2020, we offered Gigabit data service to approximately 97% of our homes passed. We are also continuing to deploy DOCSIS 3.1, which, together with Sparklight TV, will further increase our network capacity and enable future growth in our residential data and business services product lines.
We expect to continue to devote financial resources to infrastructure improvements in existing and newly acquired markets as well as to expand high-speed data service into areas where our consortium was designated the winning bidder for the RDOF Phase I auction. We believe these investments are necessary to continually meet our customers’ needs and to remain competitive. The capital enhancements associated with recent acquisitions include rebuilding low-capacity markets; reclaiming bandwidth from analog video services; implementing 32-channel bonding; deploying DOCSIS 3.1; converting back office functions such as billing, accounting and service provisioning; migrating products to legacy Cable One platforms; and expanding our high-capacity fiber network.
Our primary goals are to continue growing residential data and business services, to increase profit margins and to deliver strong Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA less capital expenditures. To achieve these goals, we intend to continue our disciplined cost management approach, remain focused on customers with expected higher relative value and follow through with further planned investments in broadband plant upgrades, including the deployment of DOCSIS 3.1 capabilities and new data service offerings for residential and business customers. At the same time, we intend to continue balancing the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, associates, customers and other stakeholders. We also plan to continue seeking broadband-related acquisition and strategic investment opportunities in rural markets in addition to pursuing organic growth through market expansion projects.
On January 8, 2019, we acquired Clearwave, a facilities-based service provider that owns and operates a high-capacity fiber network offering dense regional coverage in Southern Illinois. We paid a purchase price of $358.8 million in cash on a debt-free basis. The acquisition provides us with a premier fiber network within our existing footprint, further enables us to supply our customers with enhanced business services solutions and provides a platform to allow us to replicate Clearwave’s strategy in several of our other markets. The all-cash transaction was funded through a combination of cash on hand and proceeds from new indebtedness.
On October 1, 2019, we acquired the data, video and voice business and certain related assets of Fidelity, a provider of connectivity services to residential and business customers throughout Arkansas, Illinois, Louisiana, Missouri, Oklahoma and Texas. We paid a purchase price of $531.4 million in cash on a debt-free basis. Cable One and Fidelity share similar strategies, customer demographics and products. The acquisition provides us opportunities for revenue growth and Adjusted EBITDA margin expansion as well as the potential to realize cost synergies. The all-cash transaction was funded through a combination of cash on hand and proceeds from new indebtedness.
On July 1, 2020, we acquired Valu-Net, an all-fiber internet service provider headquartered in Kansas with approximately 5,000 residential data subscribers at the time of the acquisition. We paid a purchase price of $38.9 million in cash on a debt-free basis. The acquisition provides us the opportunity to further grow our business in and around Emporia, Kansas and realize operational synergies and Adjusted EBITDA growth.
On May 4, 2020, we made a minority equity investment for a less than 10% ownership interest in Nextlink for $27.2 million. On July 10, 2020, we acquired an approximately 40% minority equity interest in Wisper for total consideration of $25.3 million. On October 1, 2020, we contributed the Anniston System to Hargray in exchange for an approximately 15% equity interest in Hargray on a fully diluted basis. The Anniston System had approximately 19,000 residential data subscribers at the time of the transaction.
On November 12, 2020, we acquired a 45% minority equity interest in MBI for $574.9 million in cash. MBI provides high-speed data, video and voice services to residential and business customers in rural markets in 16 states under the Vyve Broadband brand and is majority-owned by funds affiliated with GTCR LLC, a private equity firm based in Chicago (“GTCR”). As of December 31, 2020, MBI’s network passed approximately 644,000 homes and has upgraded systems and a high-capacity plant with more than 15,800 network plant miles, including over 4,100 fiber route miles, capable of delivering Gigabit speeds across its footprint. As part of this investment, we acquired the right, but not the obligation, to purchase all but not less than all of the remaining equity interests in MBI that we do not already own between January 1, 2023 and June 30, 2024 (the “Call Option”). If we do not exercise the Call Option, investors affiliated with GTCR have the right, but not the obligation, to sell (and to cause all members of MBI other than us to sell) to us and, in such case, we are obligated to purchase, all but not less than all of the direct and indirect equity interests in MBI that we do not already own between July 1, 2025 through September 30, 2025 (the “Put Option” and, together with the Call Option, the “Call and Put Options”). The purchase price payable upon the exercise of the Call Option or the Put Option, as applicable, will be calculated under a formula based on a multiple of MBI’s adjusted EBITDA. For the three months ended December 31, 2020, MBI generated revenues of approximately $68 million.
On February 12, 2021, we and our indirect wholly owned subsidiary, Lighthouse Merger Sub LLC, entered into the Merger Agreement pursuant to which we agreed to acquire the equity interests in Hargray that we do not already own. The equity interests to be acquired represent approximately 85% of Hargray on a fully diluted basis. Under the terms of the Merger Agreement, we will pay a purchase price that implies a $2.2 billion total enterprise value for Hargray on a debt-free and cash-free basis, subject to customary post-closing adjustments. We intend to finance the Hargray Acquisition with a combination of existing cash resources and proceeds from new indebtedness (which may include revolving credit facility borrowings) and/or equity capital. We have received $900 million of definitive bridge loan commitments from JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. ("JPMorgan") and Credit Suisse AG to finance a portion of the purchase price. Hargray has also amended its credit agreement to allow us to assume approximately $689 million of Hargray’s outstanding debt at the closing of the Hargray Acquisition. The Hargray Acquisition offers us an opportunity to expand our presence in the Southeastern U.S. and will enable us to capitalize on Hargray’s experience and expertise in fiber expansion. The closing of the Hargray Acquisition is subject to the receipt of certain regulatory approvals, including clearance under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976 and the receipt of consents or approvals from the FCC and certain state public service commissions, and other customary closing conditions. We currently anticipate that the Hargray Acquisition will be completed during the second quarter of 2021.
Refer to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 for discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for 2019 compared to 2018 contained in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
Impact of COVID-19
We are a part of the United States’ critical infrastructure, and our continued operation is essential to connectivity services that are vital during the COVID-19 pandemic. At the same time, the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic has caused us to modify our operations, including restricting our technicians from entering customer homes and businesses; closing or limiting access to local offices and our corporate headquarters for associates, customers and others; limiting non-essential travel for associates; instituting an expanded work-from-home program, including enhancing our technological capabilities to support such efforts; implementing several compensation-related enhancements, including “purpose pay,” which provided a 25% premium to base pay for certain associates who were required to leave their homes to perform their essential job functions and was concluded in early September 2020; and establishing health protocols and providing personal protective equipment to protect our associates, customers and others.
In addition, in an effort to help ease the financial burden and provide continued connectivity for our customers and communities impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, beginning in March 2020, we initially committed to do the following for 60 days under the FCC’s Keep Americans Connected Pledge: waive late charges and suspend disconnection of data and voice services for residential and business customers who are unable to pay their bill due to disruptions caused by the pandemic and open free public Wi-Fi hotspots in local office parking lots and other public areas across our footprint. These commitments were scheduled to conclude at the end of June 2020; however, we continued to waive late charges for residential and small business data and voice customers through the end of July 2020 and we extended access to our free public Wi-Fi hotspots through the end of 2021.
Other actions taken by us beginning in March 2020 to assist customers and the communities we serve during the COVID-19 pandemic included discontinuing charging data overage fees, which was later extended through the end of June 2020; offering a low-cost 15 Megabit per second residential data plan for $10 per month for the first three months of service to help low-income families and those most impacted by the pandemic, which will be available through the end of 2021; donating more than $300,000 for community relief efforts and supporting various other local relief efforts; and partnering with communities, hospitals, medical centers and other essential institutions to address their broadband connection needs and challenges. Further, we have agreed to participate in a program that helps school districts and states provide internet access for students in low-income households. We also revised a majority of our residential data plans to provide 50 to 300 Gigabits of additional data based on the plan as of the beginning of July 2020, and we continued to work with residential and small business data and voice customers who have been harmed financially by the COVID-19 pandemic to keep them connected by offering flexible payment plans. Meanwhile, to meet the increased demand from new residential data customers, we focused on data-only connects for most of the second and third quarters of 2020.
In addition to the effects to our three primary product lines noted above, the COVID-19 pandemic and our associated responses negatively impacted Adjusted EBITDA by $17.6 million during 2020, primarily during the second and third quarters of the year. The negative impacts were driven by a $12.3 million decrease in revenues largely from the now-concluded suspensions of data overage fees, late charges and reconnect fees as well as diminished growth in business services revenues, coupled with $5.3 million of higher labor costs and other operating expenses, net of lower travel costs. These negative Adjusted EBITDA impacts were more than offset by a greater-than-usual gain in residential data customers in 2020 and the associated increase in residential data revenues.
The planned implementation of our new ERP system, which was delayed because of resource challenges and inefficiencies that resulted from the COVID-19 pandemic, remains on schedule for implementation by the summer of 2021.
The negative impacts associated with the actions we took in response to the pandemic largely ceased during the fourth quarter of 2020, due primarily to the resumption of billing late charges, reconnect fees and data overage fees as well as the normalization of labor costs. In addition, we expect there to be a positive impact on 2021 residential data revenues as a result of retaining a significant number of residential data customers acquired during 2020 as well as anticipated continued growth of residential data customers in 2021, albeit at a slower pace. However, we continue to face various uncertainties related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the overall economy and our business, including whether we are able to sustain continued customer growth, our level of bad debt expense and if some of the expense reductions realized during the second half of 2020 will continue or if those expenses will return to more normal levels given the fluid situation regarding pandemic-related restrictions across the country.
We continue to monitor the evolving situation caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, and we may take further actions required by governmental authorities or that we determine are prudent to support the well-being of our associates, customers, suppliers, business partners and others. The degree to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our operations, business, financial results and financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain, continuously evolving and in many cases cannot be predicted. This includes, but is not limited to, the duration and spread of the pandemic, its severity, the efficacy of vaccines (particularly with respect to emerging strains of the virus), the actions to contain the virus or treat its impact, potential legislative or regulatory efforts to impose new requirements on our data services and how quickly and to what extent normal social, economic and operating conditions can resume.
Refer to the section entitled “Risks Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional risks we face due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Results of Operations
PSU and Customer Counts
Selected subscriber data for the periods presented was as follows (in thousands, except percentages):
In recent years, our customer mix has shifted, causing subscribers to move from triple-play packages combining data, video and voice services to single and double-play packages. This is largely because some residential video customers have defected to DBS services and OTT offerings and households continue to discontinue residential voice service. In addition, we have focused on selling data-only packages to new customers rather than cross-selling video to these customers. Meanwhile, the COVID-19 pandemic and our responses to it have accelerated this customer mix shift.
Use of Nonfinancial Metrics and Average Monthly Revenue per Unit (“ARPU”)
We use various nonfinancial metrics to measure, manage and monitor our operating performance on an ongoing basis. Such metrics include homes passed, PSUs and customer relationships. Homes passed represents the number of serviceable and marketable homes and businesses passed by our active plant. A PSU represents a single subscription to a particular service offering. Residential bulk multi-dwelling PSUs are classified as residential and are counted at the individual unit level. Business voice customers who have multiple voice lines are counted as a single PSU. A customer relationship represents a single customer who subscribes to one or more PSUs.
We believe homes passed, PSU and customer relationship counts are useful to investors in evaluating our operating performance. Similar measures with similar titles are common measures used by investors, analysts and peers to compare performance in our industry, although our measures of homes passed, PSUs and customer relationships may not be directly comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
We use ARPU to evaluate and monitor the amount of revenue generated by each type of service subscribed to by customers and the contribution to total revenues as well as to analyze and compare growth patterns. Residential ARPU values represent the applicable residential service revenues (excluding installation and activation fees) divided by the corresponding average of the number of PSUs at the beginning and end of each period, divided by the number of months in the period, except that for any PSUs added or subtracted as a result of an acquisition or divestiture occurring during the period, the associated ARPU values represent the applicable residential service revenues (excluding installation and activation fees) divided by the pro-rated average number of PSUs during such period. Business services ARPU values represent business services revenues divided by the average of the number of business customer relationships at the beginning and end of each period, divided by the number of months in the period, except that for any business customer relationships added or subtracted as a result of an acquisition or divestiture occurring during the period, the associated ARPU values represent business services revenues divided by the pro-rated average number of business customer relationships during such period.
We believe ARPU is useful to investors in evaluating our operating performance. ARPU and similar measures with similar titles are common measures used by investors, analysts and peers to compare performance in our industry, although our measure of ARPU may not be directly comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
2020 Compared to 2019
Revenues
Revenues increased $157.2 million, or 13.5%, including a $105.5 million contribution from the incremental operations. The remaining increase was due primarily to increases in organic residential data and business services revenues of $74.5 million and $13.4 million, respectively, partially offset by decreases in organic residential video, residential voice and other revenues. Certain actions we took in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which have generally concluded and included waiving late charges, suspending collection activities (which reduced reconnect fees) and temporarily discontinuing charging data overage fees, negatively impacted consolidated revenues by $12.3 million during 2020. This negative impact on consolidated revenues, of which $7.4 million was associated with other revenues, was more than offset by a larger-than-usual gain in residential data customers during 2020 and the associated increase in residential data revenues related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Revenues by service offering were as follows for 2020 and 2019, together with the percentages of total revenues that each item represented for the years presented (dollars in thousands):
Residential data service revenues increased $122.3 million, or 22.3%, due primarily to organic subscriber growth, including a larger-than-usual subscriber gain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the incremental operations, a reduction in package discounting and increased customer subscriptions to premium tiers.
Residential video service revenues decreased $2.3 million, or 0.7%, due primarily to an 18.0% year-over-year decrease in residential video subscribers, excluding the incremental operations, partially offset by revenues generated by the incremental operations and a rate adjustment.
Residential voice service revenues increased $4.1 million, or 9.4%, due primarily to the incremental operations, partially offset by an 18.1% year-over-year decrease in residential voice subscribers, excluding the incremental operations.
Business services revenues increased $30.2 million, or 14.7%, due primarily to the incremental operations and organic growth in our business data and voice services to small and medium-sized businesses and enterprise customers.
Other revenues increased $3.0 million, or 8.0%, due to the incremental operations, partially offset by actions we took in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which have generally concluded and included temporarily waiving late charges and suspending collection activities (which reduced reconnect fees).
ARPU for the indicated service offerings were as follows for 2020 and 2019:
Costs and Expenses
Operating expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization) were $418.7 million for 2020 and increased $30.2 million, or 7.8%, compared to 2019. The increase in operating expenses attributable to the incremental operations was $34.8 million. Excluding the expenses associated with the incremental operations, operating expenses were $383.9 million for 2020, a decrease of $4.6 million, or 1.2%, compared to 2019. This decrease was due primarily to a $15.9 million reduction in programming expenses, partially offset by increases of $6.9 million in labor and other compensation-related costs due in part to actions we took in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and $3.9 million in repairs and maintenance costs. Operating expenses as a percentage of revenues were 31.6% for 2020 compared to 33.3% for 2019.
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $255.2 million for 2020 and increased $10.0 million, or 4.1%, compared to 2019. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses attributable to the incremental operations was $20.5 million. Excluding the expenses associated with the incremental operations, selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $10.4 million, or 4.2%, to $234.7 million due primarily to reductions of $5.7 million in acquisition-related costs, $4.6 million in rebranding costs, $3.7 million in health insurance costs and $3.5 million in system conversion costs, partially offset by a $10.4 million increase in labor and other compensation-related costs. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues were 19.3% and 21.0% for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Depreciation and amortization expense was $265.7 million for 2020 and increased $49.0 million, or 22.6%, compared to 2019. The increase included $35.6 million attributable to the incremental operations as well as new assets placed in service since 2019, partially offset by assets that became fully depreciated since 2019. As a percentage of revenues, depreciation and amortization expense was 20.0% for 2020 compared to 18.6% for 2019.
We recognized a net gain on asset sales and disposals of $1.1 million in 2020, which included a $6.6 million non-cash gain on the sale of certain tower properties, compared to a $7.2 million net loss on asset sales and disposals in 2019, which included a $1.6 million gain on the sale of a non-operating property that housed our former headquarters.
We also recognized an $82.6 million non-cash gain on sale of business in 2020 in connection with the Anniston Exchange.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $73.6 million for 2020 and increased $1.9 million, or 2.6%, compared to 2019, driven primarily by additional outstanding debt and interest rate swap settlements, partially offset by lower interest rates.
Other Income (Expense), Net
We recognized other expense, net, of $16.4 million in 2020, consisting of a $17.5 million non-cash loss on fair value adjustment associated with the Call and Put Options to acquire the remaining equity interests in MBI, $6.2 million of debt issuance cost write-offs and $1.2 million of financing-related fees, partially offset by investment and interest income. We recognized other expense, net, of $4.9 million in 2019, consisting of a $6.5 million call premium related to the redemption of our Old Notes (as defined below), $4.2 million of debt issuance cost write-offs and $0.7 million of financing-related fees, partially offset by interest and investment income.
Income Tax Provision
Income tax provision was $76.3 million for 2020 and increased $21.1 million, or 38.2%, compared to 2019 due primarily to an increase in income before income taxes and equity method investment earnings of $145.5 million, partially offset by a $13.0 million increase in income tax benefits attributable to the net operating loss carryback provision of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act. Our effective tax rate was 20.1% and 23.6% for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Net Income
Net income was $304.4 million for 2020 compared to $178.6 million for 2019, an increase of $125.8 million.
Unrealized Loss on Cash Flow Hedges and Other, Net of Tax
Unrealized loss on cash flow hedges and other, net of tax was $72.5 million for 2020 and increased $4.5 million, or 6.6%, compared to 2019 due primarily to higher unrealized losses on our interest rate swaps.
Use of Adjusted EBITDA
We use certain measures that are not defined by GAAP to evaluate various aspects of our business. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure and should be considered in addition to, not as superior to, or as a substitute for, net income reported in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA is reconciled to net income below.
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income plus interest expense, income tax provision, depreciation and amortization, equity-based compensation, severance expense, (gain) loss on deferred compensation, acquisition-related costs, (gain) loss on asset sales and disposals, system conversion costs, rebranding costs, (gain) loss on sale of business, equity method investment earnings, other (income) expense and other unusual expenses, as provided in the following table. As such, it eliminates the significant non-cash depreciation and amortization expense that results from the capital-intensive nature of our business as well as other non-cash or special items and is unaffected by our capital structure or investment activities. This measure is limited in that it does not reflect the periodic costs of certain capitalized tangible and intangible assets used in generating revenues and our cash cost of debt financing. These costs are evaluated through other financial measures.
We use Adjusted EBITDA to assess our performance. In addition, Adjusted EBITDA generally correlates to the measure used in the leverage ratio calculations under the Third Restatement Agreement and the Indenture governing the New Notes (each as defined below) to determine compliance with the covenants contained in the Third Restatement Agreement and the ability to take certain actions under the Indenture. Adjusted EBITDA is also a significant performance measure used by us in our annual incentive compensation program. Adjusted EBITDA does not take into account cash used for mandatory debt service requirements or other non-discretionary expenditures, and thus does not represent residual funds available for discretionary uses.
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors in evaluating our operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA and similar measures with similar titles are common measures used by investors, analysts and peers to compare performance in our industry, although our measure of Adjusted EBITDA may not be directly comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
Financial Condition: Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Our primary funding requirements are for our ongoing operations, capital expenditures, potential acquisitions and strategic investments (including the Hargray Acquisition), payments of quarterly dividends and share repurchases. We believe that existing cash balances, our Senior Credit Facilities and operating cash flows will provide adequate support for these funding requirements over the next 12 months. However, our ability to fund operations, make capital expenditures, make future acquisitions and strategic investments, pay quarterly dividends and make share repurchases depends on future operating performance and cash flows, which, in turn, are subject to prevailing economic conditions and to financial, business and other factors, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, some of which are beyond our control.
As part of our 45% minority equity interest in MBI, we acquired the Call Option to purchase all but not less than all of the remaining equity interests in MBI that we do not already own, which is exercisable at any time between January 1, 2023 and June 30, 2024. If we do not exercise the Call Option, then investors affiliated with GTCR may exercise the Put Option under which we are obligated to purchase all but not less than all of the direct and indirect equity interests in MBI that we do not already own from all members of MBI other than us, which is exercisable at any time between July 1, 2025 through September 30, 2025. The purchase price payable upon the exercise of the Call Option or the Put Option, as applicable, will be calculated under a formula based on a multiple of MBI’s adjusted EBITDA. We have not yet obtained the capital that we believe will be necessary to pay the purchase price if either the Call Option or the Put Option are exercised.
In light of the volatility in the debt markets resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic as well as our desire to enhance our flexibility in pursuing acquisitions and strategic investments, in May 2020, we completed a public offering of 287,500 shares of our common stock (the “Public Offering”) and raised $469.8 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and offering expenses.
The following table shows a summary of our net cash flows for the years indicated (dollars in thousands):
NM = Not meaningful.
The $82.6 million year-over-year increase in net cash provided by operating activities was primarily attributable to an increase in Adjusted EBITDA of $105.2 million, lower cash paid for rebranding costs and acquisition costs and a notes redemption call premium paid in the second quarter of 2019, partially offset by higher cash paid for taxes and an unfavorable change in accounts payable.
The $179.3 million decrease in net cash used in investing activities from the prior year was due primarily to $883.4 million of net cash outflows related to the Clearwave and Fidelity acquisitions in 2019, partially offset by 2020 activities that included $612.1 million of equity investments, a $44.7 million increase in cash paid for capital expenditures, $38.3 million of net cash outflows related to the Valu-Net acquisition and lower proceeds from sales of property, plant and equipment.
The $326.5 million increase in net cash provided by financing activities from the prior year was due primarily to $469.8 million of net proceeds from the Public Offering in the second quarter of 2020 and $90.9 million of lower debt payments, partially offset by a $228.2 million reduction in net debt borrowings compared to 2019.
On July 1, 2015, the Board authorized up to $250.0 million of share repurchases (subject to a total cap of 600,000 shares of our common stock). Purchases under the share repurchase program may be made from time to time on the open market and in privately negotiated transactions. The size and timing of these purchases are based on a number of factors, including share price and business and market conditions. Since the inception of the share repurchase program through the end of 2020, we have repurchased 210,631 shares of our common stock at an aggregate cost of $104.9 million. No shares were repurchased during 2020.
We currently expect to continue to pay comparable quarterly cash dividends on shares of our common stock, subject to approval of the Board. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Board approved a quarterly dividend of $2.50 per share of common stock, which was paid on December 11, 2020. On February 2, 2021, the Board approved a quarterly dividend of $2.50 per share of common stock to be paid on March 5, 2021 to holders of record as of February 16, 2021.
Financing Activity
As of December 31, 2020, we had $1.5 billion of aggregate outstanding term loan borrowings, $650.0 million of aggregate outstanding New Notes, $29.6 million of letter of credit issuances and $470.4 million available for borrowing under our revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Credit Facility”). A summary of our outstanding term loan borrowings as of December 31, 2020 is as follows (dollars in thousands):
(1)
Payable in equal quarterly installments (expressed as a percentage of the original principal amount and subject to customary adjustments in the event of any prepayment). All loans may be prepaid at any time without penalty or premium (subject to customary London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) breakage provisions).
(2)
The term “A-2” loan tranche (the “Term Loan A-2”) interest rate spread can vary between 1.25% and 1.75%, determined on a quarterly basis by reference to a pricing grid based on our Total Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Third Restatement Agreement). All other applicable margins are fixed.
(3)
On May 8, 2019, $250.0 million was drawn. On October 1, 2019, an additional $450.0 million was drawn. On October 30, 2020, the amortization schedule was reset.
(4)
Per annum amortization rates for years one through five following the October 30, 2020 refinancing date are 2.5%, 2.5%, 5.0%, 7.5% and 12.5%, respectively.
(5)
On June 14, 2019, $325.0 million was drawn. On October 30, 2020, an additional $300.0 million was drawn.
Credit Facility
In January 2020, we issued letters of credit totaling $22.0 million under the Revolving Credit Facility on behalf of Wisper to guarantee its performance obligations under an FCC broadband funding program. These letters of credit were amended in January 2021 to increase the total to $33.0 million. The fair value of the letters of credit approximates face value based on the short-term nature of the agreements. We would be liable for up to the total amount outstanding under the letters of credit if Wisper were to fail to satisfy all or some of its performance obligations under the FCC program. Wisper pledged certain assets in favor of us as collateral for issuing the letters of credit, which pledge was terminated in the third quarter of 2020 at the same time that we closed an equity investment in Wisper, and Wisper has guaranteed and indemnified us in connection with such letters of credit. As of December 31, 2020, we have assessed the likelihood of non-performance associated with the guarantee to be remote, and therefore, no liability has been accrued within the consolidated balance sheet.
In March 2020, we borrowed $100.0 million under the Revolving Credit Facility for general corporate purposes, including for small acquisitions and investments. The outstanding balance was repaid in full in May 2020 using a portion of the net proceeds from the Public Offering. Letter of credit issuances under the Revolving Credit Facility totaled $29.6 million at December 31, 2020, including the $22.0 million issued on behalf of Wisper, and were held for the benefit of performance obligations under government grant programs and certain general and liability insurance matters and bore interest at a rate of 1.63% per annum.
In May 2020, we completed the Public Offering of 287,500 shares of our common stock for total net proceeds of $469.8 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and offering expenses. We used a portion of the net proceeds to repay in full our outstanding borrowings of $100.0 million under the Revolving Credit Facility in May 2020 and we used the remainder for general corporate purposes, including for acquisitions and strategic investments.
In October 2020, we and certain of our wholly owned subsidiaries entered into a Third Restatement Agreement with JPMorgan, as administrative agent, and the lenders party thereto to amend and restate the second amended and restated credit agreement among us and our lenders (the “Credit Agreement” and as restated, the “Third Restatement Agreement”). The Third Restatement Agreement amended the Credit Agreement to, among other things, (i) upsize our term “B-3” loan tranche (the “Term Loan B-3”) by $300.0 million (the “TLB-3 Upsize”) and extend the scheduled maturity of each of our term “B-2” loan tranche (the “Term Loan B-2”) and the Term Loan B-3 to October 30, 2027, (ii) increase the aggregate principal amount of commitments under the Revolving Credit Facility by $150.0 million to $500.0 million and extend the scheduled maturity of each of the Revolving Credit Facility and the Term Loan A-2 to October 30, 2025 and (iii) reset the amortization schedule of the Term Loan A-2 so that the Term Loan A-2 will amortize in equal quarterly installments following the date of the amendment and restatement at a rate (expressed as a percentage of the outstanding principal amount on October 30, 2020) of 2.5% per annum for each of the first two years, 5.0% per annum for the third year, 7.5% per annum for the fourth year and 12.5% per annum for the fifth year (in each case subject to customary adjustments in the event of any prepayment), with the balance due upon maturity. Except as described above, the Third Restatement Agreement did not make any material changes to the terms of the Term Loan A-2, the Term Loan B-2, the Term Loan B-3 or the Revolving Credit Facility. We used the net proceeds from the TLB-3 Upsize, together with cash on hand, to repay all $483.8 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding term “B-1” loan tranche.
The Third Restatement Agreement contains customary representations, warranties and affirmative and negative covenants, including limitations on indebtedness, liens, restricted payments, prepayments of certain indebtedness, investments, dispositions of assets, restrictions on subsidiary distributions and negative pledge clauses, fundamental changes, transactions with affiliates and amendments to organizational documents. The Third Restatement Agreement also requires that we maintain specified ratios of total net indebtedness and first lien net indebtedness to consolidated operating cash flow. The Third Restatement Agreement also contains customary events of default, including non-payment of principal, interest, fees or other amounts, material inaccuracy of any representation or warranty, failure to observe or perform any covenant, default in respect of our and our restricted subsidiaries’’ other material debt, bankruptcy or insolvency, the entry against us or any of our restricted subsidiaries of a material judgment, the occurrence of certain ERISA events, impairment of the loan documentation and the occurrence of a change of control.
Senior Notes
In November 2020, we completed a private offering of $650.0 million aggregate principal amount of 4.00% senior notes due 2030 (the “New Notes”). We used a portion of the net proceeds from the offering to fund the investment in MBI and expect to use the remainder for general corporate purposes, which may include additional acquisitions and strategic investments. The terms of the New Notes are governed by an indenture dated as of November 9, 2020 (the “Indenture”), among the Company, the guarantors party thereto and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee.
The New Notes bear interest at a rate of 4.00% per annum payable semi-annually in arrears on May 15 and November 15 of each year, beginning on May 15, 2021. The New Notes are required to be guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by each of our existing and future wholly owned domestic subsidiaries that guarantees our obligations under the Third Restatement Agreement or that guarantees certain capital markets debt of ours or a guarantor in an aggregate principal amount in excess of $250.0 million.
At any time and from time to time prior to November 15, 2025, we may redeem some or all of the New Notes for cash at a redemption price equal to 100% of their principal amount, plus the “make-whole” premium described in the Indenture and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the applicable redemption date. Beginning on November 15, 2025, we may redeem some or all of the New Notes at any time and from time to time at the applicable redemption prices listed in the Indenture, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the applicable redemption date. In addition, at any time and from time to time prior to November 15, 2023, we may redeem up to 40% of the aggregate principal amount of the New Notes with funds in an aggregate amount not exceeding the net cash proceeds from one or more equity offerings at a redemption price equal to 104% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the applicable redemption date.
Upon the occurrence of certain change of control events specified in the Indenture, we are required to offer to repurchase all of the New Notes at 101% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the date of repurchase.
The Indenture contains covenants that, among other things and subject to certain exceptions, limit (i) our ability and the ability of our subsidiaries to incur any liens securing indebtedness for borrowed money, (ii) our ability to consolidate or merge with or into another person or sell or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of our and our subsidiaries’ assets (taken as a whole) and (iii) the ability of the guarantors to consolidate with or merge with or into another person.
The Indenture provides for customary events of default which include (subject in certain cases to customary grace and cure periods), among others, nonpayment of principal or interest, breach of other agreements or covenants in respect of the New Notes, failure to pay certain other indebtedness at final maturity, acceleration of certain indebtedness prior to final maturity, failure to pay certain final judgments, failure of certain guarantees to be enforceable and certain events of bankruptcy or insolvency.
Other Debt-Related Information
We were in compliance with all debt covenants as of December 31, 2020.
In connection with various financing transactions completed during 2020 and 2019, we capitalized $15.1 million and $11.8 million of debt issuance costs and wrote-off $6.2 million and $4.2 million of existing unamortized debt issuance costs. We recorded debt issuance cost amortization of $4.3 million and $4.6 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively, within interest expense in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income.
Unamortized debt issuance costs consisted of the following (in thousands):
During the first quarter of 2019, we entered into two interest rate swap agreements in order to convert our interest payment obligations with respect to an aggregate of $1.2 billion of our variable rate LIBOR indebtedness to a fixed rate. Under the first swap agreement effective in March 2019, with respect to a notional amount of $850.0 million, our monthly payment obligation is determined at a fixed base rate of 2.653%. Under the second swap agreement effective in June 2020, with respect to a notional amount of $350.0 million, our monthly payment obligation is determined at a fixed base rate of 2.739%. Both interest rate swap agreements are scheduled to mature in the first quarter of 2029 but each may be terminated prior to the scheduled maturity at our election or that of the financial institution counterparty under the terms provided in each swap agreement. We recognized losses of $22.5 million and $3.1 million on interest rate swaps for 2020 and 2019, respectively, which were reflected in interest expense within the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income.
Refer to notes 10 and 12 to the consolidated financial statements for further details regarding our financing activity, outstanding debt and interest rate swaps.
Capital Expenditures
We have significant ongoing capital expenditure requirements as well as capital enhancements associated with acquired operations, including rebuilding low-capacity markets; reclaiming bandwidth from analog video services; implementing 32-channel bonding; deploying DOCSIS 3.1; converting back office functions such as billing, accounting and service provisioning; migrating products to legacy Cable One platforms; and expanding our high-capacity fiber network. Capital expenditures are funded primarily by cash on hand and cash flows from operating activities.
Our capital expenditures by category for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows (in thousands):
(1)
Customer premise equipment includes costs incurred at customer locations, including installation costs and customer premise equipment (e.g., modems and set-top boxes).
(2)
Commercial includes costs related to securing business services customers and PSUs, including small and medium-sized businesses and enterprise customers.
(3)
Scalable infrastructure includes costs not related to customer premise equipment to secure growth of new customers and PSUs or provide service enhancements (e.g., headend equipment).
(4)
Line extensions include network costs associated with entering new service areas (e.g., fiber/coaxial cable, amplifiers, electronic equipment, make-ready and design engineering).
(5)
Upgrade/rebuild includes costs to modify or replace existing fiber/coaxial cable networks, including betterments.
(6)
Support capital includes costs associated with the replacement or enhancement of non-network assets due to technological and physical obsolescence (e.g., non-network equipment, land, buildings and vehicles) and capitalized internal labor costs not associated with customer installation activities.
Contractual Obligations and Contingent Commitments
The following table summarizes our outstanding contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(1)
Programming purchase commitments represent contracts that we have with cable television networks and broadcast stations to provide programming services to our subscribers. The amounts reported represent estimates of the future programming costs for these purchase commitments based on estimated subscriber numbers, tier placements as of December 31, 2020 and the per-subscriber rates contained in the contracts. Actual amounts due under such contracts may differ from the amounts above based on the actual subscriber numbers and tier placements at the time. Programming purchases pursuant to non-binding commitments are not reflected in the amounts shown.
(2)
Lease payments include payment obligations related to our outstanding finance and operating lease arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
(3)
Debt payments include principal repayment obligations for our outstanding debt instruments as of December 31, 2020.
(4)
Other purchase obligations include purchase obligations related to capital projects and other legally binding commitments. Other purchase orders made in the ordinary course of business are excluded from the amounts shown but are included within accounts payable and accrued liabilities in our consolidated balance sheet.
We incur the following costs as part of our operations, however, they are not included within the contractual obligations table above for the reasons discussed below:
●
We rent space on utility poles in order to provide our services to certain subscribers. Generally, pole rentals are cancellable on short notice. However, we anticipate that such rentals will recur. Rent expense for pole attachments was $10.5 million and $9.5 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
●
Fees imposed on us by various governmental authorities, including franchise fees, are passed through monthly to our customers and are periodically remitted to authorities. These fees were $25.2 million and $22.7 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. As we act as principal in these arrangements, these fees are reported in video and voice revenues on a gross basis with corresponding expenses included within operating expenses in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income.
●
We have franchise agreements requiring plant construction and the provision of services to customers within the franchise areas. In connection with these obligations under existing franchise agreements, we obtain surety bonds or letters of credit guaranteeing performance to municipalities and public utilities and payment of insurance premiums. Such surety bonds and letters of credit totaled $31.6 million and $18.3 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Payments under these arrangements are required only in the remote event of nonperformance. We do not expect that these contingent commitments will result in any amounts being paid.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements or financing arrangements with special-purpose entities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions. We base our estimates on historical experience and other assumptions believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
An accounting policy is considered to be critical if it is important to our results of operations and financial condition and if it requires management’s most difficult, subjective and complex judgments in its application. For a summary of all our significant accounting policies, see note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Long-lived Assets
A long-lived asset or asset group is tested for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Indicators of impairment may include:
●
a significant decrease in the market value of the asset;
●
a significant change in the extent or manner in which an asset is used or a significant change in the physical condition of the asset;
●
a significant adverse change in legal factors or in the business climate that could affect the value of an asset, including an adverse action or assessment by a regulator;
●
an accumulation of costs significantly in excess of the amount originally expected to acquire or construct an asset;
●
a current period operating or cash flow loss combined with a history of operating or cash flow losses or a projection or forecast that demonstrates continuing losses associated with an asset; and
●
a current expectation that, more likely than not, an asset will be sold or otherwise disposed of significantly before the end of its estimated useful life.
When an indicator of impairment is determined, the first step is to identify the future intent of the asset or asset group: hold for continued use, hold for sale or dispose by a means other than sale. If the asset is held for continued use and the carrying amount exceeds the undiscounted sum of cash flows expected from the use and eventual disposition of the property, the impairment loss is recognized as the difference between the carrying amount and the estimated fair value of the asset or asset group, and the new cost basis is depreciated over the remaining useful life of the asset. If the intent is to hold the asset for sale and certain other criteria are met (e.g., the asset can be disposed of currently, appropriate levels of authority have approved the sale and there is an active program to locate a buyer), the impairment test involves comparing the asset’s carrying value to its estimated fair value less disposal costs. To the extent the carrying value is greater than the asset’s estimated fair value less disposal costs, an impairment charge is recognized for the difference. If the asset is to be disposed by a means other than sale, the depreciation estimates are revised to reflect the use of the asset over its shortened useful life.
Significant judgments in this area involve determining whether an event has occurred, determining the future cash flows for the assets involved and selecting the appropriate discount rate to be applied in determining estimated fair value.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
We have a significant amount of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets that are reviewed at least annually for impairment. These balances were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Goodwill Reporting Unit. Goodwill is calculated as the excess of the consideration transferred over the fair value of identifiable net assets acquired in a business combination and represents the future economic benefits expected to arise from anticipated synergies and intangible assets acquired that do not qualify for separate recognition, including an assembled workforce, noncontractual relationships and other agreements. We assess the recoverability of our goodwill as of October 1st of each year, or more frequently whenever events or substantive changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of a reporting unit may exceed its fair value.
We test goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level, which was historically established at the geographic division level. We reevaluate the determination of our reporting units used to test for impairment periodically or whenever events or substantive changes in circumstances occur. Effective in the second quarter of 2020, as a result of progress made in our staged rebranding initiative and the further alignment of service offerings and product pricing for recent acquisitions with our legacy business, we reevaluated the basis of our goodwill reporting units and identified a single goodwill reporting unit based on the chief operating decision maker’s current performance monitoring and resource allocation process and the similarity of our geographic divisions.
Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets Units of Account. Our intangible assets with an indefinite life are from franchise agreements that we have with state and local governments and certain trade names. Franchise agreements allow us to contract and operate our business within specified geographic areas. We expect our franchise agreements to provide us with substantial benefit for a period that extends beyond the foreseeable horizon, and we have historically obtained renewals and extensions of such agreements without material modifications to the agreements for nominal costs, and these costs are expensed as incurred. We currently expect to utilize certain of our trade names for a period that extends beyond the foreseeable horizon and expect the cost to maintain such asset to be nominal.
We assess the recoverability of our indefinite-lived intangible assets as of October 1st of each year, or more frequently whenever events or substantive changes in circumstances indicate that the assets might be impaired. The unit of accounting for our franchise agreements was historically established at the geographic division level. We reevaluate the unit of accounting used to test for impairment periodically or whenever events or substantive changes in circumstances occur to ensure impairment testing is performed at an appropriate level. Effective in the second quarter of 2020, as a result of progress made in our staged rebranding initiative and the further alignment of service offerings and product pricing for recent acquisitions with our legacy business, we reevaluated the basis of our franchise agreements unit of accounting for use in impairment assessments and identified a single unit of accounting for franchise agreements based on a reevaluation of our current operations and the use of our assets.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Our industry is capital intensive, and a significant portion of our resources is spent on capital activities associated with extending, rebuilding and upgrading our network. The following tables present certain information regarding our net property, plant and equipment and our cash paid for property, plant and equipment for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Property, plant and equipment represents the costs incurred in the design, construction and implementation of plant, infrastructure and capacity improvements and upgrades. Costs associated with the installation and upgrade of services and the acquiring and deploying of customer premise equipment, including materials, internal and external labor costs and related indirect and overhead costs, are also capitalized.
Capitalized labor costs include the direct costs of engineers and technical personnel involved in the design and implementation of plant and infrastructure; the costs of technicians involved in the installation and upgrades of services and customer premise equipment; and the costs of support personnel directly involved in capitalizable activities, such as project managers and supervisors. These costs are capitalized based on internally developed standards by position which are updated annually (or more frequently if required). These standards are developed utilizing a combination of actual costs incurred where applicable, survey information, operational data and management judgment. Overhead costs are capitalized based on standards developed from historical information. Indirect and overhead costs include payroll taxes; insurance and other benefits; and vehicle, tool and supply expense related to installation activities. Costs for repairs and maintenance, disconnecting service or reconnecting service are expensed as incurred.
The estimated useful lives assigned to our property, plant and equipment are reviewed on an annual basis or more frequently if circumstances warrant and such lives are revised to the extent necessary due to changing facts and circumstances. Any changes in estimated useful lives are reflected prospectively.
Business Combination Purchase Price Allocation
The application of the acquisition method requires the allocation of the purchase price amongst the acquisition date fair values of identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. Fair values are determined using the income approach, market approach and/or cost approach depending on the nature of the asset or liability being valued and the reliability of available information. The income approach estimates fair value by discounting associated lifetime expected future cash flows to their present value and relies on significant assumptions regarding future revenues, expenses, working capital levels and discount rates. The market approach estimates fair value by analyzing recent actual market transactions for similar assets or liabilities. The cost approach estimates fair value based on the expected cost to replace or reproduce the asset or liability and relies on assumptions regarding the occurrence and extent of any physical, functional and/or economic obsolescence.
Recently Adopted and Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Recent accounting pronouncements which may be applicable to us are described in note 2 to our consolidated financial statements.