ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Overview
We offer financing programs that enable automobile dealers to sell vehicles to consumers, regardless of their credit history. Our financing programs are offered through a nationwide network of automobile dealers who benefit from sales of vehicles to consumers who otherwise could not obtain financing; from repeat and referral sales generated by these same customers; and from sales to customers responding to advertisements for our financing programs, but who actually end up qualifying for traditional financing.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, consolidated net income was $421.0 million, or $23.47 per diluted share, compared to $656.1 million, or $34.57 per diluted share, for the same period in 2019 and $574.0 million, or $29.39 per diluted share, for the same period in 2018. The decrease in 2020 consolidated net income was primarily due to an increase in our provision for credit losses primarily due to our adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020. The growth in 2019 consolidated net income was primarily due to an increase in the average balance of our Loan portfolio.
COVID-19 continues to be widespread in the United States. In an effort to contain the virus, authorities have implemented various measures, including travel bans, stay-at-home orders and shutdowns of non-essential businesses. These measures have caused a significant decline in economic activity and a dramatic increase in unemployment. While the prevalence, severity and impact of such restrictions have lessened and unemployment rates have improved, uncertainty remains as to when economic conditions will return to normalcy and whether further restrictions may be required. Starting in mid-March, we experienced a substantial reduction in demand for our product and a significant decline in cash flows from our Loan portfolio that lasted through mid-April, after which collections and new loan volumes improved significantly. Starting in late July and continuing through the end of the year, we experienced another substantial reduction in demand for our product. As the virus is not yet fully contained, the ultimate impact of the pandemic on our business is not yet known. The impact will depend on future developments, including, but not limited to, the duration of the pandemic, its severity, the actions to contain the disease or mitigate its impact, additional federal stimulus measures and enhanced unemployment benefits, if any, and the duration, timing and severity of the impact on consumer behavior and economic activity.
Results for the year ended December 31, 2020 include a provision for credit losses of $556.9 million reflecting the adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020 and the impact of changes in the amount and timing of forecasted future net cash flows from our Loan portfolio. Under CECL, we are required to record a provision for credit losses for every new loan at the time that loan is originated equal to the difference between the amount we paid to acquire the loan and the present value of forecasted net cash flows using an effective interest rate prescribed under CECL. The effective interest rate under CECL is calculated assuming 100% of the contractually scheduled payments of each loan is received. Since we do not expect to receive this amount, the effective rate under CECL is higher than the rate we expect to earn. Using the higher effective rate prescribed by CECL to record the loan results in a value for each loan that is less than the amount we paid to acquire the loan. This difference is recorded as an allowance for credit losses along with a corresponding provision for credit losses. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded provision for credit losses of $518.6 million, related to new Consumer Loan assignments. Over the life of the loan, we expect to record an amount equivalent to this provision for credit losses as finance charge revenue, which will be recognized using the same effective interest rate used to record the loan.
The remaining provision for credit losses of $38.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, reflected changes in our estimates of the amount and timing of future net cash flows from our Loan portfolio discussed below. Under CECL, the net present value of the change in our net cash flow forecast is recorded as a provision for credit losses or reversal of provision for credit losses.
Critical Success Factors
Critical success factors include our ability to accurately forecast Consumer Loan performance, access capital on acceptable terms, and maintain or grow Consumer Loan volume at the level and on the terms that we anticipate, with an objective to maximize economic profit. Economic profit is a non-GAAP financial measure we use to evaluate our financial results and determine incentive compensation. Economic profit measures how efficiently we utilize our total capital, both debt and equity, and is a function of the return on capital in excess of the cost of capital and the amount of capital invested in the business.
Consumer Loan Metrics
At the time a Consumer Loan is submitted to us for assignment, we forecast future expected cash flows from the Consumer Loan. Based on the amount and timing of these forecasts and expected expense levels, an advance or one-time purchase payment is made to the related Dealer at a price designed to maximize economic profit.
We use a statistical model to estimate the expected collection rate for each Consumer Loan at the time of assignment. We continue to evaluate the expected collection rate of each Consumer Loan subsequent to assignment. Our evaluation becomes more accurate as the Consumer Loans age, as we use actual performance data in our forecast. By comparing our current expected collection rate for each Consumer Loan with the rate we projected at the time of assignment, we are able to assess the accuracy of our initial forecast. The following table compares our forecast of Consumer Loan collection rates as of December 31, 2020, with the forecasts as of December 31, 2019, as of December 31, 2018, and at the time of assignment, segmented by year of assignment:
(1)Represents the total forecasted collections we expect to collect on the Consumer Loans as a percentage of the repayments that we were contractually owed on the Consumer Loans at the time of assignment. Contractual repayments include both principal and interest. Forecasted collection rates are negatively impacted by canceled Consumer Loans as the contractual amount owed is not removed from the denominator for purposes of computing forecasted collection rates in the table.
Consumer Loans assigned in 2011 through 2013 and 2020 have yielded forecasted collection results materially better than our initial estimates, while Consumer Loans assigned in 2015 and 2016 have yielded forecasted collection results materially worse than our initial estimates. For all other assignment years presented, actual results have been close to our initial estimates.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, forecasted collection rates improved for Consumer Loans assigned in 2020, declined for Consumer Loans assigned in 2015 through 2019 and were generally consistent with expectations at the start of the period for all other assignment years presented.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, forecasted collection rates improved for Consumer Loans assigned in 2019, declined for Consumer Loans assigned in 2017 and were generally consistent with expectations at the start of the period for all other assignment years presented.
The changes in forecasted collection rates impacted forecasted net cash flows (forecasted collections less forecasted Dealer Holdback payments) as follows:
During the first quarter of 2020, we reduced our estimate of future net cash flows from our Loan portfolio by $206.5 million, or 2.3% of the forecasted net cash flows at the start of the period, primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The reduction was comprised of: (1) $44.3 million calculated by our forecasting model, which reflected lower realized collections during the first quarter of 2020 and (2) an additional $162.2 million, which represented our best estimate of the future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on future net cash flows. Under CECL, changes in the amount and timing of forecasted net cash flows are recorded as a provision for credit losses in the current period. While the adjustment to our forecast, which we continued to apply through the end of 2020, represents our best estimate at this time, the COVID-19 pandemic has created conditions that increase the level of uncertainty associated with our estimate of the amount and timing of future net cash flows from our Loan portfolio.
The following table summarizes changes in realized collections in each of the last four quarters as compared to the same period in the previous year:
(1)Represents collections realized on Consumer Loans that are either current or in the early stages of delinquency.
Starting in mid-March, we experienced a reduction in realized collections at the same time government authorities began to implement restrictions that limited economic activity. The reduction in front end collections reflects a lower volume of payments from customers while the reduction in total collections also included lower realized collections from repossessions, which were temporarily suspended as the COVID-19 crisis began to unfold. Starting in mid-April, front end collections improved as federal stimulus and enhanced unemployment benefit payments were distributed. Starting in August and continuing through the end of the year, the improvement in front end collections declined as federal stimulus and enhanced unemployment benefit payments lapsed, and unemployment rates, while improving, remain above pre-pandemic levels. Front end collections and total collections for the month ended January 31, 2021 increased 17.0% and 15.7%, respectively, as compared to the same period in 2020, as additional federal stimulus payments were distributed.
The following table presents information on the average Consumer Loan assignment for each of the last 10 years:
(1)Represents the repayments that we were contractually owed on Consumer Loans at the time of assignment, which include both principal and interest.
(2)Represents advances paid to Dealers on Consumer Loans assigned under our Portfolio Program and one-time payments made to Dealers to purchase Consumer Loans assigned under our Purchase Program. Payments of Dealer Holdback and accelerated Dealer Holdback are not included.
Forecasting collection rates accurately at Loan inception is difficult. With this in mind, we establish advance rates that are intended to allow us to achieve acceptable levels of profitability, even if collection rates are less than we initially forecast.
The following table presents forecasted Consumer Loan collection rates, advance rates, the spread (the forecasted collection rate less the advance rate), and the percentage of the forecasted collections that had been realized as of December 31, 2020. All amounts, unless otherwise noted, are presented as a percentage of the initial balance of the Consumer Loan (principal + interest). The table includes both Dealer Loans and Purchased Loans.
(1)Represents advances paid to Dealers on Consumer Loans assigned under our Portfolio Program and one-time payments made to Dealers to purchase Consumer Loans assigned under our Purchase Program as a percentage of the initial balance of the Consumer Loans. Payments of Dealer Holdback and accelerated Dealer Holdback are not included.
(2)Presented as a percentage of total forecasted collections.
The risk of a material change in our forecasted collection rate declines as the Consumer Loans age. For 2016 and prior Consumer Loan assignments, the risk of a material forecast variance is modest, as we have currently realized in excess of 90% of the expected collections. Conversely, the forecasted collection rates for more recent Consumer Loan assignments are less certain as a significant portion of our forecast has not been realized.
The spread between the forecasted collection rate and the advance rate has ranged from 19.8% to 29.3% over the last 10 years. The spread was at the high end of this range in 2011, when the competitive environment was unusually favorable, and much lower during other years (2015 through 2020) when competition was more intense. The increase in the spread from 2019 to 2020 was primarily the result of the performance of 2020 Consumer Loans, which has exceeded our initial estimates by a greater margin than those assigned to us in 2019, partially offset by a lower initial forecast on 2020 Consumer Loans.
The following table compares our forecast of Consumer Loan collection rates as of December 31, 2020 with the forecasts at the time of assignment, for Dealer Loans and Purchased Loans separately:
(1) The forecasted collection rates presented for Dealer Loans and Purchased Loans reflect the Consumer Loan classification at the time of assignment.
The following table presents forecasted Consumer Loan collection rates, advance rates, and the spread (the forecasted collection rate less the advance rate) as of December 31, 2020 for Dealer Loans and Purchased Loans separately. All amounts are presented as a percentage of the initial balance of the Consumer Loan (principal + interest).
(1)The forecasted collection rates and advance rates presented for Dealer Loans and Purchased Loans reflect the Consumer Loan classification at the time of assignment.
(2)Represents advances paid to Dealers on Consumer Loans assigned under our Portfolio Program and one-time payments made to Dealers to purchase Consumer Loans assigned under our Purchase Program as a percentage of the initial balance of the Consumer Loans. Payments of Dealer Holdback and accelerated Dealer Holdback are not included.
Although the advance rate on Purchased Loans is higher as compared to the advance rate on Dealer Loans, Purchased Loans do not require us to pay Dealer Holdback.
The spread on Dealer Loans increased from 21.0% in 2019 to 21.5% in 2020 primarily as a result of the performance of the 2020 Consumer Loans in our Dealer Loan portfolio, which has exceeded our initial estimates by a greater margin than those assigned to us in 2019, partially offset by a lower initial forecast on 2020 Consumer Loans in our Dealer Loan portfolio. The spread on Purchased Loans increased from 19.5% in 2019 to 19.9% in 2020 primarily as a result of the performance of the 2020 Consumer Loans in our Purchased Loan portfolio, which has exceeded our initial estimates by a greater margin than those assigned to us in 2019, partially offset by a lower initial forecast on 2020 Consumer Loans in our Purchased Loan portfolio.
Access to Capital
Our strategy for accessing capital on acceptable terms needed to maintain and grow the business is to: (1) maintain consistent financial performance; (2) maintain modest financial leverage; and (3) maintain multiple funding sources. Our funded debt to equity ratio was 2.0 to 1 as of December 31, 2020. We currently utilize the following primary forms of debt financing: (1) a revolving secured line of credit; (2) Warehouse facilities; (3) Term ABS financings; and (4) senior notes.
Consumer Loan Volume
The following table summarizes changes in Consumer Loan assignment volume in each of the last three years as compared to the same period in the previous year:
(1)Represents advances paid to Dealers on Consumer Loans assigned under our Portfolio Program and one-time payments made to Dealers to purchase Consumer Loans assigned under our Purchase Program. Payments of Dealer Holdback and accelerated Dealer Holdback are not included.
Consumer Loan assignment volumes depend on a number of factors including (1) the overall demand for our financing programs, (2) the amount of capital available to fund new Loans, and (3) our assessment of the volume that our infrastructure can support. Our pricing strategy is intended to maximize the amount of economic profit we generate, within the confines of capital and infrastructure constraints.
During 2020, unit and dollar volumes decreased 7.5% and 3.5%, respectively, as the number of active Dealers declined 5.3% while average volume per active Dealer decreased 2.5%. Dollar volume declined less than unit volume during 2020 due to an increase in the average advance paid per unit. This increase was the result of an increase in the average size of the Consumer Loans assigned primarily due to increases in the average vehicle selling price and average initial loan term and an increase in Purchased Loans as a percentage of total unit volume.
During 2019, unit volume decreased 0.9% while dollar volume grew 4.9%, as the number of active Dealers grew 7.0% while average volume per active Dealer decreased 7.4%. Dollar volume grew while unit volume declined during 2019 due to an increase in the average advance paid per unit. This increase was the result of an increase in the average size of the Consumer Loans assigned primarily due to an increase in the average vehicle selling price and an increase in Purchased Loans as a percentage of total unit volume.
The following table summarizes changes in Consumer Loan assignment unit volume in each of the last four quarters as compared to the same period in the previous year:
Starting in mid-March, we experienced a significant decline in unit volume that we believe was primarily due to the impact of COVID-19, which resulted in many Dealers temporarily closing or restricting their operations and a deterioration in consumer demand for Dealers that remained open. During the latter part of April and continuing into July, unit volumes improved. We believe the improvement resulted from a combination of Dealers gradually reopening their operations and the distribution of federal stimulus and enhanced unemployment benefit payments. Starting in late July and continuing through the end of the year, we experienced another significant decline in unit volume as federal stimulus and enhanced unemployment benefit payments lapsed, Dealer inventories declined and used vehicle prices increased. Unit volume for the month ended January 31, 2021 declined 6.1% as compared to the same period in 2020, as additional federal stimulus payments were distributed. January 2021 was negatively impacted as it had one less business day as compared to the same period in 2020 (25 business days in January 2021 compared to 26 business days in January 2020).
The following table summarizes the changes in Consumer Loan unit volume and active Dealers:
(1)Active Dealers are Dealers who have received funding for at least one Consumer Loan during the period.
The following table provides additional information on the changes in Consumer Loan unit volume and active Dealers:
(1)New active Dealers are Dealers who enrolled in our program and have received funding for their first Loan from us during the period.
(2)Attrition is measured according to the following formula: decrease in Consumer Loan unit volume from Dealers who have received funding for at least one Loan during the comparable period of the prior year but did not receive funding for any Loans during the current period divided by prior year comparable period Consumer Loan unit volume.
Consumer Loans are assigned to us as either Dealer Loans through our Portfolio Program or Purchased Loans through our Purchase Program. The following table shows the percentage of Consumer Loans assigned to us under each of the programs for each of the last three years:
(1)Represents advances paid to Dealers on Consumer Loans assigned under our Portfolio Program and one-time payments made to Dealers to purchase Consumer Loans assigned under our Purchase Program. Payments of Dealer Holdback and accelerated Dealer Holdback are not included.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the net Dealer Loans receivable balance was 61.4% and 62.8%, respectively, of the total net Loans receivable balance.
Results of Operations
The following is a discussion of our 2020 and 2019 results of operations and income statement data on a consolidated basis, including year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The Financial Accounting Standards Board issued a new accounting standard (known as CECL) that changed how we account for our Loans effective January 1, 2020. The net Loan income (finance charge revenue less provision for credit losses expense) that we recognize over the life of a Loan equals the cash we collect from the underlying Consumer Loan less the cash we pay to the Dealer. While the total amount of net Loan income we will recognize over the life of the Loan is not impacted by CECL, the timing of when we will recognize this income has changed significantly from our prior accounting method. We believe that recognizing net Loan income on a level-yield basis over the life of the Loan based on expected future net cash flows matches the economics of our business. We believe CECL diverges from economic reality by requiring us to recognize a significant provision for credit losses expense at the time of assignment for amounts we never expected to realize and finance charge revenue in subsequent periods that is significantly in excess of our expected yields. Given the significant change in timing of net Loan income recognition, net income for the year ending December 31, 2020 was significantly lower under CECL than what would have been reported under our prior accounting method, with the greatest impact occurring in the quarter of adoption. The financial statement impact of CECL in any period will depend on Consumer Loan assignment volume and the percentage of Consumer Loans assigned to us as Purchased Loans, the size and composition of our Loan portfolio, the Loan portfolio’s credit quality and economic conditions. For additional information, see Note 2 and Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Finance Charges. The increase of $193.0 million, or 14.1%, was primarily the result of increases in the average net Loans and the average yield on our Loan portfolio, as follows:
The following table summarizes the impact each component had on the overall increase in finance charges for the year ended December 31, 2020:
The increase in the average net Loans receivable balance was primarily due to the dollar volume of new Consumer Loan assignments exceeding the principal collected on Loans receivable. The average yield on year ended December 31, 2020 increased as compared to the same period in 2019 primarily due to our adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020, which requires us to recognize finance charges on new Consumer Loan assignments using effective interest rates based on contractual future net cash flows, which are significantly in excess of our expected yields.
Other Income. The decrease of $19.0 million, or 27.7%, was primarily due to a decrease in interest income earned on restricted cash and cash equivalents primarily due to a decline in benchmark interest rates, a decrease in remarketing fees due to a decrease in involuntary repossessions due to COVID-19 and a decrease in ancillary product profit sharing income due to an increase in average vehicle service contract claim rates.
Provision for Credit Losses. The increase of $480.5 million, or 628.9%, was primarily due to the impact of our adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020.
Under CECL, we are required to recognize provision for credit losses on new Consumer Loan assignments for contractual net cash flows that were not expected to be realized at the time of assignment. Under both CECL and our prior accounting method, we also recognize provision for credit losses for forecast changes in the amount and timing of expected future net cash flows subsequent to assignment. The following table summarizes the provision for credit losses for each of these components:
The decrease in provision for credit losses on forecast changes of $38.1 million was due to forecast changes in the amount and timing of expected future net cash flows and the adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020, which changed how these forecast changes are recognized.
For additional information, see Note 2 and Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements contained in Item 1 of this Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Provision for Income Taxes. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the effective income tax rate of 23.4% was generally consistent with the effective income tax rate of 23.3% for the year ended December 31, 2019. For additional information, see Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, we review our accounting policies, assumptions, estimates and judgments to ensure that our financial statements are presented fairly and in accordance with GAAP.
Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference. We believe that the following accounting estimates are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, and involve a high degree of subjective or complex judgment, and the use of different estimates or assumptions could produce materially different financial results.
Finance Charge Revenue & Allowance for Credit Losses
Nature of Estimates Required. We estimate the amount and timing of future collections and Dealer Holdback payments. These estimates impact Loans receivable and allowance for credit losses on our balance sheet and finance charges and provision for credit losses on our income statement.
Assumptions and Approaches Used. On January 1, 2020, we adopted Accounting Standards Update 2016-13, Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which is known as the current expected credit loss model, or CECL. Prior to the adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020, we accounted for our Loans as loans acquired with significant credit deterioration. For additional information regarding the adoption impact of CECL, see Note 2 and Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference.
We recognize finance charges under the interest method such that revenue is recognized on a level-yield basis over the life of the Loan. We calculate finance charges on a monthly basis by applying the effective interest rate of the Loan to the net carrying amount of the Loan (Loan receivable less the related allowance for credit losses). For Consumer Loans assigned subsequent to December 31, 2019, the effective interest rate is based on contractual future net cash flows. For Consumer Loans assigned prior to January 1, 2020, the effective interest rate was determined based on expected future net cash flows.
The outstanding balance of the allowance for credit losses of each Loan represents the amount required to reduce the net carrying amount of Loans (Loans receivable less allowance for credit losses) to the present value of expected future net cash flows discounted at the effective interest rate. Expected future net cash flows for Dealer Loans are comprised of expected future collections on the assigned Consumer Loans, less any expected future Dealer Holdback payments. Expected future net cash flows for Purchased Loans are comprised of expected future collections on the assigned Consumer Loans.
Expected future collections are forecasted for each individual Consumer Loan based on the historical performance of Consumer Loans with similar characteristics, adjusted for recent trends in payment patterns and economic conditions. Our forecast of expected future collections includes estimates for prepayments and post-contractual-term cash flows. Unless the consumer is no longer contractually obligated to pay us, we forecast future collections on each Consumer Loan for a 120 month period after the origination date. Expected future Dealer Holdback payments are forecasted for each individual Dealer based on the expected future collections and current advance balance of each Dealer Loan.
We monitor and evaluate Consumer Loan performance on a monthly basis by comparing our current forecasted collection rates to our initial expectations. We use a statistical model that considers a number of credit quality indicators to estimate the expected collection rate for each Consumer Loan at the time of assignment. The credit quality indicators considered in our model include attributes contained in the consumer’s credit bureau report, data contained in the consumer’s credit application, the structure of the proposed transaction, vehicle information and other factors. We continue to evaluate the expected collection rate of each Consumer Loan subsequent to assignment primarily through the monitoring of consumer payment behavior. Our evaluation becomes more accurate as the Consumer Loans age, as we use actual performance data in our forecast. Since all known, significant credit quality indicators have already been factored into our forecasts and pricing, we are not able to use any specific credit quality indicators to predict or explain variances in actual performance from our initial expectations. Any variances in performance from our initial expectations are the result of Consumer Loans performing differently from historical Consumer Loans with similar characteristics. We periodically adjust our statistical pricing model for new trends that we identify through our evaluation of these forecasted collection rate variances.
COVID-19 continues to be widespread in the United States. In an effort to contain the virus, authorities have implemented various measures, including travel bans, stay-at-home orders and shutdowns of non-essential businesses. These measures have caused a significant decline in economic activity and a dramatic increase in unemployment. While the prevalence, severity and impact of such restrictions have lessened and unemployment rates have improved, uncertainty remains as to when economic conditions will return to normalcy and whether further restrictions may be required. Starting in mid-March, we experienced a significant decline in cash flows from our Loan portfolio that lasted through mid-April, after which collections and new loan volumes improved significantly. Starting in late July and continuing through the end of the year, we experienced another substantial reduction in demand for our product. As the virus is not yet fully contained, the ultimate impact of the pandemic on our business is not yet known. The impact will depend on future developments, including, but not limited to, the duration of the pandemic, its severity, the actions to contain the disease or mitigate its impact, additional federal stimulus measures and enhanced unemployment benefits, if any, and the duration, timing and severity of the impact on consumer behavior and economic activity.
During the first quarter of 2020, we reduced our estimate of future net cash flows from our Loan portfolio by $206.5 million, or 2.3% of the forecasted net cash flows at the start of the period, primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The reduction was comprised of: (1) $44.3 million calculated by our forecasting model, which reflected lower realized collections during the first quarter of 2020 and (2) an additional $162.2 million, which represented our best estimate of the future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on future net cash flows. Under CECL, changes in the amount and timing of forecasted net cash flows are recorded as a provision for credit losses in the current period. While the adjustment to our forecast, which we continued to apply through the end of 2020, represents our best estimate at this time, the COVID-19 pandemic has created conditions that increase the level of uncertainty associated with our estimate of the amount and timing of future net cash flows from our Loan portfolio.
Our provision for credit losses for the year ended December 31, 2020, included:
•$518.6 million provision for credit losses on new Consumer Loan assignments related to our adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020, which reduced consolidated net income by $399.3 million, or $22.26 per diluted share; and
•$38.3 million provision for credit losses on forecast changes related to changes in the amount and timing of expected future net cash flows, which reduced consolidated net income by $29.5 million, or $1.64 per diluted share.
Key Factors. Variances in the amount and timing of future net cash flows from current estimates could materially impact earnings in future periods. A 1% decline in the forecasted future net cash flows on Loans as of December 31, 2020 would have reduced 2020 net income by approximately $51.7 million.
During periods of economic slowdown or recession, delinquencies, defaults, repossessions and losses may increase on our Consumer Loans, and Consumer Loan prepayments may decline. These periods are also typically accompanied by decreased consumer demand for automobiles and declining values of automobiles securing outstanding Consumer Loans, which weakens collateral coverage and increases the amount of a loss in the event of default. Significant increases in the inventory of used automobiles during periods of economic recession may also depress the prices at which repossessed automobiles may be sold or delay the timing of these sales. Additionally, higher gasoline prices, declining stock market values, unstable real estate values, resets of adjustable rate mortgages to higher interest rates, increasing unemployment levels, general availability of consumer credit or other factors that impact consumer confidence or disposable income could increase loss frequency and decrease consumer demand for automobiles as well as weaken collateral values of automobiles. Because our business is focused on consumers who do not qualify for conventional automobile financing, the actual rates of delinquencies, defaults, repossessions and losses on our Consumer Loans could be higher than those experienced in the general automobile finance industry, and could be more dramatically affected by a general economic downturn.
Premiums Earned
Nature of Estimates Required. We estimate the pattern of future claims on vehicle service contracts. These estimates impact accounts payable and accrued liabilities on our balance sheet and premiums earned on our income statement.
Assumptions and Approaches Used. Premiums from the reinsurance of vehicle service contracts are recognized over the life of the policy in proportion to the expected costs of servicing those contracts. Expected costs are determined based on our historical claims experience. In developing our cost expectations, we stratify our historical claims experience into groupings based on contractual term, as this characteristic has led to different patterns of cost incurrence in the past. We will continue to update our analysis of historical costs under the vehicle service contract program as appropriate, including the consideration of other characteristics that may have led to different patterns of cost incurrence, and revise our revenue recognition timing for any changes in the pattern of our expected costs as they are identified.
Key Factors. Variances in the pattern of future claims from our current estimates would impact the timing of premiums recognized in future periods. A 10% change in premiums earned for the year ended December 31, 2020 would have affected 2020 net income by approximately $4.4 million.
Contingencies
Nature of Estimates Required. We estimate the likelihood of adverse judgments against us and any resulting damages, fines or statutory penalties owed. These estimates impact accounts payable and accrued liabilities on our balance sheet and are general and administrative expenses on our income statement.
Assumptions and Approaches Used. With assistance from our legal counsel, we determine if the likelihood of an adverse judgment for various claims, litigation and regulatory investigations is remote, reasonably possible, or probable. To the extent we believe an adverse judgment is probable and the amount of the judgment is estimable, we recognize a liability. For information regarding current actions to which we are a party, see Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Key Factors. Negative variances in the ultimate disposition of claims and litigation outstanding from current estimates could result in additional expense in future periods.
Uncertain Tax Positions
Nature of Estimates Required. We estimate the impact of an uncertain income tax position on the income tax return. These estimates impact income taxes receivable and accounts payable and accrued liabilities on our balance sheet and provision for income taxes on our income statement.
Assumptions and Approaches Used. We follow a two-step approach for recognizing uncertain tax positions. First, we evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates it is more-likely-than-not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. Second, for positions that we determine are more-likely-than-not to be sustained, we recognize the tax benefit as the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being sustained. We establish a reserve for uncertain tax positions liability that is comprised of unrecognized tax benefits and related interest. We adjust this liability in the period in which an uncertain tax position is effectively settled, the statute of limitations expires for the relevant taxing authority to examine the tax position, or more information becomes available.
Key Factors. To the extent we prevail in matters for which a liability has been established or are required to pay amounts in excess of our established liability, our effective income tax rate in future periods could be materially affected.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We need capital to maintain and grow our business. Our primary sources of capital are cash flows from operating activities, collections of Consumer Loans and borrowings under: (1) a revolving secured line of credit; (2) Warehouse facilities; (3) Term ABS financings; and (4) senior notes. There are various restrictive covenants to which we are subject under each financing arrangement and we were in compliance with those covenants as of December 31, 2020. For information regarding these financings and the covenants included in the related documents, see Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference.
On January 17, 2020, we used a portion of the net proceeds from the 2024 senior notes to redeem the remaining $151.8 million outstanding principal amount of the 2021 senior notes.
On February 20, 2020, we completed a $500.0 million Term ABS financing, which was used to repay outstanding indebtedness. The financing has an expected annualized cost of approximately 2.5% (including the initial purchasers’ fees and other costs), and it will revolve for 24 months, after which it will amortize based upon the cash flows on the contributed Loans.
On March 15, 2020, we redeemed the $250.0 million outstanding principal amount of the 2023 senior notes in accordance with the terms of the indenture governing the 2023 notes at a redemption price equal to 101.844% of the principal amount thereof.
On June 25, 2020, June 26, 2020, and June 30, 2020, we amended our agreements for Warehouse Facility II, Warehouse Facility VII, and our revolving secured line of credit facility, respectively. The purpose of each of the three amendments was to modify the basis for calculating our compliance with the minimum net income and fixed charge coverage covenants for periods ending on or prior to December 31, 2020 from our current method of accounting to the basis of accounting that was used prior to January 1, 2020.
On July 23, 2020, we completed a $481.8 million Term ABS financing, which was used to repay outstanding indebtedness. The financing has an expected annualized cost of approximately 2.0% (including the initial purchasers’ fees and other costs), and it will revolve for 24 months, after which it will amortize based upon the cash flows on the contributed Loans.
On October 22, 2020, we completed a $600.0 million Term ABS financing, which was used to repay outstanding indebtedness. The financing has an expected annualized cost of approximately 1.8% (including the initial purchasers’ fees and other costs), and it will revolve for 24 months, after which it will amortize based upon the cash flows on the contributed Loans.
On December 15, 2020, we extended the maturity of our revolving secured line of credit facility with a commercial bank syndicate from June 22, 2022 to June 22, 2023. The amount of the facility will remain at $340.0 million until June 22, 2022, when the amount of the facility will decrease to $305.0 million.
On December 16, 2020, we increased the financing amount on Warehouse Facility V from $100.0 million to $125.0 million and extended the date on which the facility will cease to revolve from August 17, 2021 to December 18, 2023. The maturity of the facility was also extended from August 17, 2023 to December 16, 2025. The interest rate on borrowings under the facility has been increased from LIBOR plus 190 basis points to LIBOR plus 225 basis points.
On January 29, 2021, we completed a $100.0 million Term ABS financing, which was used to repay outstanding indebtedness. The financing will revolve for 24 months, after which it will amortize based upon the cash flows on the contributed Loans.
On January 29, 2021, we extended the date on which our $300.0 million Warehouse Facility IV will cease to revolve from July 26, 2022 to November 17, 2023. The interest rate on borrowings under the facility has been increased from LIBOR plus 200 basis points to LIBOR plus 210 basis points.
On February 3, 2021, we extended the date on which our $400.0 million Warehouse Facility II will cease to revolve from July 12, 2022 to April 30, 2024.
Cash and cash equivalents decreased to $16.0 million as of December 31, 2020 from $187.4 million as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 we had $1,419.1 million and $1,565.0 million, respectively, in unused and available lines of credit. Our total balance sheet indebtedness increased to $4,608.6 million as of December 31, 2020 from $4,538.8 million as of December 31, 2019, primarily due to the growth in new Consumer Loan assignments and stock repurchases.
Contractual Obligations
A summary of the total future contractual obligations requiring repayments as of December 31, 2020 is as follows:
(1)The amounts presented consist solely of principal and do not reflect deferred debt issuance costs of $26.5 million. We are also obligated to make interest payments at the applicable interest rates, as discussed in Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference. Based on the actual principal amounts outstanding under our revolving secured line of credit, our Warehouse facilities, and our senior notes as of December 31, 2020, the forecasted principal amounts outstanding on all other debt and the actual interest rates in effect as of December 31, 2020, interest is expected to be approximately $127.3 million during 2021; $94.4 million during 2022; and $145.6 million during 2023 and thereafter.
(2)We have contractual obligations to pay Dealer Holdback to our Dealers. Payments of Dealer Holdback are contingent upon the receipt of consumer payments and the repayment of advances. The amounts presented represent our forecast as of December 31, 2020.
(3)A lease liability of $1.5 million is recognized within accounts payable and accrued liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets.
(4)Purchase obligations consist primarily of contractual obligations related to our information system and facility needs.
(5)The amounts presented consist solely of reserves for uncertain tax positions. Payments are contingent upon examination and would occur in the periods in which the uncertain tax positions are settled.
Based upon anticipated cash flows, management believes that cash flows from operations and our various financing alternatives will provide sufficient financing for debt maturities and for future operations. Our ability to borrow funds may be impacted by economic and financial market conditions. If the various financing alternatives were to become limited or unavailable to us, our operations and liquidity could be materially and adversely affected.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a material current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Market Risk
We are exposed primarily to market risks associated with movements in interest rates. Our policies and procedures prohibit the use of financial instruments for speculative purposes. A discussion of our accounting policies for derivative instruments is included in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Interest Rate Risk. We rely on various sources of financing, some of which contain floating rates of interest and expose us to risks associated with increases in interest rates. We manage such risk primarily by entering into interest rate cap agreements.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $95.9 million of floating rate debt outstanding on our revolving secured line of credit, without interest rate protection. For every 100-basis-point increase in interest rates on our revolving secured line of credit, annual after-tax earnings would decrease by approximately $0.7 million, assuming we maintain a level amount of floating rate debt.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $75.0 million in floating rate debt outstanding under Warehouse Facility II covered by an interest rate cap with a cap rate of 5.50% on the underlying benchmark rate. Based on the difference between the underlying benchmark rate on Warehouse Facility II as of December 31, 2020 and the interest rate cap rate, the interest rate on Warehouse Facility II could increase by a maximum of 5.35%. This maximum interest rate increase would reduce annual after-tax earnings by approximately $3.1 million, assuming we maintain a level amount of floating rate debt.
As of December 31, 2020, we had interest rate cap agreements outstanding to manage the interest rate risk on Warehouse Facility IV, Warehouse Facility V, Warehouse Facility VII and Warehouse Facility VIII. However, as of December 31, 2020, there was no floating rate debt outstanding under these facilities.
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have a balance outstanding under Warehouse Facility VI, which does not have interest rate protection.
New Accounting Updates
See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference, for information concerning the following new accounting updates and the impact of the implementation of these updates on our financial statements:
•Accounting for Costs of Implementing Cloud Computing.
•Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments.
•Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes.
Forward-Looking Statements
We make forward-looking statements in this report and may make such statements in future filings with the SEC. We may also make forward-looking statements in our press releases or other public or shareholder communications. Our forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties and include information about our expectations and possible or assumed future results of operations. When we use any of the words “may,” “will,” “should,” “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “assume,” “forecast,” “estimate,” “intend,” “plan,” “target” or similar expressions, we are making forward-looking statements.
We claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 for all of our forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements represent our outlook only as of the date of this report. While we believe that our forward-looking statements are reasonable, actual results could differ materially since the statements are based on our current expectations, which are subject to risks and uncertainties. Factors that might cause such a difference include, but are not limited to, the factors set forth in Item 1A of this Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference, and the risks and uncertainties discussed elsewhere in this Form 10-K and in our other reports filed or furnished from time to time with the SEC.