ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A"), which contains forward-looking statements, should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes in Part IV, Item 15 of this report, the “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this report and the cautionary statements included throughout this report. The inclusion of supplementary analytical and related information herein may require us to make estimates and assumptions to enable us to fairly present, in all material respects, our analysis of trends and expectations with respect to our results of operations and financial position.
The following MD&A includes a discussion comparing our results in fiscal 2020 to fiscal 2019. For a discussion comparing our results from fiscal 2019 to fiscal 2018, refer to “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on March 11, 2020.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The Company is subject to risks and uncertainties as a result of the outbreak of, and local, state and federal governmental responses to, the COVID-19 pandemic which was declared a National Public Health Emergency on March 13, 2020. We experienced significant disruptions to our business due to suggested and mandated social distancing and shelter-in-place orders, which resulted in the temporary closure of a number of restaurants across our portfolio while the remaining locations shifted to an off-premise only operating model on an interim basis.
In our initial response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company and its Board of Directors implemented the following measures to preserve liquidity and enhance financial flexibility:
● Eliminated non-essential capital expenditures and expenses;
● Suspended new unit development;
● Reduced board, executive and corporate support staff compensation;
● Furloughed approximately 41,000 hourly staff members;
● Engaged in discussions with our landlords regarding ongoing rent obligations, including the potential deferral, abatement and/or restructuring of rent otherwise payable during the period of the COVID-19 pandemic related closure;
● Increased borrowings under our revolving credit facility;
● Raised additional equity capital; and
● Suspended the dividend on our common stock and share repurchases.
In late April 2020, certain jurisdictions began allowing the reopening of restaurant dining rooms, and we began to reopen dining rooms across our concepts the second week of May. During the third quarter of fiscal 2020, we called back to work a majority of our staff members who were previously furloughed, and restored Board, executive and corporate support staff compensation. In addition, we resumed new unit development on a limited basis and will continue to evaluate the pace and quantity of new unit development.
Restrictions on the type of operating model and occupancy capacity continue to change, and these restrictions increased in many of our markets during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 with the surge in COVID-19 cases. The following table presents the number of restaurants and their operating model as of February 17, 2021:
(1) On average, The Cheesecake Factory restaurants with reopened dining rooms were operating at 50% capacity.
We cannot predict how long the COVID-19 pandemic will last or whether it will reoccur, what additional restrictions may be enacted, to what extent we can maintain off-premise sales volumes or if individuals will be comfortable returning to our dining rooms during or following social distancing protocols and what long-lasting effects the COVID-19 pandemic may have on the restaurant industry as a whole. The extent of the reopening process, along with the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on consumer spending behavior, will determine the significance of the impact to our operating results and financial position.
These considerable developments triggered the need to perform interim impairment assessments of our long-lived assets, goodwill and other intangible assets and a revaluation of contingent consideration associated with the acquisition of FRC in addition to our annual impairment testing. Future changes in estimates could further impact the carrying value of these items. (See Notes 7 and 8 for further discussion of impairment of long-lived and intangible assets, respectively. See Note 3 for further discussion of the revaluation of contingent consideration.)
See Item 1A - Risk Factors - Risks Related to the COVID-19 Pandemic.
General
The Cheesecake Factory Incorporated is a leader in experiential dining. We are culinary forward and relentlessly focused on hospitality. We currently own and operate 294 restaurants throughout the United States and Canada under brands including The Cheesecake Factory®, North Italia® and a collection within our Fox Restaurant Concepts business. Internationally, 27 The Cheesecake Factory® restaurants operate under licensing agreements. Our bakery division operates two facilities that produce quality cheesecakes and other baked products for our restaurants, international licensees and third-party bakery customers.
Overview
Our strategy is driven by our commitment to customer satisfaction and is focused primarily on menu innovation, service and operational execution to continue to differentiate ourselves from other restaurant concepts, as well as to drive competitively strong performance that is sustainable. Financially, we are focused on prudently managing expenses at our restaurants, bakery facilities and corporate support center, and leveraging our size to make the best use of our purchasing power.
Investing in new Company-owned restaurant development is our top long-term capital allocation priority, with a focus on opening our concepts in premier locations within both new and existing markets. For The Cheesecake Factory concept, we target an average cash-on-cash return on investment of approximately 20% to 25% at the unit level. We target an average cash-on-cash return on investment of about 35% for the North Italia concept and 25% to 30% for the FRC concepts. Returns are affected by the cost to build restaurants, the level of revenues that each restaurant can deliver and our ability to maximize the profitability of restaurants. Investing in new restaurant development that meets our return on investment criteria is expected to support achieving mid-teens Company-level return on invested capital. In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, we will continue to evaluate the pace and quantity of new unit development.
Our overall revenue growth is primarily driven by revenues from new restaurant openings and increases in comparable restaurant sales. Changes in comparable restaurant sales come from variations in customer traffic, as well as in average check.
For The Cheesecake Factory concept, our strategy is to increase comparable restaurant sales by growing average check and stabilizing customer traffic through (1) continuing to offer innovative, high quality menu items that offer customers a wide range of options in terms of flavor, price and value (2) focusing on service and hospitality with the goal of delivering an exceptional customer experience and (3) continuing to provide our customers with convenient options for off-premise dining, as we believe there is opportunity for a longer-term increase in our off-premise mix as we emerge from the COVID-19 pandemic. We are continuing our efforts on a number of initiatives, including a greater focus on increasing customer throughput in our restaurants, leveraging the success of our gift card program, working with a third party to provide delivery services for our restaurants, increasing customer awareness of our online ordering capabilities, augmenting our marketing programs, enhancing our training programs and leveraging our customer satisfaction measurement platform.
Average check is driven by menu price increases and/or changes in menu mix. We generally update The Cheesecake Factory restaurant menus twice a year, and our philosophy is to use price increases to help offset key operating cost increases in a manner that balances protecting both our margins and customer traffic levels. We have targeted menu price increases of approximately 2% to 3% annually, utilizing a market-based strategy to help mitigate cost pressure in higher-wage geographies. Currently, our menu pricing is at the higher end of this range. We will continue to evaluate future pricing decisions in light of the COVID-19 pandemic operating environment.
On October 2, 2019, we completed the acquisition of North Italia and FRC, including Flower Child (the "Acquisition"), which we expect will further accelerate and diversify our revenue following the COVID-19 pandemic. The results of operations, financial position and cash flows of the acquired businesses are included in our consolidated financial statements as of the closing date of the Acquisition. (See Note 2 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part IV, Item 15 of this report for further discussion of the Acquisition.)
Margins are subject to fluctuations in commodity costs, labor, restaurant-level occupancy expenses, general and administrative ("G&A") expenses and preopening expenses. Our objective is to recapture our pre-COVID-19 pandemic margins, and longer-term to drive margin expansion, by maintaining flat restaurant-level margins at The Cheesecake Factory concept, leveraging our bakery operations, international and consumer packaged goods royalty revenue streams and G&A expense over time, and optimizing our restaurant portfolio.
Our future cash flow performance will depend on the evolving COVID-19 pandemic regulatory landscape, as well as economic conditions and consumer behavior. We would expect cash generation to increase as the operating environment for the full-service segment of the restaurant industry normalizes from the COVID-19 pandemic impact. Longer-term, we plan to employ a balanced capital allocation strategy, comprised of: investing in new restaurants that are expected to meet our targeted returns, repaying borrowings under our $400 million unsecured revolving credit facility (the “Amended Facility”) and reinstating our dividend and share repurchase program, the latter of which offsets dilution from our equity compensation program and supports our earnings per share growth. At present, our dividends on our common stock and share repurchases are suspended. Our ability to declare dividends and repurchase shares in the future will be subject to financial covenants under the Amended Facility, among other factors.
Longer-term, we believe our domestic revenue growth (comprised of our targeted annual unit growth of 7%, in aggregate across concepts, and comparable sales growth), combined with international expansion, planned debt repayment and an anticipated capital return program will support our long-term financial objective of 13% to 14% total return to shareholders, on average. We define our total return as earnings per share growth plus our dividend yield. (See Item 1A - Risk Factors - Risks Related to Owning Our Stock - “Our stock price could be adversely affected if our performance falls short of our financial guidance and/or market expectations.”)
Results of Operations
The following table presents, for the periods indicated, information from our consolidated statements of (loss)/income expressed as percentages of revenues.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019
Revenues
Revenues decreased 20.1% to $1,983.2 million for fiscal 2020 compared to $2,482.7 million for fiscal 2019, primarily due to a decline in comparable restaurant sales, reflecting the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by additional revenue related to the acquired restaurants and new restaurant openings.
The Cheesecake Factory comparable sales declined by 28.2%, or $601.9 million, from fiscal 2019, driven by a decline in customer traffic of 41.5%, partially offset by average check growth of 13.3% (based on an increase of 3.1% in menu pricing and a 10.2% positive change in mix). We implemented effective menu price increases of approximately 1.5% in both the first and third quarters of fiscal 2020. Sales through the off-premise channel comprised approximately 43% of our restaurant sales during fiscal 2020 as compared to 16% in fiscal 2019 as most of our restaurants shifted to an off-premise-only model at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic and consumer behavior shifted toward off-premise dining throughout the pandemic. We account for each off-premise order as one customer for traffic measurement purposes. Therefore, average check is higher as most off-premise orders are for more than one customer. In turn, the high mix of sales in the off-premise channel was the primary driver of the positive change in mix and also contributed to the decline in traffic, along with the broader impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Cheesecake Factory average sales per restaurant operating week decreased 28.2% to $148,939 in fiscal 2020 from $207,310 in fiscal 2019. Total operating weeks at The Cheesecake Factory restaurants increased 1.2% to 10,642 in fiscal 2020 compared to 10,520 in the prior year. North Italia comparable sales declined approximately 28% during fiscal 2020. North Italia average sales per restaurant operating week for fiscal 2020 was $89,515 based on 1,146 operating weeks.
Restaurants become eligible to enter the comparable sales base in their 19th month of operation. At December 29, 2020, there were six The Cheesecake Factory restaurants and four North Italia restaurants not yet in the comparable sales base. International licensed locations and restaurants that are no longer in operation, including those which we have relocated, are excluded from comparable sales calculations.
Revenue contribution from the acquired concepts in fiscal 2020 totaled $259.9 million compared to $92.0 million in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2019, representing the period subsequent to the October 2, 2019 closing date of the Acquisition. External bakery sales were $66.6 million for fiscal 2020 compared to $58.4 million for fiscal 2019.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales consists of food, beverage, retail and bakery production supply costs incurred in conjunction with our restaurant and bakery revenues, and excludes depreciation, which is captured separately in depreciation and amortization expenses. As a percentage of revenues, cost of sales was 23.1% for fiscal 2020 compared to 22.6% for fiscal 2019, reflecting a shift in sales mix between restaurant and third-party bakery revenues, as well as a full year of revenues from the acquired concepts.
The Cheesecake Factory restaurant menus are among the most diversified in the foodservice industry and, accordingly, are not overly dependent on a few select commodities. Changes in costs for one commodity sometimes can be offset by cost changes in other commodity categories. The principal commodity categories for our restaurants include general grocery items, dairy, produce, seafood, poultry, meat and bread. (See the discussion of our contracting activities in Part II,