Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
This discussion and analysis generally covers our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, including year-over-year comparisons versus the year ended December 31, 2019. Our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on March 11, 2020, and available free of charge on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and at our investor relations website www.calithera.com, includes a discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2018 in Item 7 of Part II, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Exchange Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the Exchange Act. Forward-looking statements are identified by words such as “believe,” “will,” “may,” “estimate,” “continue,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “should,” “plan,” “expect,” “predict,” “could,” “potentially” or the negative of these terms or similar expressions. You should read these statements carefully because they discuss future expectations, contain projections of future results of operations or financial condition, or state other “forward-looking” information. These statements relate to our future plans, objectives, expectations, intentions and financial performance and the assumptions that underlie these statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such a difference include, but are not limited to, those discussed in this report in Part I, Item 1A - “Risk Factors,” and elsewhere in this report. Forward-looking statements are based on our management’s beliefs and assumptions and on information currently available to our management. These statements, like all statements in this report, speak only as of their date, and we undertake no obligation to update or revise these statements in light of future developments. We caution investors that our business and financial performance are subject to substantial risks and uncertainties. In addition, statements that “we believe” and similar statements reflect our beliefs and opinions on the relevant subject. These statements are based on information available to us as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. While we believe that information provides a reasonable basis for these statements, that information may be limited or incomplete. Our statements should not be read to indicate that we have conducted an exhaustive inquiry into or review of, all relevant information. These statements are inherently uncertain and investors are cautioned not to unduly rely on these statements.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage bio-pharmaceutical company focused on fighting cancer and other life-threatening diseases by discovering and developing novel small molecule drugs that target cellular metabolism. Tumor metabolism and immuno-oncology have emerged as promising new fields for cancer drug discovery, and recent clinical successes with therapeutic agents in each field have created fundamentally new potential therapies for cancer patients. With our unique approach, we have established a broad pipeline of small molecule drug candidates that target enzymes controlling metabolically critical pathways in tumor cells and immune cells. We have multiple internally discovered clinical stage compounds that are all enzyme inhibitors. While we are primarily focused on oncology, we are opportunistically developing therapeutics outside of oncology where we can leverage our existing expertise in immune cell metabolism to treat diseases with unmet need.
Through genetic mutations that alter fundamental metabolic pathways, cancer cells can acquire the ability to grow in an uncontrolled manner, but they also acquire nutrient dependencies that can differentiate them from normal cells. Targeting these nutrient dependencies by inhibiting specific metabolic pathways in cancer cells is a novel therapeutic approach to blocking the uncontrolled growth of tumors. Our lead product candidate, telaglenastat or CB-839, takes advantage of the critical dependency many cancers have on the nutrient glutamine for growth and survival. We believe telaglenastat has the potential to be an important new therapeutic agent with a novel mechanism of action for the treatment of a broad range of cancers, and is the first selective allosteric glutaminase inhibitor to enter clinical trials. We retain all commercial rights to telaglenastat and have been granted a U.S. patent, which includes composition of matter coverage for telaglenastat through 2037 in the U.S. and 2032 outside of the U.S.
We are currently developing telaglenastat in combination with standard therapies in a select set of solid tumors. Our lead development pathway for telaglenastat is for the treatment of KEAP1 or NRF2 mutated non-small cell lung cancer, or NSCLC. According to third-party market research, U.S. incidence of NSCLC is 192,208 with 20% of these patients harboring KEAP1 or NRF2 activating mutations. Recently presented clinical data evaluating front-line standard-of-care chemoimmunotherapy treatment for NSCLC patients with mutations in KEAP1/NRF2 demonstrated inferior clinical outcomes compared to patient without these mutations. Thus, NSCLC patients with KEAP1 or NRF2 mutations are a population with a large unmet clinical need. Pre-clinical studies have shown that activation of the KEAP1/NRF2 pathway in lung tumors makes them dependent on glutaminase activity for growth and survival, and treatment with teleglenastat selectively blocks their growth. In September 2020, we treated the first patient in the KEAPSAKE study, which is a randomized Phase 2 clinical trial of the glutaminase inhibitor telaglenastat in combination with standard-of-care therapy. The KEAPSAKE study will evaluate the safety and anti-tumor activity of telaglenastat plus standard-of-care
chemoimmunotherapy as front-line treatment for patients with stage IV non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer whose tumors have a KEAP1 or NRF2 mutation determined by next-generation sequencing. The double-blind telaglenastat trial will enroll approximately 120 patients with stage IV non-squamous NSCLC with the KEAP1 or NRF2 mutation. Patients will be randomized to receive telaglenastat or placebo, in combination with pembrolizumab, carboplatin and pemetrexed. The study will evaluate the safety and investigator assessed progression-free survival, or PFS, of telaglenastat plus this standard of care chemoimmunotherapy regimen. We anticipate sharing interim data from the KEAPSAKE trial in the second half of 2021.
We were previously developing telaglenastat for the treatment of renal cell carcinoma, or RCC. In January 2021, we announced the results of the CANTATA trial, a 444 patient global, randomized, double-blind trial designed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of telaglenastat in combination with cabozantinib versus placebo with cabozantinib in patients with advanced clear cell RCC who have been treated with one or two prior lines of systemic therapy. The trial did not meet the primary endpoint of progression-free survival, or PFS. Based on this result, we evaluated our operational and workforce needs to extend our cash runway and ensure long-term sustainability. We reduced our workforce by approximately 35% to preserve cash resources. We currently have no plans to further develop telaglenastat in RCC.
As part of our Pfizer clinical collaboration, we initiated a trial with the CDK 4/6 inhibitor IBRANCE®, in combination with telaglenastat in July 2019. The Phase 1/2 trial (NCT03965845) of the combination of telaglenastat plus Ibrance is ongoing in patients with KRAS mutated colorectal cancer and KRAS mutated non-small cell lung cancer. Encouraging efficacy and safety of the combination was observed in PDAC patients treated in the dose escalation phase of the trial. In November 2020, we announced the expansion of the study to include an additional cohort of patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma whose tumors harbor mutations in both KRAS and CDKN2A. Approximately 50 percent of PDAC patients harbor mutations in both KRAS and CDKN2A.
Our product candidate, CB-280, is an oral inhibitor of arginase, an enzyme that depletes the amino acid arginine. It is being developed for the treatment of cystic fibrosis, or CF. Arginase depletes arginine, which is critical for the generation of NO, or nitric oxide. NO has critical anti-microbial effects in lung and also mediates bronchodilation. CB-280 is a novel oral arginase inhibitor which is solely owned by Calithera. We completed a Phase 1 Single Ascending Dose trial to evaluate the safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetic profile of oral CB-280 in healthy volunteers. In July 2020, we initiated a Phase 1b clinical trial in adult patients with cystic fibrosis and chronic airway infection. The randomized, double blind, placebo-controlled, dose escalation trial will evaluate multiple ascending doses of CB-280, dosed orally twice daily for 14 days, compared to placebo in up to 32 adult CF patients to determine a safe dose range for CB-280. Enrollment in this study is ongoing and we expect to share interim data in the second half of 2021.
An additional arginase inhibitor, INCB001158, was discovered by Calithera and is being developed by Incyte Corporation, or Incyte, for oncology and hematology indications, and is currently being evaluated in Phase 1/2 trials as a monotherapy and in combination with other anti-cancer agents.
We are a fully integrated biopharmaceutical company with expertise in biology and chemistry, and our ongoing research efforts are focused on discovering additional product candidates for the treatment of cancer and other life-threatening diseases. We have discovered the clinical candidate CB-708, a potent, selective, orally administered small molecule that inhibits CD73, an enzyme that converts adenosine monophosphate to generate the immunosuppressive agent adenosine.
We have also identified CB-668, an investigational first-in-class, potent, orally administered IL4I1 inhibitor as a novel immuno-oncology approach to cancer. IL4I1 is expressed by tumor cells and antigen presenting cells and metabolizes phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan to produce hydrogen peroxide, an inhibitor of T-cell function, and kynurenic acid an immunosuppressive metabolite. In syngeneic mouse models CB-668 exhibited immune mediated, single agent activity and augmented activity in combination with checkpoint inhibitors. IL4I1 expression has been correlated with poor clinical outcomes and expression is elevated in multiple tumor types including ovarian and B-cell tumors.
Critical Accounting Polices and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to
understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Effective January 1, 2018, we adopted Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), or ASC 606, using the modified retrospective approach. Under this approach, we recorded a cumulative adjustment to decrease accumulated deficit and deferred revenue by $8.8 million on January 1, 2018. Under ASC 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration that the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of ASC 606, the entity performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations, and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
We have a collaboration and licensing agreement that is within the scope of ASC 606, under which we license certain rights to one of our product candidates to Incyte Corporation. The terms of this arrangement include payment to us of a non-refundable, upfront license fee, and potential development, regulatory and sales milestones, and sales royalties. Each of these payments results in collaboration revenues, except for revenues from royalties on net sales of licensed products, which would be classified as royalty revenues.
In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under our agreement, we perform the following steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation. As part of the accounting for these arrangements, we must develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract.
Licenses of Intellectual Property: If the license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenues from non-refundable, upfront fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the licensee and the licensee is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promised goods or services, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, upfront fees. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Milestone Payments: At the inception of each arrangement that includes development, regulatory or commercial milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price. If it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our control or the licensees’ control, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received or the underlying activity has been completed. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis, for which we recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of such development milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect collaboration revenue in the period of adjustment.
Royalties: For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). To date, we have not recognized any royalty revenue resulting from any of our licensing arrangements.
Contract Balances
Upfront payments and fees are recorded as deferred revenue upon receipt or when due, and may require deferral of revenue recognition to a future period until we perform our obligations under these arrangements. Amounts payable to us are recorded as accounts receivable when our right to consideration is unconditional.
We receive payments from Incyte based on billing schedules established in the contract. Upfront payments and fees are recorded as deferred revenue upon receipt or when due, and may require deferral of revenue recognition to a future period until we perform our obligations under these arrangements. Amounts are recorded as accounts receivable when our right to consideration is unconditional. We do not assess whether a contract has a significant financing component if the expectation at contract inception is such that the period between payment by the licensees and the transfer of the promised goods or services to the licensees will be one year or less.
Accrued Research and Development Costs
We record accrued liabilities for estimated costs of our research and development activities conducted by third-party service providers, which include the conduct of preclinical and clinical studies, and contract manufacturing activities. We record the estimated costs of research and development activities based upon the estimated amount of services provided but not yet invoiced, and include these costs in accrued liabilities in the balance sheets and within research and development expense in the statements of operations. These costs are a significant component of our research and development expenses. We accrue for these costs based on factors such as estimates of the work completed and in accordance with agreements established with our third-party service providers under the service agreements.
We have not experienced any material differences between accrued costs and actual costs incurred. However, the status and timing of actual services performed, number of patients enrolled, and the rate of patient enrollments may vary from our estimates, resulting in adjustments to expense in future periods. Changes in these estimates that result in material changes to our accruals could materially affect our results of operations.
Financial Overview
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue represents the portion of deferred revenue recognized from a $45.0 million upfront fee and $12.0 million milestone achieved in the first quarter of 2017, from the Incyte Collaboration Agreement. The combined transaction price of $57.0 million was recognized over the estimated period of performance under the Incyte Collaboration Agreement based on the measure of progress toward completion for the combined performance obligation, which was satisfied as of June 2018. Effective January 1, 2018, we adopted ASC 606 using the modified retrospective approach. Refer to Item 8, Notes to consolidated financial statements, Notes 2 and 11, for further information on the adoption of ASC 606 and the Incyte Collaboration Agreement.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses represent costs incurred to conduct research, such as the discovery and development of our product candidates. We recognize all research and development costs as they are incurred. Costs associated with co-development activities performed under our collaboration agreements with Incyte, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Pfizer and activity performed under our award with the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation are included in research and development expenses, with any reimbursement of costs reflected as a reduction of such expenses.
Research and development expenses consist primarily of the following:
•
employee-related expenses, which include salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation;
•
expenses incurred under agreements with clinical trial sites that conduct research and development activities on our behalf;
•
laboratory and vendor expenses related to the execution of preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•
contract manufacturing expenses, primarily for the production of clinical supplies;
•
facilities and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, depreciation expense and other supplies; and
•
license fees and milestone payments related to our licensing agreements.
The largest component of our total operating expenses has historically been our investment in research and development activities including the clinical development of our product candidates. We allocate to research and development expenses the salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation expense, and indirect costs of our clinical and preclinical programs on a program-specific basis, and we include these costs in the program-specific expenses.
The following table shows our research and development expenses for 2020 and 2019:
We expect our research and development expenses will decrease over the next year primarily due to the completion of our CANTATA trial and our workforce reduction announced in January 2021.
The process of conducting clinical trials necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming. We may never succeed in achieving marketing approval for our product candidates. The probability of success of our product candidates may be affected by numerous factors, including clinical data, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. As a result, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel costs, allocated expenses and other expenses for outside professional services, including legal, audit and accounting services, insurance, investor relations and other expenses associated with being a public company. Personnel costs consist of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation. Allocated expenses consist of facilities and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, depreciation expense and other supplies. We expect our general and administrative expenses will decrease over the next year.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Research and Development
Research and development expenses decreased $5.3 million, or 7%, from $76.3 million for 2019 to $71.0 million for 2020. The decrease of $5.3 million was due to a $6.2 million decrease in the INCB001158 program and a $3.8 million decrease in our early stage research programs, partially offset by an increase of $2.7 million in the telaglenastat program and an increase of $2.0 million in the CB-280 program.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $3.8 million, or 23%, from $16.6 million for 2019 to $20.4 million for 2020. The increase of $3.8 million was primarily related to a $2.5 million increase in personnel-related and facility costs, primarily from increases in headcount, salaries, stock-based compensation expense and the expansion of our office space, and a $1.3 million increase in professional services costs, mainly for activities related to commercial preparation and the potential launch of telaglenastat and legal services related to our complaint filed against Incyte.
Interest and Other Income, net
Interest and other income, net decreased $1.8 million, from $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of $1.8 million was primarily due to lower interest income generated from lower returns on our investments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments totaling $115.2 million. Our operations have been financed by net proceeds from the sale of shares of our capital stock and payments from the Incyte Collaboration Agreement.
In August 2020, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the Securities and Exchange Commission which permits the offering, issuance and sale by us of up to a maximum aggregate offering price of $250 million of our common stock. As of December 31, 2020, $250 million of our common stock remained available for sale, of which $75 million may be issued and sold pursuant to an at-the-market offering program for sales of our common stock under a sales agreement with Jefferies LLC, subject to certain conditions as specified in the sales agreement.
In April 2020, we sold 5,750,000 shares of our common stock pursuant to an underwriting agreement with Citigroup Global Markets, Inc. The public offering price was $6.25 per share for gross proceeds of $35.9 million, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $33.5 million after deducting underwriting fees and offering expenses.
Our primary uses of cash are to fund operating expenses, primarily research and development expenditures. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses.
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments as of December 31, 2020 will be sufficient for us to meet our current operating plan for at least the twelve-month period following the filing of our December 31, 2020 Form 10-K. However, our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement that involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary materially based on a number of factors including the extent and magnitude of the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic, in particular the challenges associated with opening new clinical studies. In order to complete the process of obtaining regulatory approval for our product candidates and to build the sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure that we believe will be necessary to commercialize our product candidates, if approved, we will require substantial additional funding.
We have based our projections of operating capital requirements on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect and we may use all of our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our operating capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•
the timing and costs of our planned clinical trials for our product candidates;
•
the timing and costs of our planned preclinical studies of our product candidates;
•
our success in establishing and scaling commercial manufacturing capabilities;
•
the number and characteristics of product candidates that we pursue;
•
the outcome, timing and costs of seeking regulatory approvals;
•
subject to receipt of regulatory approval, revenue received from commercial sales of our product candidates;
•
the terms and timing of any future collaborations, licensing, consulting or other arrangements that we may establish;
•
the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, maintenance, defense and enforcement of any patents or patent applications or other intellectual property rights; and
•
the extent to which we in-license or acquire other products and technologies.
We plan to continue to fund our operations and capital funding needs through equity and/or debt financing. We may also consider further collaborations or selectively partnering for clinical development and commercialization. The sale of additional equity would result in additional dilution to our stockholders. The incurrence of debt financing would result in debt service obligations and the instruments governing such debt could provide for operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. If we are not able to secure adequate additional funding we may be forced to make reductions in spending, extend payment terms with suppliers, liquidate assets where possible, and/or suspend or curtail planned programs. The continued spread of COVID-19 and uncertain market conditions may limit our ability to access capital. Any of these actions could harm our business, results of operations and future prospects.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Cash Flows
Year Ended 2020 Compared with Year Ended 2019
Cash used in operations was $84.3 million for 2020, compared to $78.7 million for 2019. The increase of $5.6 million in cash used in operations was primarily due to the timing of payments.
Cash provided by (used in) investing activities was $89.0 million and ($10.8) million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, and for both years primarily related to the purchase and the sale and maturity of investments.
Cash provided by financing activities was $42.1 million and $98.9 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. For 2020, we received $33.5 million in net proceeds from the sale and issuance of common stock related to our public offering, $7.4 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock through our at-the-market offering program, and $1.2 million from the issuance of common stock upon the exercise of stock options and from employee stock plan purchases. In 2019, we received $53.8 million in net proceeds from the sale and issuance of common stock related to our public offering, $43.9 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock through our at-the-market offering programs, and $1.2 million from the issuance of common stock upon the exercise of stock options and from employee stock plan purchases.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During 2020 and 2019 we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements appearing under Part II, Item 8 for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.