Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes presented elsewhere in this Report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under Item 1A “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report. Please see the “Forward Looking Information” immediately preceding Part I of this Report.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP and with general practices within the financial services industry. Application of these principles requires management to make complex and subjective estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under current circumstances. These assumptions form the basis for our judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from independent, objective sources. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. Use of alternative assumptions may have resulted in significantly different estimates. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Allowance for Loan Losses
Credit risk is inherent in the business of extending loans to borrowers. Due to this risk, the Company must maintain an allowance for loan losses that management believes is adequate to absorb estimated probable losses on existing loans that may become uncollectible. This reserve is established through a provision for loan losses that is recorded to expense. Loans are charged against the reserve when management believes with certainty that the loan balance will not be collectible. Any cash received on previously charged-off amounts is recorded as a recovery to the reserve. The Company formally re-evaluates and establishes the appropriate level of the allowance for loan losses on a quarterly basis.
The allowance for loan losses consists of specific and general reserves. The specific reserve relates to loans that are individually classified as impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that the Company will be unable to collect all amounts due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. Loans for which the terms have been modified resulting in a concession, and for which the borrower is experiencing financial difficulties, are considered troubled debt restructurings (TDRs) and also classified as impaired. When a loan is considered to be impaired, the amount of impairment is measured based on the fair value of the collateral (less costs to sell) if the loan is collateral dependent, or on the present value of expected future cash flows or values that are observable on the secondary market if the loan is not collateral dependent. The general reserve relates to all non-impaired loans. In determining the general reserve, management applies quantitative and qualitative factors to each segment of the loan portfolio. Quantitative factors primarily include the Company’s historical delinquency and loss experience. For segments of the loan portfolio where the Company has no significant prior loss experience, management uses quantifiable observable industry data to determine the amount of potential loss to include in the reserve. Qualitative factors supplement the quantitative factors applied to each segment of the loan portfolio and include: levels of and trends in delinquencies and impaired loans (including TDRs); levels of and trends in charge-offs and recoveries; migration of loans to the classification of special mention, substandard, or doubtful; trends in volume and terms of loans; effects of any changes in risk selection and underwriting standards; other changes in lending policies, procedures, and practices; experience, ability, and depth of lending management and other relevant staff; national and local economic trends and conditions; industry conditions; and effects of changes in credit concentration. While management uses the best information available to make its evaluation, future adjustments to the allowance for loan losses may be necessary if there are significant changes in economic or other conditions that affect the current risk profile of the loan portfolio.
Other Significant Accounting Policies
Our most significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to our audited financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, included elsewhere in this Report.
COVID-19
Since early 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused a substantial disruption to the economy, as well as a heightened level of uncertainty about the scope and longevity of its impact. In response to the pandemic, we have implemented a multi-pronged approach to address the challenges caused by the effects of this pandemic. Our approach includes ensuring the safety of our employees and the communities that we serve and developing new and temporarily revised programs that are responsive to the needs of our loan and deposit customers. As we continue to closely monitor COVID-19 developments, we remain focused on our ability to navigate these challenging conditions and the underlying strength and stability of our Company. For information regarding the specific business impact to the Company regarding COVID-19, see Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements, which are included elsewhere in this Report.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Some of the financial measures discussed in this Report are considered non-GAAP financial measures. In accordance with SEC rules, we classify a financial measure as being a non-GAAP financial measure if that financial measure excludes or includes amounts, or is subject to adjustments that have the effect of excluding or including amounts, from the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
The following tables reflect the details of the non-GAAP financial measures the Company included in this Report. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures provide useful information to management and investors that is supplementary to our statements of financial condition, results of income and cash flows computed in accordance with GAAP. However, we acknowledge that our non-GAAP financial measures have limitations. As such, you should not view these disclosures as a substitute for results determined in accordance with GAAP, and they are not necessarily comparable to non-GAAP financial measures that other banking companies use. Other banking companies may use names similar to those we use for the non-GAAP financial measures we disclose, but may calculate them differently. You should understand how we and other companies each calculate their non-GAAP financial measures when making comparisons.
Results of Operations:
Overview
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, net income was $4.3 million and $7.0 million, respectively. The decrease of $2.7 million, or 39%, was primarily attributable to increases in the provision for credit losses and operating expenses, offset in part by an increase in interest income.
Net Interest Income and Margin
Net interest income, the difference between interest earned on loans and investments and interest paid on deposits and borrowings is the principal component of the Company’s earnings. Net interest income is affected by changes in the nature and volume of earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities held during the quarter, the rates earned on such assets and the rates paid on interest bearing liabilities.
Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $44.9 million, an increase of $4.0 million, or 10% over $40.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net interest income was primarily attributable to an increase in interest income as the result of amortization of fees collected on PPP loans and an increase in the volume of average earning assets, offset by lower yields on earning assets resulting from a decline in short-term interest rates and higher liquidity.
Average total interest-earning assets increased by $636.9 million, or 64% to $1.63 billion in the year ended December 31, 2020 from $992.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, growth in average deposits outpaced growth in average loans when compared to the same period of 2019 as the Company worked to strengthen liquidity. Average deposit balances for the year ended December 31, 2020 grew $414.7 million, or 46%, from the year ended December 31, 2019, while average loans
grew $315.4 million, or 35%, for the same period. As a result, the average loan to deposit ratio for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 93.2% down from 101.1% for the same time period of 2019 and the yield on average earning assets decreased 169 basis points to 3.25% from 4.94%.
In addition, the average yield on total average gross loans for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 4.22%, a decrease of 97 basis points compared to 5.19% in the same period one year earlier. Excluding PPP loans, the average yield on total average gross loans in the year ended December 31, 2020 was 4.71%.
Of the $414.7 million increase in average total deposit balances year over year, $224.1 million was attributable to noninterest-bearing deposits and $190.6 million was attributable to interest-bearing deposits. The cost of interest-bearing deposits was 0.85% during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 1.31% in the same period one year earlier. In addition, the overall cost of average total deposit balances decreased by 33 basis points to 0.48% in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 0.81% in the in the same period of 2019.
As a result, the net interest margin decreased by 136 basis points to 2.76% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 4.12% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The following table shows the composition of average earning assets and average funding sources, average yields and rates, and the net interest margin for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
(1) Nonperforming loans are included in average loan balances. No adjustment has been made for these loans in the calculation of yields. Interest income on loans includes amortization of deferred loan fees / (costs) of $1.6 million and $(1.1) million, respectively.
(2) Other noninterest-earning assets includes the allowance for loan losses of $12.3 million and $11.1 million, respectively.
(3) Net interest margin is net interest income divided by total interest-earning assets.
The following table shows the effect of the interest differential of volume and rate changes for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The change in interest due to both rate and volume has been allocated in proportion to the relationship of absolute dollar amounts of change in each.
Interest Income
Interest income increased by $3.9 million in for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period of 2019, primarily due to amortization of loan fees collected on PPP loans and volume growth in average earning assets, and in particular an increase in loans. The increase in interest earned on our loan portfolio of $4.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period of 2019 was comprised of $5.5 million attributable to an approximate $315.4 million increase in average loans outstanding, offset by approximately $1.1 million attributable to the decrease in the yield earned on loans to 4.22% from 5.19%. See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the impact on interest income related to PPP loans.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $38,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period of 2019. Overall, the impact on interest expense from the growth in the deposit portfolio was offset by decreased rates paid on interest-bearing deposits and the decrease in borrowing rates due to the PPPLF term borrowing. The average rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities in for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period one year earlier decreased 58 basis points to 0.82% from 1.40%.
Provision for Credit Losses
We made provisions for loan losses of $4.9 million and $2.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We recorded net loan charge-offs of $1.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020
compared to net loan charge-offs of $2.1 million during the same period of 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company charged-off a legacy commercial loan that had been on nonaccrual status since the second quarter of 2019. The allowance for loan loss as a percent of outstanding loans was 1.03% at December 31, 2020 and 1.17% at December 31, 2019. The decrease in the reserve percentage reflects the impact of PPP loans which are guaranteed by the SBA. The reserve percentage excluding PPP loans was 1.33% (See discussion in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Non-GAAP Financial Measures”). See further discussion of the Provision for Credit Losses and Allowance for Loan losses in “Financial Condition-Allowance for Loan Losses”.
Noninterest Income
The following table reflects the major components of the Company’s noninterest income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Noninterest income decreased by $236,000 or 6% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period of 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in gains recognized on the sale of SBA loans.
Noninterest Expense
The following table reflects the major components of the Company’s noninterest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, non-interest expenses increased by $4.6 million or 14% to $37.8 million compared to $33.2 million in the same period of 2019.
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 included increases in salaries and benefits related to the investment in our business, professional and legal fees related to implementation of FDICIA and SEC compliance controls and processes as well as the registration of the Company’s common shares, and occupancy and equipment from the expansion of facilities due to the growth of our business.
Provision for Income Taxes
Income tax expense was $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 which compared to $2.6 million for the same period one year earlier. The effective tax rates for those time periods were 31.0% and 27.4%, respectively. The increase in the effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was the result of an adjustment to the amortization schedule of an individual low income housing tax credit investment.
Financial Condition:
Overview
Total assets of the Company were $1.91 billion as of December 31, 2020 compared to $1.15 billion as of December 31, 2019. The increase in assets was driven by an increase in both the loan portfolio and federal funds sold. Growth in assets was primarily funded by growth in deposits and other borrowings.
Loan Portfolio
Our loan portfolio consists almost entirely of loans to customers who have a full banking relationship with us. Gross loan balances increased by $491.4 million or 44% from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, primarily due to the loans funded under the PPP which were primarily classified as SBA loans. The loan portfolio at December 31, 2020 was comprised of approximately 30% of commercial and industrial loans compared to 41% at December 31, 2019. In addition, commercial real estate loans comprised 43% of our loans at December 31, 2020 compared to 58% at December 31, 2019. A substantial percentage of the commercial real estate loans are considered owner-occupied loans. Our loans are generated by our relationship managers and executives. Our senior management is actively involved in the lending, underwriting, and collateral valuation processes. Higher dollar loans or loan commitments are also approved through a bank loan committee comprised of executives and outside board members.
The following table reflects the composition of the Company’s loan portfolio and their percentage distribution at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The following table shows the maturity distribution for total loans outstanding as of December 31, 2020. The maturity distribution is grouped by remaining scheduled principal payments that are due within one year, after one but within five years, or after five years. The principal balances of loans are indicated by both fixed and variable rate categories.
(1) Excludes variable rate loans on floors
Nonperforming Assets
Nonperforming assets are comprised of loans on nonaccrual status, loans 90 days or more past due and still accruing interest, and other real estate owned. We had no loans 90 days or more past due and still accruing interest and no other real estate owned at December 31, 2020. A loan is placed on nonaccrual status if there is concern that principal and interest may not be fully collected or if the loan has been past due for a period of 90 days or more, unless the obligation is both well secured and in process of legal collection. When loans are placed on nonaccrual status, all interest previously accrued but not collected is reversed against current period interest income. Income on nonaccrual loans is subsequently recognized only to the extent that cash is received and the loan’s principal balance is deemed collectible. Loans are returned to accrual status when they are brought current with respect to principal and interest payments and future payments are reasonably assured. Loans in which the borrower is encountering financial difficulties and we have modified the terms of the original loan are evaluated for impairment and classified as TDR loans. See “Part I-Financial Information, Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, Footnote 2-Business Impact of COVID-19” for additional discussion of loan modifications that have occurred under the CARES Act.
The following table presents information regarding the Company’s nonperforming and restructured loans at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Allowance for Loan Losses
Our allowance for loan losses is maintained at a level management believes is adequate to account for probable incurred credit losses in the loan portfolio as of the reporting date. We determine the allowance based on a quarterly evaluation of risk. That evaluation gives consideration to the nature of the loan portfolio, historical loss
experience, known and inherent risks in the portfolio, the estimated value of any underlying collateral, adverse situations that may affect a borrower’s ability to repay, current economic and environmental conditions and risk assessments assigned to each loan as a result of our ongoing reviews of the loan portfolio. This process involves a considerable degree of judgment and subjectivity. In addition, various regulatory agencies, as an integral part of their examination process, periodically review the Bank’s allowance. Such agencies may require the Bank to recognize additions to the allowance based on judgments different from those of management.
Our allowance is established through charges to the provision for loan losses. Loans, or portions of loans, deemed to be uncollectible are charged against the allowance. Recoveries of previously charged-off amounts are credited to our allowance for loan losses. The allowance is decreased by the reversal of prior provisions when the total allowance balance is deemed excessive for the risks inherent in the portfolio. The allowance for loan losses balance is neither indicative of the specific amounts of future charge-offs that may occur, nor is it an indicator of any future loss trends.
The following table provides information on the activity within the allowance for loan losses as of and for the periods indicated.
Our provision of $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects an increase to qualitative assessments from the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as modest loan growth, offset by improvements in other qualitative assessments. As of December 31, 2020, our most direct potential exposure to the COVID-19 environment related to our dental practice acquisition loans, which are part of commercial loans, and we believe our actions to offer payment deferments and government guaranteed loans provides significant mitigation of risk in that segment. In addition, our assessment broadly anticipates that the most severe and direct impacts from the COVID-19 environment would manifest in consumer credit card and installment portfolios; segments of commercial loans related to consumer services; and real estate in heavily impacted segments such as retail strip malls, hospitality and restaurants. The provision reflects a heavier allocation toward commercial and installment loans due to COVID-19 and less toward real estate segments.
Investment Portfolio
Our investment portfolio is comprised of debt securities. We use two classifications for our investment portfolio: available-for-sale (AFS) and held-to-maturity (HTM). Securities that we have the positive intent and ability to hold to maturity are classified as “held-to-maturity securities” and reported at amortized cost. Securities not classified as held-to-maturity securities are classified as “investment securities available-for-sale” and reported at fair value. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had no held-to-maturity investments.
Our investments provide a source of liquidity as they can be pledged to support borrowed funds or can be liquidated to generate cash proceeds. The investment portfolio is also a significant resource to us in managing interest rate risk, as the maturity and interest rate characteristics of this asset class can be readily changed to match changes in the loan and deposit portfolios. The majority of our available-for-sale investment portfolio is comprised of mortgage-backed securities (MBSs) that are either issued or guaranteed by U.S. government agencies or government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) and corporate bonds.
The following table reflects the amortized cost and fair market values for the total portfolio for each of the categories of investments in our securities portfolio as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Deposits
Our deposits are generated through core customer relationships, related predominantly to business relationships. Many of our business customers maintain high levels of liquid balances in their demand deposit accounts and use the Bank’s treasury management services.
At December 31, 2020, approximately 44% of our deposits were in noninterest-bearing demand deposits. The balance of our deposits at December 31, 2020 were held in interest-bearing demand, savings and money market accounts and time deposits. Approximately 43% of total deposits were held in interest-bearing demand, savings and money market deposit accounts at December 31, 2020, which provide our customers with interest and liquidity. Time deposits comprised the remaining 13% of our deposits at December 31, 2020.
Information concerning average balances and rates paid on deposits by deposit type for the past two fiscal years is contained in the Distribution, Yield and Rate Analysis of Net Income table located in the previous section titled “Results of Operations-Net Interest Income and Net Interest Margin”. The following table provides a
comparative distribution of our deposits by outstanding balance as well as by percentage of total deposits at the dates indicated.
Liquidity
Our primary source of funding is deposits from our core banking relationships. The majority of the Bank’s deposits are transaction accounts or money market accounts that are payable on demand. A small number of customers represent a large portion of the Bank’s deposits, as evidenced by the fact that approximately 19% of deposits were represented by the 10 largest depositors as of December 31, 2020. We strive to manage our liquidity in a manner that enables us to meet expected and unexpected liquidity needs under both normal and adverse conditions. The Bank maintains significant on-balance sheet and off-balance liquidity sources, including a marketable securities portfolio and borrowing capacity through various secured and unsecured sources.
Interest Rate Risk Management
We measure our interest rate sensitivity through the use of a simulation model. The model incorporates the contractual cash flows and re-pricing characteristics from each financial instrument, as well as certain management assumptions. The model also captures the estimated impacts of optionality and duration and their expected change due to changes in interest rates and the shape of the yield curve. We manage our interest rate risk through established policies and procedures. We measure both the potential short term change in earnings and the long term change in market value of equity on a quarterly basis. Both measurements use immediate rate shocks that assume parallel shifts in interest rates up and down the yield curve in 100 basis point increments. There are eight scenarios comprised of rate changes up or down to 400 basis points. We have established policy thresholds for each of these eight scenarios. In the current interest rate environment, however, we do not consider a decrease in interest rates that is greater than 25 basis points. The impact on earnings for one year and the change in market value of equity are limited to a change of no more than (7.5)% for rate changes of 100 basis points, no more than (15.0)% for changes of 200 basis points, no more than (20.0)% for rate changes of 300 basis points, and no more than (25.0)% for rate change of 400 basis points. The objective of these various simulation scenarios is to optimize the risk/reward equation for our future earnings and capital. Based upon the results of these various simulations and evaluations, we are positioned to be moderately asset sensitive, with earnings increasing in a rising rate environment.
The following table sets forth the estimated changes on the Company’s annual net interest income that would result from the designated instantaneous parallel shift in interest rates noted, as of December 31, 2020.
Capital Resources
We are subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by federal and state banking regulators. Our capital management consists of providing equity to support our current operations and future growth. Failure to meet minimum regulatory capital requirements may result in mandatory and possible additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct material effect on our financial statements. Under capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action, we must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative measures of our assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet items as calculated under regulatory accounting policies. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we were in compliance with all applicable regulatory capital requirements, including the capital conservation buffer, and the Bank’s capital ratios exceeded the minimums necessary to be considered ‘‘well-capitalized’’ for purposes of the FDIC’s prompt corrective action regulations. At December 31, 2020, the capital conservation buffer was 2.50%.
At December 31, 2020, the Bank had a Tier 1 risk based capital ratio of 10.80%, a total capital to risk-weighted assets ratio of 12.33%, and a leverage ratio of 8.02%. At December 31, 2019, the Bank had a Tier 1 risk based capital ratio of 10.38%, a total capital to risk-weighted assets ratio of 11.79%, and a leverage ratio of 10.44%. On September 30, 2020, the Company issued and sold a 5.00% fixed-to-floating rate subordinated note due in 2030 with a principal amount of $20.0 million. The Company used the net proceeds to repay $12.0 million of outstanding indebtedness, purchase a $2.0 million sub-debt investment and contributed $6.0 million to the Bank as additional Tier 1 capital.