ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
CalAmp Corp. (including its subsidiaries unless the context otherwise requires, “CalAmp”, “the Company”, “we”, “our”, or “us”), incorporated in 1987, is a connected intelligence company that helps people and businesses work smarter. We partner with transportation and logistics, industrial equipment, government and automotive industries to deliver insights that enable businesses to make the right decisions. Our applications, platforms and smart devices allow them to track, monitor and recover their vital assets with real-time visibility that reduces costs, maximizes productivity and improves safety. Headquartered in Irvine, California. We have more than 20 million products installed and approximately 1.3 million software and services subscribers worldwide.
Recent Developments
COVID-19
In December 2019, a strain of coronavirus entitled COVID-19 emerged in China and spread to other countries including to the United States. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 to be a public health pandemic of international concern, which has resulted in travel restrictions and in some cases, prohibitions of non-essential activities, disruption and shutdown of businesses and greater uncertainty in global financial markets.
In the United States and other geographies in which we and our customers, partners and service providers operate, the health concerns as well as political or governmental developments in response to COVID-19 resulted in economic, social or labor instability or prolonged contractions in certain end markets and in certain situations, slowed the sales process and resulted in customers not purchasing or renewing on contracts.
Through fiscal 2021, our revenues were negatively impacted by COVID-19 as various small-to-medium customers postponed their capital expenditure due to the pandemic and related macro-economic uncertainties. The pandemic has also created certain global supply imbalances resulting in supply shortages in certain components that we use. It is difficult to predict the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact our future business or operating results, which is highly dependent on uncertain future developments, including the severity of the continuing pandemic and the actions taken or to be taken by governments and private businesses in relation to its containment. Because our business is dependent on telematics product sales, device installations and related subscription-based services, the ultimate effect of the outbreak may not be fully reflected in our operating results until future periods.
We have adopted several measures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including instructing employees to work from home, implementing certain cost and cash flow control measures to address potential declines in billings and cash collections from customers, shifting the manner in which we engage with customers and restricting non-critical business travel by our employees. As a result of the work and travel restrictions, substantially all of our sales and installation services activities are being conducted or managed remotely.
Wind Down and Subsequent Sale of LoJack U.S. SVR Operations
On December 16, 2020, our Board of Directors approved a plan for management to commence with the wind down of the LoJack U.S. SVR operations. This business unit has historically provided stolen vehicle recovery (SVR) products operating on a radio frequency allocated by the FCC for domestic automotive dealerships. These products and related services have been provided predominately as a hardware-based offering that no longer aligns with our core strategy. Subsequent to the public announcement of this plan, we received inbound inquiries from certain parties interested in acquiring the business.
On January 22, 2021, we received a formal proposal from Spireon Holdings, L.P. (“Spireon”) to acquire the LoJack U.S. and Canadian SVR (“LoJack North America”) business for a purchase price of $8.0 million. Effective March 15, 2021, the Company and Spireon entered into an agreement pursuant to which we sold certain assets and transferred certain liabilities of the LoJack North America business to Spireon.
Since the LoJack North America operations were deemed to be a business that met the held for sale criteria under ASC 205-20-45, Presentation of Financial Statements - Discontinued Operations, management has presented the operations for this business as Discontinued Operations in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for the fiscal years ended February 28/29, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. See Note 2, Discontinued Operations, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information on this subsequent event.
Acquisitions
In February 2019, we acquired Tracker Network (UK) Limited, which brings us strong brand awareness across the United Kingdom and extensive law enforcement relationships with an ability to help drive our expansion in Europe. In March 2019, we acquired Car Track, S.A. de C.V. (“LoJack Mexico”), which will leverage our full stack of telematics and SaaS solutions to expand product offerings to our substantial subscriber base in Mexico. Both Tracker UK and LoJack Mexico were customers in our Telematics Products segment prior to the acquisition.
In April 2019, we acquired Synovia Solutions (“Synovia”), a North American market leader in fleet safety and management for K-12 school bus and state and local government fleets. Synovia was a customer in our Telematics Products segment prior to our acquisition. Combined with the recent acquisitions of Tracker Network UK and LoJack Mexico, the Synovia acquisition expands our fleet management and vehicle safety services portfolio while accelerating our transformation to high-value subscription-based services. These acquisitions contributed to a shift in revenues from our Telematics Products segment to our Software & Subscriptions segment during fiscal 2020.
Reportable Segments
Since the LoJack U.S. SVR Products reporting segment is presented as discontinued operations, we now operate under two reportable segments: Software & Subscription Services and Telematics Products. We have recast certain prior period amounts to conform to the way our CODM regularly reviews the segment performance.
Telematics Products
Our Telematics Products segment offers a series of advanced telematics products for the broader connected vehicle and emerging industrial IoT marketplace, which enable customers to optimize their operations by collecting, monitoring and effectively reporting business-critical information and desired intelligence from high-value remote and mobile assets. Our telematics products include asset tracking units, mobile telematics devices, fixed and mobile wireless gateways, and routers. These wireless networking devices underpin a wide range of solutions, and are ideal for applications demanding secure, reliable and business-critical communications. Products and sales channels include Original Equipment Manufacturers (“OEM”) and Mobile Resource Management (“MRM”) products.
Software & Subscription Services
Our Software & Subscription Services segment offers cloud-based application enablement and telematics service platforms that facilitate integration of our own applications, as well as those of third parties, through open Application Programming Interfaces (“APIs”) to deliver full-featured mobile IoT solutions to a wide range of customers and markets. Our scalable proprietary applications and other subscription services enable rapid and cost-effective development of high-value solutions for customers all around the globe. Services include tracking and monitoring services within Fleet Management as well as Supply Chain Integrity and International Vehicle Location.
Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Revenues
Our revenue streams are described as follows:
Products. Our products revenues consist primarily of sales of our telematics products or wireless networking devices to large global companies as well as small and medium-sized enterprises in the United States and internationally. Revenues from our products are reported net of sales returns and allowances, and incentives. The
prices charged for telematics products are determined through negotiation with our customers as well as prevailing market conditions and are fixed and determinable upon shipment. The revenues are included in our Telematics Products segment.
Software-as-a-Service (“SaaS”) and Platform-as-a-Service (“PaaS”). Our SaaS-based and PaaS-based solutions for our fleet management, transportation and logistics and certain other verticals provide our customers with the ability to wirelessly communicate with monitoring devices installed in vehicles and other mobile or remote assets via our software applications. For our fleet management, transportation and logistics and certain other customers, we sell or lease highly customized devices that only function with our proprietary SaaS technology. We consider the service and devices as a single performance obligation. Generally, we defer the recognition of revenue for the devices that are sold with application subscriptions. The deferred product revenue amounts are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated average in-service lives of these devices, which are generally four to five years in the fleet management, transportation and logistics verticals. Revenues from subscription services are recognized ratably, on a straight-line basis, over the term of the subscription.
We also sell vehicle location monitoring solutions internationally. These solutions generally consist of the sale of a vehicle location unit (“VLU”) together with our related monitoring services. Because we sell similar VLUs on a stand-alone basis from time to time, we recognize revenue up front for the sale of the device and over time for the monitoring services.
These revenues are included in our Software & Services Segment (“S&SS”).
Professional Services. Our professional services provided to customers include project management, engineering services, and installation services. Revenues are typically distinct from other performance obligations and are recognized as the related services are performed.
Cost of Revenues
Our cost of revenues for telematics products represent the cost of finished goods sold to our customers and are recognized at the point in time control passes to the customer. These costs include raw materials, manufacturing overhead and labor costs, as well as customs and duties, license royalties, recycling fees, insurance and other costs that are included in the price that we negotiate and pay to our contract manufacturers and component suppliers for the products. The cost of revenues also includes charges related to excess and obsolete inventories and the cost of fulfilling product warranties.
Our cost of revenues for application subscriptions and other services includes personnel costs and related benefits, consultants, software development activities, cellular network access costs, infrastructure costs for use of private networking services, and other costs that are required to deliver these services to our customers. Our cost of revenues for application subscriptions and other services also includes cost of customized devices that only function with our applications and are sold on an integrated basis with applicable subscriptions. These costs are capitalized and are recognized ratably, on a straight-line basis, over the estimated average in-service lives of these devices. The estimated average in-service lives are generally four to five years in the fleet management, transportation and logistics verticals. We recognize cost of revenues for VLUs concurrently with the sale of the VLU and over the subscription period for the related monitoring services.
We continually negotiate to reduce the cost we pay to our suppliers in order to maintain consistent low prices for our customers. We accomplish this by working with our suppliers to find alternative, less expensive sources of raw materials and components as well as eliminating excess costs throughout our supply chain.
Gross Profit
Our gross profit and gross profit as a percentage of revenues, or gross margin, is influenced by several factors including sales volume, product and service mix, and excess and obsolescence (“E&O”) charges and other product costs. We expect gross margin to fluctuate over time based on how we control the mix of product and services and manage our inventory using sales incentives granted to our customers. Additionally, although we primarily procure and sell our products in U.S. dollars, we are susceptible to exchange rate fluctuations with other currencies. To the extent that exchange rates move unfavorably this may have an impact on our future selling prices and unit costs. Gross
profit and gross margin may fluctuate over time based on the factors described above.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist principally of personnel related costs, including salaries and bonuses, fringe benefits and stock-based compensation as well as the cost of professional services, information technology, facilities and other administrative expenses. We classify our operating expenses into the following six categories:
•
Research and development expense consists of personnel related costs, professional services, certification fees and software licenses incurred to support our existing install-base of telematics devices through our field application engineers, software developers, program and product managers, as well as our effort to develop new products and technologies.
•
Selling and marketing expense consists of personnel related costs including our incentive programs to support our global sales organization as well as advertising and marketing promotions of our brand and products, including media advertisement costs, merchandising and display costs, trade show and event costs, and sponsorship costs.
•
General and administrative expense consists of personnel related costs to support our global enterprise as well as outside services for legal, accounting, insurance, information technology, investor relations and other costs associated with being a public company.
•
Intangible asset amortization is attributable to our acquired identifiable intangible assets from business combinations. Our acquired intangible assets with definite lives are amortized from the date of acquisition over periods ranging from four to fifteen years.
•
Restructuring expense consists of personnel and facility related costs resulting from our various cost savings initiatives. Personnel costs represent severance and employee related costs, and facility charges represent expenses for vacant office and manufacturing facility space under Corporate Expenses.
•
Impairment loss consists of write-offs of intangible assets for tradenames and dealer relationships associated with LoJack products and right-of-use assets for ceased use leases.
We expect our operating costs will increase in absolute dollars due to the anticipated growth of our business and related infrastructure as well as expansion into new geographic regions. Operating expense may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue throughout the year due to discrete quarterly events and seasonal trends.
Non-Operating Income (Expense)
Non-operating income (expense) consists of (i) investment and interest income earned on our cash balances and investments, (ii) interest expense on our convertible senior unsecured notes including the amortization of note discount and debt issue costs, (iii) the gain on a legal settlement, (iv) the loss from extinguishment of debt and (v) other income (expense) that includes but is not limited to transaction gains and losses and foreign currency gains and losses. In fiscal 2019, we recognized the gain on legal settlement on a cash basis due to the lack of certainty of collection as we received the settlement payments from a former LoJack supplier, which is further explained in Note 20, Commitments and Loss Contingencies, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements. Loss from extinguishment of debt is further explained in Note 11, Financing Arrangements, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and related states as well as foreign jurisdictions in which we do business. These foreign jurisdictions have different statutory tax rates than the U.S. Additionally, certain of our foreign earnings may also be taxable in the U.S. Accordingly, our effective tax rate will vary from the U.S. statutory income tax due to state income taxes, the amount of income allocable to each tax jurisdiction, tax credits, and changes in valuation allowances which are provided against net deferred tax assets when it is determined that it is more likely than not that the assets will not be realized.
Equity in Net Loss of Affiliate and related Impairment Loss
We had an investment in a technology and insurance startup company called Smart Driver Club Limited, which represented a minority ownership interest that was accounted for under the equity method of accounting. As a result, we recorded our portion of the losses incurred by this entity and impairment charges related to this investment as equity in net loss of affiliate.
Income (loss) from Discontinued Operations, net of Tax
Since the LoJack North America operations were deemed to be a business that met the held for sale criteria under ASC 205-20-45, Presentation of Financial Statements - Discontinued Operations, management has presented the operations for this business as Discontinued Operations in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for the fiscal years ended February 28/29, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
A more complete description of our business prior to the discontinued operation is included in Item 1. “Business”, in Part I of the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended February 29, 2020 that was previously filed with the SEC on May 5, 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA
In addition to our U.S. GAAP results, we present Adjusted EBITDA as a supplemental non-GAAP measure of our performance. Our CEO, the CODM, uses Adjusted EBITDA to evaluate and monitor segment performance. A non-GAAP financial measure is defined as a numerical measure of a company’s financial performance that excludes or includes amounts to be different than the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the statements of comprehensive income (loss), balance sheets or statements of cash flows. We define Adjusted EBITDA as Earnings Before Investment Income, Interest Expenses, Taxes, Depreciation, Amortization, net income (loss) from discontinued operations, stock-based compensation, acquisition and integration expenses, non-cash costs and expenses arising from purchase accounting adjustments, litigation provision, gain from legal settlement, impairment loss and certain other adjustments. We believe this non-GAAP financial information provides additional insight into our ongoing performance and have therefore chosen to provide this information to investors for a more consistent basis of comparison to help investors evaluate our results of ongoing operations and enable more meaningful period-to-period comparisons. Pursuant to the rule and regulations of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission regarding the use of non-GAAP financial measures, we have provided a reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable financial measure. See Note 21 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information related to Adjusted EBITDA by reportable segments and reconciliation to net income (loss).
OPERATING RESULTS
The following table sets forth the percentage of revenues represented by items included in our consolidated statements of income for the three most recent fiscal years:
Unless otherwise indicated, the discussion on our results of operations provided below relate to our continuing operations and we have recast prior period amounts for purposes of historical comparisons. See Note 2, Discontinued Operations, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Fiscal year ended February 28, 2021 compared to fiscal year ended February 29, 2020:
Revenue by Segment
Our Software & Subscription Services enable customers to gather and analyze critical data used to track, monitor and recovery vital mobile assets with real-time visibility and insights. During Fiscal 2021, our services focused on three principal end markets including (i) transportation and logistics, (ii) government and municipalities, and (iii) connected car services. Although our business was impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic especially in the first quarter, we resumed device installations and activation services soon thereafter thereby driving revenue growth in fiscal 2021. For the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021, Software & Subscription Services revenue increased by $6.5 million or 5.2% compared to the same period last year. Additionally, our annual recurring revenue for the year ended February
28, 2021 increased to $97.3 million, an increase of $11.4 million or 13.3% over the prior year. The increase was primarily due to a 7.9% increase in active subscribers in our core businesses. The increase in subscribers generated revenue growth of $6.1 million in our government and municipalities end markets as well as $1.1 million in the international connected car market particularly within the EMEA region. The revenue within these markets was partially offset by a decline in revenues from our non-core businesses.
As of February 28, 2021, our remaining contract performance obligations were approximately $145 million as compared to $129 million as of February 29, 2020. As mentioned above, the majority of our growth in the contract performance obligation was driven by new customer acquisitions within the government and municipalities as well as connected car end markets.
Telematics Products revenue, comprised primarily of MRM telematics and OEM/network products, decreased by $19.7 million or 9.9% for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021 compared to the same period last year. Factors affecting the decrease are as follows:
•
MRM telematics products revenue decreased $26.3 million due to a reduction in sales volume to our small-to-medium sized customers that postponed capital expenditures due to the global pandemic and related macro-economic uncertainties. The pandemic has also created certain global supply imbalances resulting in supply shortages especially for silicon wafers and other components;
•
OEM/Network Products revenue increased $10.2 million due to an acceleration of the migration to LTE products with one of our largest customers. We expect this increase to continue with all of our customers as the 3G network sunset becomes more imminent.
The softer than expected customer demand experienced throughout fiscal 2021 has diminished as we have observed an increase in customer demand in our fourth quarter as total backlog for our hardware products as of February 28, 2021 was $61.5 million, representing an increase of $30.6 million or almost 100% as compared to total backlog of $30.9 million as of February 29, 2020.
Gross Profit by Segment
Consolidated gross profit for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021 decreased by $3.1 million or 2.5% over the prior year due to lower revenue in our Telematics Products business and partially offset by continued growth in Software & Subscription Services. Consolidated gross margin increased by 70 basis points compared to the same period in last year due to increased gross margin in Software & Subscription Services.
Software & Subscription Services: Gross profit increased primarily as a result of $6.5 million increase in revenues described above, as well as improved gross margin. Gross margin increased 470 basis points largely due to improved gross margin in our government/municipalities business which was driven by lower overhead expenses. Gross margin also benefitted in the current year from the reduced impact from purchase price adjustments associated with businesses acquired in 2019.
Telematics Products: The decline in gross profit and gross margin was due to a lower revenue as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as a $1.4 million one-time charge related to the resolution of a product performance matter with a customer.
Cost of revenues above excludes restructuring related costs, which are shown separately in the operating expenses in our consolidated statement of comprehensive income (loss).
Operating Expenses
Consolidated research and development expense decreased by $1.2 million or 4.4% for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021 compared to the same period last year. The decrease was primarily due to $1.0 million lower outside professional services and $0.5 million lower travel related expenses due to cost savings from integration of acquired businesses and certain cost containment measures taken in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic. Consolidated research and development expense as a percentage of revenues remained consistent at 8.4% for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021 compared to the same period last year.
Consolidated selling and marketing expense decreased by $1.2 million or 2.5% for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021 compared to the same period last year. The decrease was primarily due to $2.8 million lower tradeshow and related travel expenses partially offset by $1.5 million increase in personnel costs. The decrease in tradeshow and related travel expenses resulted from various cost containment measures implemented in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in personnel costs was primarily driven by higher sales commissions and incentive compensation as we grew our revenue within Software & Subscription Services.
Consolidated general and administrative expense decreased by $0.4 million or 0.8% for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021 compared to the same period last year. The decrease was primarily driven by $2.2 million decrease in outside professional services related to certain non-recurring legal matters and acquisitions in fiscal 2020 coupled with reduced expenses as we further integrate the acquired businesses. The decrease was partially offset by $1.9 million increase in personnel costs that was mostly driven by increased incentive compensation.
Amortization of intangibles decreased by $1.1 million or 18.6% for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021 compared to the same period last year due to reduced amortization resulting from certain intangible assets that became fully amortized in fiscal 2021.
As described in Note 12 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements, we commenced a plan to capture certain synergies and cost savings related to streamlining our global operations and sales organization as well as rationalize certain leased properties that were vacant. In fiscal 2021, we incurred additional charges for this initiative. For the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021, total restructuring charges from continuing operations were $2.5 million severance and employee related costs. For the fiscal year ended February 29, 2020, we recorded approximately of $2.6 million in severance and employee related costs for continuing operations. Restructuring costs are shown separately in the operating expenses in our consolidated statement of comprehensive income (loss).
During fiscal 2021, we vacated certain office facilities in Richardson, Texas and Indianapolis, Indiana, which resulted in an impairment of the corresponding right-of-use assets and related fixed assets of $0.8 million. The Richardson, Texas facility is sublet through March 2023.
Non-operating Income (Expense), Net
Investment income decreased by $2.4 million to $2.1 million for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021 from $4.5 million for the prior year. The decrease was due primarily to lower rates of interest earned on invested funds coupled with a decrease in total funds invested as we utilized our available cash to pay down certain convertible notes.
Interest expense decreased $4.6 million to $15.5 million for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021 from $20.1 million for the prior year as we fully repaid the 2020 Convertible Notes in the first quarter of fiscal 2021. Interest expense for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021 included interest paid for the $20.0 million borrowing under revolving line of credit, which we fully repaid on November 19, 2020.
Other non-operating expense for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021 decreased $0.3 million from the prior year due to favorable fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, primarily Euros to U.S. dollars.
See Note 11 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for information on the $2.4 million loss on extinguishment of debt for the fiscal years ended February 29, 2020.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
An income tax expense of $0.6 million was recorded in fiscal 2021, compared to $20.5 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease in the income tax expense compared to the prior year was primarily driven by the recording of a valuation allowance against domestic net deferred tax assets in the amount of $34.6 million in fiscal 2020. See Note 14 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Net Loss from Discontinued Operations, Net of Tax
Net loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, for the year ended February 28/29, 2021 and 2020 was $35.2 million and $27.8 million, respectively. There were no tax benefits recorded in either year due to valuation allowances recorded against deferred tax assets. Net losses for fiscal years ended February 28/29, 2021 and 2020 were primarily driven by impairment losses of $23.8 million and $13.4 million, respectively.
In February 2020, we determined that the prolonged secular decline in revenues from our legacy LoJack US SVR Products coupled with the slower than anticipated market penetration of our telematics solutions in the U.S. automotive dealership channel represented determinate indications of impairment. Consequently, we recorded total impairment loss related to discontinued operations of $13.4 million for the year ended February 29, 2020, which was primarily attributable to partial write-offs of intangible assets for LoJack tradenames and dealer relationships associated with LoJack products and services, right-of-use assets for tower infrastructure leases resulting from early terminations and property and equipment associated with the early terminated tower leases.
In fiscal 2021, the factors from February 2020 were further exacerbated by the unfavorable impact the COVID-19 pandemic has had on the automotive end markets over the past ten months. On December 16, 2020, our Board of Directors approved a plan for management to commence the wind down of the LoJack U.S. SVR operations. Based upon our decision to wind down the LoJack U.S. SVR business and our current and prior quarterly impairment assessments, we recorded impairment losses related to discontinued operations of $23.8 million. These losses were comprised of write-downs of goodwill, property, plant and equipment and other assets, and intangible assets.
See Note 1, Goodwill and Long-lived Assets, and Note 2, Discontinued Operations, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Profitability Measures
Net Income (Loss) from Continuing Operations:
Our net loss from continuing operations in the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021 was $21.2 million as compared to net loss of $51.6 million in the same period last year. The decrease in net loss is largely due to a decrease in income tax provision of $19.9 million. Income tax provision in fiscal 2020 included a valuation allowance charge of $34.6 million against domestic net deferred tax assets, which did not recur in the current period.
Adjusted EBITDA:
Adjusted EBITDA for Telematics Products in the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021 decreased $16.9 million compared to the same period last year due to lower revenues as described above. Adjusted EBITDA for Software and Subscription Services increased $10.6 million compared to the same period last year due primarily to growth in revenues and gross profit as described above.
See Note 21 for reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA by reportable segments and a reconciliation to GAAP-basis net income (loss).
Fiscal year ended February 29, 2020 compared to fiscal year ended February 28, 2019:
Revenue by Segment
Software & Subscription Services revenue increased by $48.6 million or 65.0% for the fiscal year ended February 29, 2020 compared to fiscal year ended February 28, 2019. The increase was due to the three acquisitions of Tracker UK, LoJack Mexico and Synovia, coupled with growth in the EMEA region.
Telematics Products revenue, comprised primarily of MRM telematics and OEM/network products, decreased by $38.4 million or 16.2% for the fiscal year ended February 29, 2020 compared fiscal year ended February 28, 2019. Factors affecting the decrease are as follows:
•
MRM telematics products revenue decreased $25.0 million due to a reduction in sales volume to a few larger customers, including Synovia that we acquired during the year coupled with significant supply shortages and softer than expected demand experienced in the fourth quarter. The supply shortages were primarily attributable to our one remaining Chinese supplier, the production capacity of which was significantly impaired in February due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We also experienced other supply shortages due to supply chain transitions, coupled with extended lead times on raw materials and components sourced from China, but used elsewhere in our global supply chain;
•
OEM/Network Products revenue decreased $11.4 million due to a reduction in sales to our largest OEM/Network Products customer which is in the middle of a product line transition with the rollout of a 3G-to-4G LTE retrofit program.
Gross Profit by Segment
Consolidated gross profit for the fiscal year ended February 29, 2020 decreased by $0.4 million or 0.3% over the prior year due to lower revenue in our Telematics Products business and partially offset by growth in Software & Subscription Services as described above.
Consolidated gross margin decreased by 104 basis points comparing to fiscal year ended February 28, 2019.
Software & Subscription Services: Gross margin was 45.6% in fiscal 2020 compared to 48.7% in fiscal 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by the recently acquired businesses as the gross profit was impacted by purchase price adjustments to deferred revenue.
Telematics Products: Gross margin was 34.9% for fiscal 2020 compared to 37.8% in fiscal 2019. Gross margin was impacted principally by product mix, incremental charges for excess and obsolete inventory and unfavorable manufacturing variances as we proceeded with the closure of our manufacturing facility in Oxnard, California which was substantially completed in March 2020.
Cost of revenues above excludes restructuring related costs, which are shown separately in the operating expenses in our consolidated statement of comprehensive income (loss).
Operating Expenses
Consolidated research and development expense increased by $1.5 million or 5.7% for the fiscal year ended February 29, 2020 compared to the same period in fiscal 2019. The increase was primarily driven by increased employee compensation and benefits due to increased headcount as a result of the acquisitions taken place in fiscal 2020. Consolidated research and development expense as a percentage of revenues increased to 8.4% for the fiscal year ended February 29, 2020 compared to 8.2% in fiscal year ended February 28, 2019. We are investing in research and development of new products and technologies to be sold through the U.S. and international sales channels.
Consolidated selling and marketing expense increased by $9.7 million or 25.8% for the fiscal year ended
February 29, 2020 compared to the same period in fiscal 2019. The increase was primarily driven by additional compensation expenses related to an increase in headcount due to the acquired businesses.
Consolidated general and administrative expense increased by $26.5 million or over 100% for the fiscal year ended February 29, 2020 compared to the same period in fiscal 2019. The increase was primarily driven by the reduction of $17.6 million in a legal reserve in fiscal 2019 (see Note 20 in the accompanying financial statements) and decreases in professional fees related to certain non-recurring legal matters. In fiscal 2020, we incurred additional compensation expenses related to an increase in headcount due to acquired businesses coupled with increased professional services and service fees related to a new cloud-based ERP system that we are implementing to support the growth in our global operations. Certain implementation costs on the new ERP system were capitalized as Property and Equipment in our consolidated balance sheets.
Amortization of intangibles increased by $1.9 million or 49.4% for the fiscal year ended February 29, 2020 compared to the same period in fiscal 2019 due the addition of intangible assets from the acquisitions.
As described in Note 12 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements, during fiscal 2019, we commenced a plan to capture certain synergies and cost savings related to streamlining our global operations and sales organization as well as rationalize certain leased properties that are partially vacant. We incurred additional charges for this initiative during fiscal 2020. For the fiscal year ended February 29, 2020, we recorded approximately of $2.5 million in severance and employee related costs from continuing operations. For the fiscal year ended February 28, 2019, total restructuring charges from continuing operations were $2.3 million, comprised of $2.2 million in severance and employee related costs, and $0.1 million for vacant office and manufacturing facility space. Restructuring costs are shown separately in the operating expenses in our consolidated statement of comprehensive income (loss).
Non-operating Income (Expense), Net
Investment income decreased by $0.8 million to $4.5 million for the fiscal year ended February 29, 2020 from $5.3 million for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2019. The decrease was due primarily to a decrease in interest income resulting from decreased investments in various cash equivalent and short-term marketable securities.
Interest expense increased $3.4 million to $20.1 million for the fiscal year ended February 29, 2020 from $16.7 million for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2019 due to additional interest expense and debt discount and issue costs relating to the 2025 Convertible Notes issued in July 2018 that are being amortized on the effective interest method and amortization of the discount of Due to Factors debt related to our acquisition of Synovia.
See Note 11 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for information on the $2.4 million and $2.0 million loss on extinguishment of debt for the fiscal years ended February 29, 2020 and February 28, 2019, respectively.
Other non-operating expense for the fiscal year ended February 29, 2020 decreased $0.6 million from the fiscal year ended February 28, 2019 due to favorable fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, primarily Euros to U.S. dollars.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
An income tax expense of $20.5 million was recorded in fiscal 2020, compared to an income tax benefit of $0.6 million in fiscal 2019. The increase in the income tax expense compared to the fiscal year ended February 28, 2019 was primarily driven by the recording of a valuation allowances against domestic net deferred tax assets in the amount of $34.6 million. See Note 14 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Net Loss from Discontinued Operations, Net of Tax
Net loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, for the year ended February 29/28, 2020 and 2019 was $27.8 million and $2.3 million, respectively. There was no tax benefit recorded due to valuation allowances recorded against deferred tax assets for fiscal 2020 and $0.7 million tax benefit recorded for fiscal 2019. The increase in net loss from discontinued operations was primarily driven by $13.4 million impairment loss charge recorded in fiscal 2020 which
was discussed above as well as the $10.8 million gain on legal settlement recorded in fiscal 2019.
See Note 2, Discontinued Operations, in the accompanying financial statements for additional information.
Profitability Measures
Net income (loss) from Continuing Operations:
Our net loss in the fiscal year ended February 29, 2020 was $51.6 million as compared to net income of $20.7 million in fiscal year ended February 28, 2019. The increase in net loss is due to an increase in operating expense resulting from the three acquired businesses, an increase in non-operating expense and an increase in income tax provision, as described above.
Adjusted EBITDA:
Adjusted EBITDA for Telematics Products in the fiscal year ended February 29, 2020 decreased $16.1 million compared to the fiscal year ended February 28, 2019 due to lower revenues as described above coupled with higher operating expenses as a result of increased headcount and outsourced professional service fees. Adjusted EBITDA for Software and Subscription Services increased $9.2 million compared to the fiscal year ended February 28, 2019 due primarily to growth in revenues and gross profit from our Italia market and three acquired businesses.
See Note 21 for reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA by reportable segments and a reconciliation to GAAP-basis net income (loss).
Quarterly Financial Information (Unaudited)
The following summarizes certain quarterly statement of operations data for each of the quarters in fiscal years 2021 and 2020 (in thousands, except percentages and per share data). The operating results in any quarter are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any future period. We derived this data from the unaudited consolidated interim financial statements that, in our opinion, have been prepared on substantially the same basis as the audited financial statements contained elsewhere in this report and include all normal recurring adjustments necessary for a fair presentation of the financial information for the periods presented. These unaudited quarterly results should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this report.
Effective March 15, 2021, we entered into a purchase agreement with Spireon that sold certain assets and transferred certain liabilities of the LoJack North America business to Spireon. As a result, we have presented the operations for this business as discontinued operations in the accompanying consolidated financial statements. We have recast the unaudited quarterly financial information below to conform with this change.
The net loss in fiscal 2021 third quarter included a $18.0 million total impairment loss from goodwill, long-lived assets and ROU assets primarily from discontinued operations.
The net loss in fiscal 2021 first quarter included a $4.3 million total impairment loss from goodwill and long-lived assets from discontinued operations.
The net loss in fiscal 2020 fourth quarter included a $19.1 million total impairment loss from long-lived assets and ROU assets from discontinued operations and a $34.6 million increase of the valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets from our continuing operations. The increase of the valuation allowance is described in Note 14, Income Taxes, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
The net loss in fiscal 2020 third quarter included a loss of $2.4 million from extinguishment of debt. The loss was described in Note 11, Financing Arrangements, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
The impairment losses for both fiscal 2021 and 2020 are described in Note 1, Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In fiscal 2021, our primary cash needs have been for working capital purposes and payment on debt obligations, and to a lesser extent, capital expenditures. We have historically funded our principal business activities through cash flows generated from operations. As we continue to grow our customer base and increase our revenues, there will be a need for working capital in the future. Our immediate sources of liquidity are cash, cash equivalents and our revolving credit facility. As of February 29, 2021, our cash, cash equivalents totaled $94.6 million.
On March 27, 2020, we entered into an amendment of the $50 million revolving credit facility with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. to extend the term to March 30, 2022. Borrowings under this revolving credit facility bear interest at either a Prime or LIBOR-based variable rate as selected by us on a periodic basis. This revolving credit facility contains financial covenants that require us to maintain a minimum level of earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation, amortization and other noncash charges (EBITDA) and minimum debt coverage ratios. In May 2020, we borrowed $20 million under the revolving credit facility, which was fully repaid on November 19, 2020. As of February 28, 2021, there were no borrowings outstanding on this revolving credit facility.
Wind Down and Subsequent Sale of LoJack U.S. SVR Operations
On March 14, 2021, we entered into a purchase agreement with Spireon pursuant to which we sold certain assets and transferred certain liabilities of the LoJack North America business for a purchase price of $8.0 million. The transaction was completed effective March 15, 2021 and we received net proceeds of approximately $6.8 million. We also entered into a Transition Service Agreement (“TSA”) to support Spireon in the transition of LoJack North America customers to its Kahu solution and we will continue to provide recovery services to the existing installed base of LoJack North America customers as an agent of Spireon for a period of six months. During this period, we will invoice Spireon for costs incurred in operating this business.
We also entered into a post-TSA Services Agreement (“SA”), under which we will continue to provide certain services related to the LoJack North America radio frequency tower infrastructure upon termination of the TSA for a period no longer than fifty-four months, as needed. As consideration for these services, Spireon will pay us a monthly service fee over the stipulated contract term.
PPP Loan
On April 16, 2020, we received proceeds from a loan in the amount of $10 million (the “PPP Loan”) from JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as lender, pursuant to the Small Business Association (“SBA”) Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act. At the time we applied for the PPP loan, we believed that we qualified to receive the funds pursuant to the PPP. On April 23, 2020, the SBA, in consultation with the Department of Treasury, issued new guidance that created uncertainty regarding the qualification requirements for a PPP loan. Out of an abundance of caution and in light of the new guidance, we repaid in full the principal and interest on the PPP Loan on April 27, 2020.
Acquisitions
As described in Note 3 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements, in February 2019, we acquired Tracker Network (UK) Limited (“Tracker”), a LoJack in the U.K. licensee for a total purchase price of £10.0 million, or approximately $13.0 million. In the same month, we also entered into an agreement to acquire Car Track, S.A. DE C.V. (“LoJack Mexico”), the exclusive licensee of LoJack technology for the Mexican market. The agreement consisted of the purchase of the 87.5% of the LoJack Mexico shares not currently owned by us for a purchase price, net of cash on hand, of approximately $13.0 million. We completed the acquisition in March 2019. In April 2019, we acquired Synovia Solutions (“Synovia”), a North American market leader in fleet safety and management for K-12 school bus and state and local government fleets. The total purchase price was $49.8 million. We funded these acquisitions from cash on hand. As part of the Synovia acquisition, we assumed the rights and obligations from the Synovia revenue assignments (“Due to Factors”) as described in Note 11 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements. The revenues recognized from this arrangement of $6.3 million and $6.8 million were considered a non-cash financing activity for the fiscal years ended February 28/29, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Future Cash Obligations
Following is a summary of our contractual cash obligations as of February 28, 2021 (in thousands):
Purchase obligations consist primarily of inventory purchase commitments.
COVID-19
We continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 on our operating results and liquidity as we believe the pandemic may have an unfavorable impact on our financial condition and results of operations. We have implemented certain cost containment and cash flow control measures especially in areas such as personnel, travel and other discretionary spend.
As of February 28, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $94.6 million and $50 million available under our existing revolving credit facility. Accordingly, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, funds anticipated to be generated from our operations and available borrowing on our revolving credit facility will be sufficient to meet our working capital needs for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements may vary from those currently planned and will depend on many factors, including our rate of sales growth, the timing and extent of spending on various business initiatives, our international expansion, the timing of new product introductions, market acceptance of our products and overall economic conditions including the potential impact of COVID-19 on the global financial markets. To the extent that current and anticipated future sources of liquidity are insufficient to fund our future business activities and requirements, we may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing.
Other
We are a defendant in various legal proceedings involving intellectual property claims and contract disputes matters whereby the final settlement has not been determined at this time. In connection with these matters, we may have to enter into license agreements or other settlement arrangements that could require us to make significant payments in the future. Based on current information available, we do not believe that there are any claims that would have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations, or liquidity. See Note 20 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information on legal proceedings.
Cash flows from operating activities
Cash flows from operating activities consist of net income (loss) adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation, intangible asset amortization, stock-based compensation expense, amortization of convertible debt issue costs and discount, deferred income taxes and other investment related matters as well as the effect of changes in working capital and other activities.
Our cash flow from operating activities are attributable to our net income as well as how well we manage our working capital, which is dictated by the volume of product we purchase from our manufacturers or suppliers and then sell to our customers along with the payment and collection terms that we negotiate with them. We purchase a majority of our product from significant suppliers located in Asia and Mexico that generally provide us 60-day payment terms for products purchased. Our significant customers are located in the U.S. as well as certain international locations. We believe that our relationship with our customers is good and that these customers are in good financial condition. We generally grant credit to our customers based on their financial viability and our historical collection experience with
them. We typically require payment from them within 30 to 45 days of our invoice date with a few exceptions that extend the credit terms up to 90 days. Since we are paying our suppliers at or within 60 days of inventory purchase and our payment terms on our accounts receivable are within 45 days, we have historically generated positive cash flows from operating activities.
For the fiscal year ended February 28, 2021, net cash provided by operating activities was $28.6 million with a net loss of $56.3 million. Our non-cash income and expenses from continuing operations, comprised principally of depreciation, intangible assets amortization, stock-based compensation expense, amortization of convertible debt issuance costs and discount, impairment loss, revenue assigned to factors, valuation allowance on deferred income tax assets and equity in net loss of affiliate and related impairment loss, which was $38.7 million in fiscal 2021. Changes in operating assets and liabilities from continuing operations represented a $14.9 million increase in operating cash flow, primarily driven by changes in working capital including a decrease in inventories and accounts receivable and an increase in accounts payable. Net cash used in discontinued operations was $4.4 million.
For the years ended February 29/28, 2020 and 2019, net cash provided by operating activities was $11.5 million and $47.7 million, respectively. Our cash flows from operations in fiscal 2020 were impacted by our net loss of $79.3 million, non-cash activities from continuing operations of $69.9 million and changes in various working capital as noted above. Our cash flows from operations in fiscal 2019 were impacted by our net income of $18.4 million and a gain from legal settlement with a former supplier of LoJack of $18.3 million, as well as similar activities within other non-cash items and changes in working capital from continuing operations as noted above. Net cash provided by discontinued operations for the years ended February 29/28, 2020 and 2019 was $4.7 million and $3.1 million, respectively.
Cash flows from investing activities
For the years ended February 28/29, 2021, 2020 and 2019, our net cash used in investing activities was $13.7 million, $65.7 million, and $21.8 million, respectively. In each of these periods, our primary investing activities consisted of capital expenditures and the purchase and sale of marketable securities in accordance with our corporate investment policy as well as strategic initiatives including certain investments in and advances to our affiliate and acquisitions. In fiscal 2020, we completed the acquisition of LoJack Mexico and Synovia for $12.7 million and $48.9 million, net of cash acquired, respectively. In fiscal 2019, we completed the acquisition of Tracker UK for approximately $13.0 million, net of cash acquired. For the years ended February 28/29, 2021, 2020 and 2019, net cash used in investing activities from discontinued operations was $2.3 million, $0.9 million and $1.6 million, respectively.
Our capital expenditures support the overall growth in our core businesses. We expect that we may make additional capital expenditures in the future, all of which would be done to support the future growth of our business.
Cash flows from financing activities
For the years ended February 28/29, 2021, 2020 and 2019, our net cash (used in) provided by financing activities was $(27.3) million, $(94.8) million and $98.5 million, respectively. In each of these periods, we incurred payments for taxes related to the net share settlement of vested equity awards and the proceeds for the exercise of stock options. In fiscal 2021, we repaid the remaining outstanding portion of our 2020 Convertible Notes of $27.6 million, as well as borrowed and repaid $20.0 million from our revolving credit facility. In fiscal 2020, we entered into separate, privately negotiated purchase agreements to repurchase approximately $94.9 million in aggregate principal amount of these notes for $94.7 million. In fiscal 2019, we issued $230.0 million of the 2025 Convertible Notes and used the net proceeds to pay the cost of the capped call transactions; repurchase shares of our common stock for $49 million, and repurchase a portion of our outstanding 2020 Convertible Notes as discussed above for $53.7 million. We also received proceeds of $3.1 million from the unwinding of the note hedges and warrants related to the 2020 Convertible Notes.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires us to make judgments, assumptions, and estimates that affect the amounts reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes. Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the year ended February 28, 2021 describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements. The accounting policies described below are significantly affected by critical accounting estimates. Such accounting policies require significant judgments, assumptions, and estimates used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements, and actual results could differ materially from the amounts reported based on these policies.
The inputs into certain of our judgments, assumptions, and estimates considered the economic implications of the COVID-19 pandemic on our critical and significant accounting estimates. These estimates are listed in our Consolidated Financial Statements for the year ending February 28, 2021, and include: revenue recognition, patent litigation and loss contingencies, goodwill and long-lived assets and income taxes, among other items. The actual results that we experience may differ materially from our estimates. As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to develop, many of our estimates could require increased judgment and carry a higher degree of variability and volatility. As events continue to evolve our estimates may change materially in future periods.
Revenue Recognition
We enter into contracts with customers that can include various combinations of products and services. As a result, our contracts may contain multiple performance obligations. We determine whether arrangements are distinct based on whether the customer can benefit from the product or service on its own or together with other resources that are readily available and whether our commitment to transfer the product or service to the customer is separately identifiable from other obligations in the contract.
In particular our SaaS-based solutions often include arrangements where we sell or lease highly customized devices that only function with our proprietary SaaS technology. In these instances, we consider the service and devices as a single performance obligation. Generally, we defer the recognition of revenue for the devices that are sold with application subscriptions. The deferred product revenue amounts are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated average in-service lives of these devices, which are generally four to five years in the fleet management, transportation and logistics verticals. Revenues from subscription services are recognized ratably, on a straight-line basis, over the term of the subscription.
Patent Litigation and Other Contingencies
We are subject to the possibility of various losses arising in the ordinary course of business. We consider the likelihood of impairment of an asset or the incurrence of a liability, as well as our ability to reasonably estimate the amount of loss, in determining loss contingencies. An estimated loss contingency is accrued when it is probable that an asset has been impaired or a liability has been incurred and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. We regularly evaluate information available to us to determine whether such accruals should be made or adjusted and whether new accruals are required.
Third parties, including customers, have in the past and may in the future assert claims or initiate litigation related to exclusive patent, copyright, trademark, and other intellectual property rights to technologies and related standards that are relevant to us. These assertions may increase over time as a result of our growth and the general increase in the pace of patent claims assertions, particularly in the United States. If any infringement or other intellectual property claim made against us by any third party is successful, or if we fail to develop non-infringing technology or license the proprietary rights on commercially reasonable terms and conditions, our business, operating results, and financial condition could be materially and adversely affected.
We accrue for these intellectual property claims whenever we determine that an unfavorable outcome is probable and the liability is reasonably estimable. The amount of the accrual is estimated based on our review of each individual claim, including the type and facts of the claim and our assessment of the merits of the claim. Since these legal matters can be very complex and require significant judgement, we often utilize external legal counsel and other subject matter experts to assist us in defending against such claims. These accruals are reviewed at least on a quarterly basis and are adjusted to reflect the impact of recent negotiations, settlements, court rulings, advice from legal counsel and other events pertaining to the case. Although we believe that we take reasonable and considerable measures to mitigate our
exposure in these matters, the outcome of litigation is inherently unpredictable. Nonetheless, we believe that we have valid defenses with respect to pending legal matters against us as well as adequate provisions for probable and estimable losses. All costs for legal services are expensed as incurred..
We currently have two open patent infringement lawsuits filed against us by Omega Patents, LLC (“Omega”) and Koninklijke Philips N.V. (“Philips”).
Omega
In connection with the Omega claim, we have accrued our best estimate of the probable liability of $2.2 million as a litigation reserve related to this matter based on reasonable royalty rates for similar technologies. It is reasonably possible that the prior judgment awarding Omega damages of as much as $4.6 million, together with $0.8 million of pre-judgment interest, could be upheld, which would exceed the amounts we have accrued.
Philips
We intend to defend ourselves vigorously in the proceedings related to Philips, and are investigating and/or asserting defenses and positions, including non-infringement, invalidity, and the “public interest factors” that must be considered by the ITC before issuing any exclusion order. If Phillips successfully proves infringement of the Patents, we could be required to pay significant monetary damages and could be precluded from importing into the U.S. certain products containing the allegedly infringing modules. However, we believe that we have strong defense and indemnification claims against our communication module suppliers, and are entitled to have our defense costs and any losses resulting from these proceeding paid by those suppliers, who are co-defendants in these proceedings. Currently, it is not feasible to predict with certainty the outcome of these four legal proceedings, and no specific amount of damages has been identified,
See Note 20, Commitments and Loss Contingencies, to the accompanying consolidation financial statements for additional information.
Goodwill and Long-lived Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired in a business combination. We test goodwill for impairment in accordance with the provisions of ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, (“ASC 350”). Goodwill is tested for impairment at least annually at the reporting unit level or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired. ASC 350 provides that an entity has the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, an entity determines it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then additional impairment testing is not required. However, if an entity concludes otherwise, then it is required to perform an impairment test. The impairment test involves comparing the estimated fair value of a reporting unit with its book value, including goodwill. If the estimated fair value exceeds book value, goodwill is considered not to be impaired. If, however, the fair value of the reporting unit is less than book value, then an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the amount that the book value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
The estimates of fair value of the reporting units are computed using either an income approach, a market approach, or a combination of both. Under the income approach, we utilize the discounted cash flow method to estimate the fair value of the reporting units. Significant assumptions inherent in estimating the fair values include the estimated future cash flows, growth assumptions for future revenues (including future gross margin rates, expense rates, capital expenditures and other estimates), and a rate used to discount estimated future cash flow projections to their present value (or estimated fair value) based on estimated weighted average cost of capital (i.e., the selected discount rate). We select assumptions used in the financial forecasts by using historical data, supplemented by current and anticipated market conditions, estimated growth rates, and management’s plans. Under the market approach, fair value is derived from metrics of publicly traded companies or historically completed transactions of comparable businesses (i.e. guideline companies). The selection of comparable businesses is based on the markets in which the reporting units operate giving consideration to risk profiles, size, geography, and diversity of products and services.
Long-lived assets to be held and used, including identifiable intangible assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be fully recoverable. These events or changes in circumstances may include a significant deterioration of operating results, changes in business plans or changes in anticipated future cash flows. If an impairment indicator is present, we evaluate recoverability by a comparison of the carrying amount of the assets or asset group to future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the lowest level of asset group. If the assets or asset group are impaired, the impairment recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the assets. Fair value is generally determined by estimates of discounted cash flows. The discount rate used in any estimate of discounted cash flows would be the rate required for similar investment of like risk.
The recoverability assessment with respect to each of the tradenames used in our operations requires us to estimate the fair value of the asset as of the assessment date. Such determination is made using discounted cash flow techniques (Level 3 determination of fair value). Significant inputs to the valuation model include future revenue and profitability projections associated with the tradename through relief of royalty approach; estimated market royalty rates that could be derived from the licensing of our tradenames to third parties in order to establish the cash flows accruing to the benefit of the Company as a result of our ownership of our tradenames; and rate used to discount the estimated royalty cash flow projections to their present value (or estimated fair value).
At February 28, 2021, we had $94.6 million in goodwill and $37.5 million in other net intangible assets, recorded on our consolidated balance sheet. Additionally, we had three reporting units with two reporting units under our Software and Subscription Services segment. Our Telematics Products segment includes $39.2 million of goodwill and our Software & Subscription Service segment includes $55.4 million. Earlier in our fiscal year ended February 28, 2021, we had a fourth reporting unit, LoJack US SVR Products.
During the current fiscal year, we determined that the prolonged secular decline in revenues from our legacy LoJack US SVR Products coupled with the slower than anticipated market penetration of our telematics solutions in the U.S. automotive dealership channel represented determinate indications of impairment. These factors were further exacerbated by the unfavorable impact that the COVID-19 pandemic has had on the automotive end markets. Consequently, we decided to wind down the business and fully impaired the goodwill associated with the LoJack U.S. SVR segment along with certain intangible and other long-lived assets. The LoJack U.S. SVR reportable segment is presented as discontinued operations as of February 28, 2021 due to the wind down and subsequent sale of the business.
See Note 8, Property and Equipment, and Note 9, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Our effective tax rates differ from the statutory rate, primarily due to the tax impact of state taxes, foreign operations, R&D tax credits, foreign-derived intangible income deductions, global intangible low-taxed income, tax audit settlements, nondeductible compensation, international realignments, and transfer pricing adjustments. Our tax provision for income taxes is inherently difficult to estimate and record. This is due to the complex nature of the U.S. and International tax codes; earnings being different than anticipated in countries with different tax rates; by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities; by changes in tax laws and regulations, treaties, or interpretations thereof, including changes to the taxation of earnings of our foreign subsidiaries, the deductibility of expenses attributable to foreign income, and the foreign tax credit rules.
Significant judgment is required in evaluating our uncertain tax positions and determining our provision for income taxes. Although we believe our reserves are reasonable, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be different from that which is reflected in our historical income tax provisions and accruals. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will impact the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made. The provision for income taxes includes the impact of reserve provisions and changes to reserves that are considered appropriate, as well as the related net interest and penalties.
Significant judgment is also required in determining any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider all available evidence, including past operating results, estimates of future taxable income, and the feasibility of tax planning strategies. In the event that we change our determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, we will adjust our valuation allowance with a corresponding impact to the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made.
At February 28, 2021, our federal income tax loss carryforwards were approximately $50.4 million, our state income tax loss carryforwards were approximately $48.4 million, and our foreign income tax loss carryforwards were approximately $57.0 million. Since these losses have varying degrees of carryforward periods, it requires us to estimate the amount of carryforward losses that we can reasonably expect to realize. Future changes in anticipated earnings could change the amount of carry forward losses that we expect to realize and the amount of valuation allowances we have recorded (see Note 14, Income Taxes, for additional information).
Forward Looking Statements
Forward looking statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K which include, without limitation, statements relating to our plans, strategies, objectives, expectations, intentions, projections and other information regarding future performance, are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. The words “may”, “will”, “could”, “plans”, “intends”, “seeks”, “believes”, “anticipates”, “expects”, “estimates”, “judgment”, “goal”, and variations of these words and similar expressions, are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements reflect our current views with respect to future events and financial performance and are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that are difficult to predict, including, without limitation, product demand, competitive pressures and pricing declines in our markets, the timing of customer approvals of new product designs, intellectual property infringement claims, interruption or failure of our Internet-based systems used to wirelessly configure and communicate with the tracking and monitoring devices that we sell, our potential needs for additional capital, the impact of adverse and uncertain economic conditions in the U.S. and international markets, the effects of global outbreaks of pandemics or contagious diseases or fear of such outbreaks, such as the recent coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, our ability to accurately forecast demand for our products and manage our inventory, our ability to successfully enter new geographic markets, manage our international expansion and comply with any applicable laws and regulations, significant disruption in, or breach in security of our ERP systems and resultant interruptions in service and any related impact on our reputation, the attraction and retention of qualified employees and key personnel and our ability to maintain our corporate culture as we continue to grow, the sufficiency of our cash and cash equivalents to meet our liquidity needs and service our indebtedness, and other risks and uncertainties that are set forth under the caption in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (Risk Factors). Such risks and uncertainties could cause actual results to differ materially and adversely from historical or anticipated results. Although we believe the expectations reflected in such forward-looking statements are based upon reasonable assumptions, we can give no assurance that our expectations will be attained. We undertake no obligation to revise or publicly release the results of any revision to these forward-looking statements, except as required by law. Given these risks and uncertainties, readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements.