Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on December 27, 2019 (inception) as a Cayman Islands exempted company for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We are not limited to a particular industry or geographic region for purposes of consummating a business combination, we intend to focus our search for a target business in a variety of industries other than real estate, lodging, oil and gas and energy infrastructure.
The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on May 13, 2020. On May 18, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 69,000,000 units, including 9,000,000 additional units to cover over-allotments, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $690.0 million, and incurring offering costs of $37,748,594, consisting of $12,900,000 of underwriting fees (including an aggregate amount of $900,000 reimbursed by the underwriters for application toward our offering expenses), $24,150,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $698,594 of other offering costs. Each unit consists of one Class A ordinary share and one-third of one redeemable warrant. Each whole warrant will entitle the holder to purchase one Class A ordinary share at an exercise price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated a private placement of 10,533,333 private placement warrants to the sponsor at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant, generating gross proceeds of $15.8 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the private placement, $690.0 million ($10.00 per unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the private placement were placed in the trust account and invested in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account as described below. Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the private placement, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied toward identifying and consummating an initial business combination.
If we are unable to complete a business combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or May 18, 2022 (unless we submit and our shareholders approve an extension of such date), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than 10 business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses and net of taxes paid or payable), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any) and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the other requirements of applicable law. Our Amended and Restated Memorandum and Articles of Association provide that, if we wind up for any other reason prior to the consummation of the initial business combination, we will follow the foregoing procedures with respect to the liquidation of the trust account as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than 10 business days thereafter, subject to applicable Cayman Islands law.
Proposed Business Combination
On November 11, 2020, we entered into a Business Combination Agreement (as it may be amended, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time, the “Business Combination Agreement” and the transactions contemplated therein, the “Business Combination”), by and among Jaws, Jaws Merger Sub, LLC, a newly formed Delaware corporation and our wholly-owned subsidiary, Primary Care (ITC) Holdings, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and Primary Care (ITC) Intermediate Holdings, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company. Concurrently with the Business Combination, we will transfer by way of continuation from the Cayman Islands to Delaware and domesticate as a Delaware corporation in accordance with Section 388 of the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware (the “DGCL”) and the Cayman Islands Companies Act (As Revised) (the “Domestication”).
For additional information regarding the Business Combination, see the registration statement on Form S-4 containing a preliminary proxy statement and a preliminary prospectus of Jaws initially filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) on January 25, 2021.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception to December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and after the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing a business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $2,869,977, which consisted of operating expenses of $3,176,907, offset by interest earned on investments held in the Trust Account of $306,930.
For the period from December 27, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, we had a net loss of $5,288, which consisted of formation and operating expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Until the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of Class B ordinary shares by our Sponsor and loans from our Sponsor.
On May 18, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 69,000,000 Units, which includes the full exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option in the amount of 9,000,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $690,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement of an aggregate of 10,533,333 private placement warrants to our sponsor at a price of $1.50 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $15,800,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $690,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $37,748,594 in transaction costs, including $12,900,000 of underwriting fees (including an aggregate amount of $900,000 reimbursed by the underwriters for application towards our offering expenses), $24,150,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $698,594 of other offering costs in connection with the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $1,153,781. Net loss of $2,869,977 was impacted by interest earned on investments of $306,930 and formation expenses paid by the Sponsor of $3,413. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $2,019,713 of cash from operating activities.
At December 31, 2020, we had investments held in the Trust Account of $690,306,930.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less taxes payable (if applicable) and deferred underwriting commissions), to complete the Business Combination. To the extent that our shares or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete the Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the post-Business Combination entity, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
At December 31, 2020, we had cash of $1,037,124 held outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, properties or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating and consummating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination.
Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of the Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with the Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of the Business Combination. If we are unable to complete the
Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following the Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Related Party Transactions
Class B Ordinary Shares
On December 27, 2019, we issued one of our Class B ordinary shares to the sponsor for no consideration. On January 17, 2020, the sponsor paid $25,000 to cover certain of our offering costs in consideration of 11,500,000 Class B ordinary shares, par value $0.0001. On April 24, 2020, May 8, 2020 and May 13, 2020, we effected share capitalizations resulting in the sponsor holding an aggregate of 17,250,000 Class B ordinary shares. In May 2020, the sponsor transferred 25,000 Class B ordinary shares to each of the independent directors on our board of directors. Of the 17,250,000 shares outstanding as of December 31, 2020, the sponsor owned an aggregate of 17,175,000 Class B ordinary shares and the independent directors owned an aggregate of 75,000 Class B ordinary shares.
The Class B ordinary shares will automatically convert into Class A ordinary shares upon the consummation of a business combination, or earlier at the option of the holder, on a one-for-one basis. However, if additional Class A ordinary shares or any other equity-linked securities are issued or deemed issued in connection with the initial business combination, the number of Class A ordinary shares issuable upon conversion of all Class B ordinary shares will equal, in the aggregate, 20% of the total number of Class A ordinary shares outstanding after such conversion (after giving effect to any redemptions of Class A ordinary shares by public shareholders), including the total number of Class A ordinary shares issued or deemed issued, or issuable upon conversion or exercise of any equity-linked securities or rights issued or deemed issued, by Jaws in connection with or in relation to the consummation of the initial business combination, excluding any Class A ordinary shares or equity-linked securities exercisable for or convertible into Class A ordinary shares issued, or to be issued, to any seller in the initial business combination and any private placement warrants issued to the sponsor upon conversion of working capital loans, provided that such conversion of Class B ordinary shares will never occur on a less than one-for-one basis.
The holders of the Class B ordinary shares agreed not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Class B ordinary shares until the earlier to occur of: (i) one year after the completion of the initial business combination or (ii) the date on which Jaws completes a liquidation, merger, share exchange or other similar transaction after the initial business combination that results in all of Jaws’ shareholders having the right to exchange their Class A ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property (except to certain permitted transferees). Any permitted transferees will be subject to the same restrictions and other agreements of the initial shareholders with respect to any Class B ordinary shares. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the closing price of the Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share splits, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial business combination, the Class B ordinary shares will be released from the lock-up restrictions.
Private Placement
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, Jaws consummated the private placement of 10,533,333 private placement warrants at a price of $1.50 per warrant to the sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $15.8 million. Each private placement warrants is exercisable for one Class A ordinary share at a price of $11.50 per share. A portion of the proceeds from the sale of the private placement warrants were added to the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering to be held in the trust account. If we do not complete a business combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the private placement warrants will expire worthless. The private placement warrants are non-redeemable and exercisable on a cashless basis so long as they are held by the sponsor or its permitted transferees.
Related Parties Loans
The sponsor had agreed to loan us up to $300,000 (the “Note”) to be used for the payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering. The Note was non-interest bearing, unsecured and was due on the earlier of December 31, 2020 or the closing of the Initial Public Offering. Jaws had borrowed $274,059 under the Note, which was fully repaid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering on May 18, 2020.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (the “Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a business combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the trust account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the trust account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-business combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Business Combination Agreement does not permit Working Capital Loans to convert into warrants. Except as set forth above, to date, the terms of the Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans.
Administrative Service Fee
We agreed, commencing on the effective date of the Initial Public Offering through the earlier of our consummation of a business combination or our liquidation, to pay an affiliate of the sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, and secretarial and administrative services. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred and paid $80,000 in fees for these services.
Registration Rights
Pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement entered into on May 18, 2020, the holders of the Class B ordinary shares, private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans) are entitled to registration rights. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the Business Combination. However, the registration and shareholder rights agreement provides that we will not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until termination of the applicable lock-up period. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Deferred Underwriting Fees
The underwriters were paid a cash underwriting discount of 2.00% of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, or $12,900,000, net of the $900,000 reimbursed by the underwriters to us for expenses incurred in connection with the Initial Public Offering. The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, or $24,150,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Controls and Procedures
We are not currently required to maintain an effective system of internal controls as defined by Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. We will be required to comply with the internal control requirements of the Sarbanes-
Oxley Act for the fiscal year ending December 31, 2021. Only in the event that we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer or an accelerated filer and no longer qualify as an emerging growth company would we be required to comply with the independent registered public accounting firm attestation requirement on internal control over financial reporting. Further, for as long as we remain an emerging growth company as defined in the JOBS Act, we intend to take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not “emerging growth companies” including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the independent registered public accounting firm attestation requirement.
We intend to assess the internal controls of our target business or businesses prior to the completion of the Business Combination and, if necessary, to implement and test additional controls as we may determine are necessary in order to state that we maintain an effective system of internal controls. A target business may not be in compliance with the provisions of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act regarding the adequacy of internal controls. Many small and mid-sized target businesses we may consider for our initial business combination may have internal controls that need improvement in areas such as:
•
staffing for financial, accounting and external reporting areas, including segregation of duties;
•
reconciliation of accounts;
•
proper recording of expenses and liabilities in the period to which they relate;
•
evidence of internal review and approval of accounting transactions;
•
documentation of processes, assumptions and conclusions underlying significant estimates; and
•
documentation of accounting policies and procedures.
Because it will take time, management involvement and perhaps outside resources to determine what internal control improvements are necessary for us to meet regulatory requirements and market expectations for our operation of a target business, we may incur significant expenses in meeting our public reporting responsibilities, particularly in the areas of designing, enhancing, or remediating internal and disclosure controls. Doing so effectively may also take longer than we expect, thus increasing our exposure to financial fraud or erroneous financing reporting.
Once our management’s report on internal controls is complete, we will retain our independent auditors to audit and render an opinion on such report when required by Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. The independent auditors may identify additional issues concerning a target business’s internal controls while performing their audit of internal control over financial reporting.
Off-balance Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of condensed financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and
liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our condensed balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income per ordinary share, basic and diluted for Class A redeemable ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account by the weighted average number of Class A redeemable ordinary shares outstanding since original issuance. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for Class B non-redeemable ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the net income (loss), less income attributable to Class A redeemable ordinary shares, by the weighted average number of Class B non-redeemable ordinary shares outstanding for the periods presented.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the chief executive officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our unaudited condensed financial statements.