ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following MD&A is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition. This section is provided as a supplement to and should be read in conjunction with Items 1, 1A and 8 (which includes our consolidated financial statements) contained in this report.
MD&A is organized as follows:
•
Recent Developments-This section describes significant recent developments.
•
Significant Factors Affecting Our Profitability-This section describes the significant impact on our results of operations caused by crude oil commodity price volatility, seasonality and acquisition and financing activities.
•
Results of Operations-This section provides an analysis of our results of operations, including the results of operations of our business segments and non-GAAP financial measures.
•
Liquidity and Capital Resources-This section provides a discussion of our financial condition and cash flows. It also includes a discussion of our debt, capital requirements, other matters impacting our liquidity and capital resources and an outlook for our business.
•
New Accounting Policies-This section describes new accounting pronouncements that we have already adopted, those that we are required to adopt in the future and those that became applicable in the current year as a result of new circumstances.
•
Critical Accounting Policies Involving Critical Accounting Estimates-This section describes the accounting policies and estimates that we consider most important for our business and that require significant judgment.
Recent Developments
Purchase of the General Partner by the Topper Group
As a result of the GP Purchase, on November 19, 2019, subsidiaries of DMP purchased from subsidiaries of Circle K: 1) 100% of the membership interests in the sole member of the General Partner; 2) 100% of the IDRs issued by the Partnership; and 3) an aggregate of 7,486,131 common units of the Partnership.
Through its control of DMP, the Topper Group controls the sole member of our General Partner and has the ability to appoint all of the members of the Board and to control and manage the operations and activities of the Partnership. As of February 22, 2021, the Topper Group also has beneficial ownership of a 48.9% limited partner interest in the Partnership (see Note 23 for disclosure regarding the elimination of the IDRs).
Equity Restructuring
On January 15, 2020, the Partnership entered into an Equity Restructuring Agreement (the “Equity Restructuring Agreement”) with the General Partner and Dunne Manning CAP Holdings II LLC (“DM CAP Holdings”), a wholly owned subsidiary of DMP.
Pursuant to the Equity Restructuring Agreement, all of the outstanding IDRs of the Partnership, all of which were held by DM CAP Holdings, were cancelled and converted into 2,528,673 newly-issued common units representing limited partner interests in the Partnership based on a value of $45 million and calculated using the volume weighted average trading price of $17.80 per common unit for the 20-day period ended on January 8, 2020, five business days prior to the execution of the Equity Restructuring Agreement (the “20-day VWAP”).
This transaction closed on February 6, 2020, after the record date for the distribution payable on the Partnership’s common units with respect to the fourth quarter of 2019.
Simultaneously with the closing of the equity restructuring, the General Partner executed and delivered the Second Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited Partnership of the Partnership (the “Second Amended and Restated Partnership Agreement”) to give effect to the Equity Restructuring Agreement.
The Second Amended and Restated Partnership Agreement amended and restated the First Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited Partnership of the Partnership, dated as of October 30, 2012, as amended, in its entirety to, among other items, (i) reflect the cancellation of the IDRs and (ii) eliminate certain legacy provisions that no longer apply, including provisions related to the IDRs and subordinated units of the Partnership that were formerly outstanding.
The terms of the Equity Restructuring Agreement were approved by the independent conflicts committee of the Board.
Asset Exchange Transactions with Circle K
During the third quarter of 2020, we completed the asset exchanges contemplated under the Asset Exchange Agreement entered into with Circle K on December 17, 2018 (the “Asset Exchange Agreement”).
In the first asset exchange, which closed on May 21, 2019, Circle K transferred to the Partnership 60 (52 fee; 8 leased) U.S. company operated convenience and fuel retail stores (“CK Properties”) having an aggregate fair value of approximately $58.1 million, and the Partnership transferred to Circle K 17 company operated properties and the real property for eight of the master lease properties (“CAPL Properties”) having an aggregate fair value of approximately $58.3 million.
In the second asset exchange, which closed on September 5, 2019, Circle K transferred to the Partnership 56 (51 fee; 5 leased) CK Properties having an aggregate fair value of approximately $50.2 million, and the Partnership transferred to Circle K the real property for 19 CAPL Properties having an aggregate fair value of approximately $51.4 million.
In the third asset exchange, which closed February 25, 2020, Circle K transferred to the Partnership ten (all fee) U.S. company operated convenience and fuel retail stores having an aggregate fair value of approximately $11.0 million, and the Partnership transferred to Circle K the real property for five CAPL Properties having an aggregate fair value of approximately $10.3 million.
In the fourth asset exchange, which closed April 7, 2020, Circle K transferred to the Partnership 13 (11 fee; 2 leased) CK Properties having an aggregate fair value of approximately $13.1 million, and the Partnership transferred to Circle K the real property for seven CAPL Properties having an aggregate fair value of approximately $12.8 million.
In the fifth asset exchange, which closed May 5, 2020, Circle K transferred to the Partnership 29 (22 fee; 7 leased) CK Properties having an aggregate fair value of approximately $31.5 million, and the Partnership transferred to Circle K the real property for 13 of the CAPL Properties having an aggregate fair value of approximately $31.7 million.
In the sixth and final asset exchange, which closed September 15, 2020, Circle K transferred to the Partnership 23 (17 fee; 6 leased) CK Properties having an aggregate fair value of approximately $20.4 million, and the Partnership transferred to Circle K the real property for four of the CAPL Properties having an aggregate fair value of approximately $20.0 million. Because the sixth asset exchange represents the final closing contemplated by the Asset Exchange Agreement, Circle K also transferred a $6.7 million cash payment, which included the $0.4 million deficit in fair value between the total properties exchanged, to the Partnership in connection with the closing, in accordance with the terms of the Asset Exchange Agreement.
In connection with the closing of these asset exchanges, the stores transferred by Circle K were converted to dealer operated sites as contemplated by the Asset Exchange Agreement and Circle K’s rights under the dealer agreements and agent agreements that were entered into in connection therewith were assigned to the Partnership.
We accounted for the first two tranches of the asset exchange (that closed in 2019) as transactions between entities under common control as our General Partner was owned by Circle K at the time of closing on those transactions.
Since our General Partner was acquired by the Topper Group in November 2019, the Partnership and Circle K were not entities under common control at the time of closing on the third, fourth, fifth and sixth asset exchanges. In connection with these asset exchanges, we recognized gains on the sales of the CAPL Properties, including the proceeds mentioned above, totaling $19.3 million in the statements of operations for 2020.
See Note 3 to the financial statements for additional information.
CST Fuel Supply Exchange Agreement
Effective March 25, 2020, pursuant to the terms of the previously announced CST Fuel Supply Exchange Agreement dated as of November 19, 2019 (the “CST Fuel Supply Exchange Agreement”), between the Partnership and Circle K, Circle K transferred to the Partnership 33 owned and leased convenience store properties (the “Properties”) and certain assets (including fuel supply agreements) relating to such Properties, as well as U.S. wholesale fuel supply contracts covering 331 additional sites (the “DODO Sites”), subject to certain adjustments, and, in exchange therefore, the Partnership transferred to Circle K all of the limited partnership units in CST Fuel Supply that were owned by the Partnership, which represent 17.5% of the outstanding units of CST Fuel Supply (collectively, the “CST Fuel Supply Exchange”). Twelve Properties and 56 DODO Sites (collectively, the “Removed Properties”) were removed from the Exchange Transaction, and Circle K made an aggregate payment of approximately $14.1 million to us in lieu of the Removed Properties, in each case, pursuant to the terms and conditions of the CST Fuel Supply Exchange Agreement.
The assets exchanged by Circle K included (a) fee simple title to all land and other real property and related improvements owned by Circle K at the Properties, (b) Circle K’s leasehold interest in all land and other real property and related improvements leased by Circle K at the Properties, (c) all buildings and other improvements and permanently attached machinery, equipment and other fixtures located on the Properties, (d) all tangible personal property owned by Circle K on the Properties, including all underground storage tanks located on the Properties, (e) all of Circle K’s rights under the dealer agreements related to the Properties and the DODO Sites, (f) Circle K’s rights under the leases to the leased Properties and all tenant leases and certain other contracts related to the Properties, (g) all fuel inventory owned by Circle K and stored in the underground storage tanks at locations operated by dealers that are independent commission marketers, (h) all assignable permits related to the Properties and related assets owned by Circle K, (i) all real estate records and related registrations and reports and other books and records of Circle K to the extent relating to the Properties, and (j) all other intangible assets associated with the foregoing assets (collectively, the “Assets”). The Partnership also assumed certain liabilities associated with the Assets.
The Partnership and Circle K agreed to indemnify each other for, among other things, breaches of their respective representations and warranties contained in the CST Fuel Supply Exchange Agreement for a period of 18 months after the date of closing (except for certain fundamental representations and warranties, which survive until the expiration of the applicable statute of limitations) and for breaches of their respective covenants and for certain liabilities assumed or retained by the Partnership or Circle K, respectively. The respective indemnification obligations of each of the Partnership and Circle K to the other are subject to the limitations set forth in the CST Fuel Supply Exchange Agreement.
In connection with the execution of the CST Fuel Supply Exchange Agreement, the Partnership and Circle K also entered into an Environmental Responsibility Agreement, dated as of November 19, 2019 (the “Environmental Responsibility Agreement”), which agreement sets forth the parties’ respective liabilities and obligations with respect to environmental matters relating to the Properties. As further described in the Environmental Responsibility Agreement, Circle K retained liability for known environmental contamination or non-compliance at the Properties, and the Partnership assumed liability for unknown environmental contamination and non-compliance at the Properties.
The terms of the CST Fuel Supply Exchange Agreement were approved by the independent conflicts committee of the Board.
In connection with closing on the CST Fuel Supply Exchange, on March 25, 2020, we entered into a limited consent (the “Consent”) to our credit facility, among the Partnership, the lenders from time to time party thereto and Citizens Bank, N.A., as administrative agent. Pursuant to the Consent, the lenders consented to the consummation of the CST Fuel Supply Exchange.
The fair value of our investment in CST Fuel Supply that was divested and the Assets acquired was $69.0 million based on a discounted cash flow analysis. We accounted for the divestiture of our investment in CST Fuel Supply under ASC 860, “Transfers and Servicing.” We recorded a gain on the divestiture of our investment in CST Fuel Supply of $67.6 million in 2020, representing the fair value of assets received less the carrying value of the investment exchanged. At the closing of the CST Fuel Supply Exchange, we divested 100% of our ownership interest in CST Fuel Supply and no longer have any involvement with CST Fuel Supply.
See Note 4 to the financial statements for additional information.
Retail and Wholesale Acquisition
On April 14, 2020, we closed on an asset purchase agreement (“Asset Purchase Agreement”) with the sellers (“Sellers”) signatories thereto, including certain entities affiliated with the Topper Group that are under common control with the Partnership. Pursuant to the Asset Purchase Agreement, we expanded the retail operations of the Partnership by 169 sites (154 company operated sites and 15 commission sites) through a combination of (1) entering into new leasing arrangements with related parties as the lessee for 62 sites and (2) terminating contracts where we were previously the lessor and fuel supplier under dealer arrangements for 107 sites which, as a result of the Asset Purchase Agreement, are now company operated sites. As a result of the Asset Purchase Agreement, we have expanded our wholesale fuel distribution by 110 sites, including 53 third-party wholesale dealer contracts, and supply of the 62 newly leased sites.
The Asset Purchase Agreement provided for an aggregate consideration of $36 million, exclusive of inventory and in-store cash, with approximately $21 million paid in cash and 842,891 newly-issued common units valued at $15 million and calculated based on the volume weighted average trading price of $17.80 per common unit for the 20-day period ended on January 8, 2020, five business days prior to the announcement of the transaction. The 842,891 common units were issued to entities controlled by Joseph V. Topper, Jr. The cash portion of the purchase price was financed with borrowings under our credit facility.
In connection with the closing of the transactions contemplated under the Asset Purchase Agreement, we assumed certain contracts with third parties and affiliates necessary for the continued operation of the sites, including agreements with dealers and franchise agreements. Further, we have entered into customary triple-net ten-year master leases as lessee with certain affiliates of the Topper Group, with an aggregate annual rent of $8.1 million payable by the Partnership.
In connection with the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Asset Purchase Agreement, our contracts with one of the Sellers, DMS, were terminated and DMS is no longer a customer or lessee of the Partnership. As a result, $8.0 million of the purchase price was accounted for as a loss on lease terminations during 2020. In addition, we wrote off $3.1 million of deferred rent income related to these same leases, also recorded as a loss on lease terminations during 2020.
In addition, the parties performed Phase I environmental site assessments with respect to certain sites. The Sellers agreed to retain liability for known environmental contamination or non-compliance at certain sites, and the Partnership agreed to assume liability for unknown environmental contamination and non-compliance at certain sites.
Further, the Asset Purchase Agreement contains customary representations and warranties of the parties as well as indemnification obligations by Sellers and the Partnership, respectively, to each other. The indemnification obligations must be asserted within 18 months of the closing and are limited to an aggregate of $7.2 million for each party.
The terms of the Asset Purchase Agreement were approved by the independent conflicts committee of the Board.
With this transaction, we not only added wholesale fuel contracts to our portfolio but added retail assets and reestablished a retail capability that enables us to pursue a broader range of acquisition opportunities and provides greater flexibility for optimizing the class of trade for each asset in our portfolio.
See Note 5 to the financial statements for additional information.
Interest Rate Swap Contracts
The interest payments on our credit facility vary based on monthly changes in the one-month LIBOR and changes, if any, in the applicable margin, which is based on our leverage ratio as further discussed in Note 13 to the financial statements. To hedge against interest rate volatility on our variable rate borrowings under the credit facility, on March 26, 2020, we entered into an interest rate swap contract. The interest rate swap contract has a notional amount of $150 million, a fixed rate of 0.495% and matures on April 1, 2024. On April 15, 2020, we entered into two additional interest rate swap contracts, each with notional amounts of $75 million, a fixed rate of 0.38% and that mature on April 1, 2024. All of these interest rate swap contracts have been designated as cash flow hedges and are expected to be highly effective.
See Note 14 to the financial statements for additional information.
Topper Group Omnibus Agreement
On January 15, 2020, the Partnership entered into an Omnibus Agreement, effective as of January 1, 2020 (the “Topper Group Omnibus Agreement”), among the Partnership, the General Partner and DMI. The terms of the Topper Group Omnibus Agreement were approved by the independent conflicts committee of the Board, which is composed of the independent directors of the Board.
Pursuant to the Topper Group Omnibus Agreement, DMI agreed, among other things, to provide, or cause to be provided, to the General Partner for the benefit of the Partnership, at cost without markup, certain management, administrative and operating services, which services were previously provided by Circle K under the Transitional Omnibus Agreement, dated as of November 19, 2019, among the Partnership, the General Partner and Circle K.
The Topper Group Omnibus Agreement will continue in effect until terminated in accordance with its terms. The Topper Group has the right to terminate the Topper Group Omnibus Agreement at any time upon 180 days’ prior written notice, and the General Partner has the right to terminate the Topper Group Omnibus Agreement at any time upon 60 days’ prior written notice.
See Note 16 to the financial statements for additional information.
COVID-19 Pandemic
During the first quarter of 2020, an outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus spread worldwide, including to the U.S., posing public health risks that have reached pandemic proportions. The COVID-19 Pandemic poses a threat to the health and economic wellbeing of employees of the Topper Group that provide services to us, customers, vendors, distribution channels and other business partners. Currently, our operations have been deemed essential by the state and local governments in which we operate. Of the 33 states in which we operate, 30 were, at certain points during 2020, under a state mandated stay-at-home order, limiting our customers to only essential travel. The operation of all of our retail sites is critically dependent on employees of the Topper Group who staff these locations. To ensure the wellbeing of those employees and their families, we have implemented safety protocols as outlined by the CDC’s guidelines for the COVID-19 Pandemic to support daily field operations and provided personal protection equipment to those employees whose positions necessitate them, and we have implemented work from home policies at our corporate office consistent with CDC guidance to reduce the risks of exposure to the COVID-19 Pandemic while still supporting our operations.
We do not have fleet operations but rely on common carriers to distribute and deliver our products. Although we have not experienced significant disruptions to date, if these distribution channels were adversely impacted by the COVID-19 Pandemic, delivery of our products could be jeopardized. Also, sustained volume decreases and less foot-traffic resulting from the COVID-19 Pandemic may lead to cash flow constraints at our dealer-operated locations potentially posing increased credit risk and leading to a default on their fuel supply or lease agreements with us.
Although we have not experienced significant costs to date, we may incur costs related to the implementation of prescribed safety protocols related to the COVID-19 Pandemic. With the April 14, 2020 closing of our acquisition of retail and wholesale assets, the Partnership now has 150 company operated sites (see Note 5 to the financial statements for additional information). In the event there are confirmed diagnoses of COVID-19 within a significant number of these stores, we may incur costs related to the closing and subsequent cleaning of these stores and the ability to adequately staff the impacted sites. We may also experience reputation risk as consumers may choose to frequent alternate locations not operated by us.
We experienced a sharp decrease in fuel volume in mid-to-late March. Although fuel volumes recovered during the second half of 2020, they remain below historical levels. For 2020, the negative impact of the volume decrease on fuel gross profit was partially offset by the positive impact from the decline in crude prices during the second quarter of 2020, which increased DTW margins.
As a result of the implications of COVID-19, we assessed property and equipment, other long-lived assets and goodwill for impairment and concluded no assets were impaired as of March 31, 2020. No indicators of impairment stemming from the COVID-19 Pandemic have been identified since. See Note 9 to the financial statements for information regarding impairment charges related primarily to classifying sites as assets held for sale.
We cannot predict the scope and severity with which COVID-19 will impact our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Sustained decreases in fuel volume or erosion of margin could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, cash flow, financial position and ultimately our ability to pay distributions.
Significant Factors Affecting our Profitability
The Significance of Crude Oil and Wholesale Motor Fuel Prices on Our Revenues, Cost of Sales and Gross Profit
Wholesale segment
The prices paid to our motor fuel suppliers for wholesale motor fuel (which affects our cost of sales) are highly correlated to the price of crude oil. The crude oil commodity markets are highly volatile, and the market prices of crude oil, and, correspondingly, the market prices of wholesale motor fuel, experience significant and rapid fluctuations. We receive a fixed mark-up per gallon on approximately 71% of gallons sold to our customers. The remaining gallons are primarily DTW priced contracts with our customers. These contracts provide for variable, market-based pricing that results in motor fuel gross profit effects similar to retail motor fuel gross profits (as crude oil prices decline, motor fuel gross profit generally increases, as discussed in our Retail segment below). The increase in DTW gross profit results from the cost of wholesale motor fuel declining at a faster rate as compared to the rate that retail motor fuel prices decline. Conversely, our DTW motor fuel gross profit declines when the cost of wholesale motor fuel increases at a faster rate as compared to the rate that retail motor fuel prices increase.
Regarding our supplier relationships, a majority of our total gallons purchased are subject to Terms Discounts. The dollar value of these discounts increases and decreases corresponding to motor fuel prices. Therefore, in periods of lower wholesale motor fuel prices, our gross profit is negatively affected, and, in periods of higher wholesale motor fuel prices, our gross profit is positively affected (as it relates to these discounts).
Retail segment
We attempt to pass along wholesale motor fuel price changes to our retail customers through “at the pump” retail price changes; however, market conditions do not always allow us to do so immediately. The timing of any related increase or decrease in “at the pump” retail prices is affected by competitive conditions in each geographic market in which we operate. As such, the prices we charge our customers for motor fuel and the gross profit we receive on our motor fuel sales can increase or decrease significantly over short periods of time.
Changes in our average motor fuel selling price per gallon and gross margin are directly related to the changes in crude oil and wholesale motor fuel prices. Variations in our reported revenues and cost of sales are, therefore, primarily related to the price of crude oil and wholesale motor fuel prices and generally not as a result of changes in motor fuel sales volumes, unless otherwise indicated and discussed below.
We typically experience lower retail motor fuel gross profits in periods when the wholesale cost of motor fuel increases, and higher retail motor fuel gross profits in periods when the wholesale cost of motor fuel declines.
As previously reported, we converted 46 company operated sites to dealer operated sites in the third quarter of 2019. As a result of this transition, we did not have any company operated sites for the period from September 30, 2019 through closing on the retail and wholesale acquisition on April 14, 2020, since which we have again been operating company operated sites.
Seasonality Effects on Volumes
Our business is subject to seasonality due to our wholesale and retail sites being located in certain geographic areas that are affected by seasonal weather and temperature trends and associated changes in retail customer activity during different seasons. Historically, sales volumes have been highest in the second and third quarters (during the summer months) and lowest during the winter months in the first and fourth quarters.
Impact of Inflation
Inflation affects our financial performance by increasing certain of our operating expenses and cost of goods sold. Operating expenses include labor costs, leases, and general and administrative expenses. While our Wholesale segment benefits from higher Terms Discounts as a result of higher fuel costs, inflation could negatively impact our operating expenses. Although we have historically been able to pass on increased costs through price increases, there can be no assurance that we will be able to do so in the future.
Acquisition and Financing Activity
Our results of operations and financial condition are also impacted by our acquisition and financing activities as summarized below.
•
On April 1, 2019, we entered into a new credit facility as further discussed in “Liquidity and Capital Resources-Debt” and Note 13 to the financial statements. On November 19, 2019, we further amended the new credit facility to allow for the GP Purchase.
•
On May 21, 2019 and September 5, 2019, we completed the first two asset exchange transactions with Circle K as further discussed in Note 3 to the financial statements.
•
We completed four additional tranches of the asset exchange with Circle K on February 25, 2020, April 7, 2020, May 5, 2020 and September 15, 2020, as further described in Note 3 to the financial statements. With the closing of the sixth tranche, the transactions contemplated under the Asset Exchange Agreement have concluded.
•
On February 6, 2020, we closed on the Equity Restructuring Agreement that eliminated the IDRs as further discussed in Note 23 to the financial statements.
•
Effective March 25, 2020, we closed on the CST Fuel Supply Exchange as further described in Note 4 to the financial statements.
•
On April 14, 2020, we closed on the acquisition of retail and wholesale assets as further described in Note 5 to the financial statements.
Adoption of ASC 842 on Lease Accounting
As further discussed in Notes 2 and 24 to the financial statements, we adopted ASC 842 effective January 1, 2019, and as a result, our results for 2020 and 2019 are not directly comparable to the results for 2018. Most significantly, payments on our previous failed sale-leaseback obligations were characterized as principal and interest expense in periods prior to 2019. Starting in 2019, these payments are characterized as rent expense. These payments for the Wholesale and Retail segments amounted to approximately $6.7 million and $0.5 million for 2018, respectively. Of the total payments, $5.5 million was classified as interest expense in 2018.
Conversion of Our Midwest Company Operated Sites to Lessee Dealers
During the third quarter of 2019, we converted 46 company operated Upper Midwest sites to lessee dealer sites. As a result of this transition, we did not have any company operated sites from September 30, 2019 through April 14, 2020, the date of closing on the acquisition of retail and wholesale assets.
Results of Operations
We have omitted discussion of the earliest of the three years covered by our consolidated financial statements presented in this Annual Report because that disclosure was already included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 25, 2020. You are encouraged to reference Part II, Item 7, within that report, for a discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018.
Consolidated Income Statement Analysis
Below is an analysis of our consolidated statements of income and provides the primary reasons for significant increases and decreases in the various income statement line items from period to period. Our consolidated statements of income are as follows (in thousands):
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Consolidated Results
Operating revenues decreased $217 million or 10%, while operating income increased $72 million or 167%.
Operating revenues
Significant items impacting these results prior to the elimination of intercompany revenues were:
•
A $377 million (19%) decrease in our Wholesale segment revenues primarily attributable to the decrease in crude oil prices. The average daily spot price of WTI crude oil decreased 31% to $39.16 per barrel in 2020, compared to $56.98 per barrel in 2019. The wholesale price of motor fuel is highly correlated to the price of crude oil. See “Significant Factors Affecting our Profitability-The Significance of Crude Oil and Wholesale Motor Fuel Prices on Our Revenues, Cost of Sales and Gross Profit.” Volume increased 11% primarily as a result of the volume generated by the asset exchanges with Circle K, the CST Fuel Supply Exchange and the acquisition of the retail and wholesale assets (the average number of sites with wholesale fuel distribution increased 28% from 2019 compared to the same period in 2020), partially offset by the impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic.
•
A $225 million (49%) increase in our Retail segment revenues primarily attributable to a 62% increase in volume driven by the increase in company operated and commission sites as a result of the April 2020 acquisition of retail and wholesale assets and the March 2020 CST Fuel Supply Exchange, partially offset by the divestiture of 17 company operated sites in May 2019 in connection with the first tranche of the asset exchange with Circle K and the conversion of 46 company operated sites to dealer operated sites in the third quarter of 2019 (the average total system sites increased 49% from 2019 compared to the same period in 2020). Partially offsetting these increases was a 16% decrease in the average selling price of motor fuel driven by the decrease in wholesale prices as discussed above. In addition, merchandise revenue increased $75 million driven by the increase in company operated sites as discussed above.
Intersegment revenues
We present the results of operations of our segments on a consistent basis with how our management views the business. Therefore, our segments are presented before intersegment eliminations (which consist of motor fuel sold by our Wholesale segment to our Retail segment). As a result, in order to reconcile to our consolidated change in operating revenues, a discussion of the change in intersegment revenues is included in our consolidated MD&A discussion.
Our intersegment revenues increased $65 million (21%), primarily attributable to the incremental intersegment revenues generated by the company operated and commission sites acquired in the April 2020 acquisition of retail and wholesale assets and the March 2020 CST Fuel Supply Exchange, partially offset by the conversion of 46 company operated sites to dealer operated sites in the third quarter of 2019 and the decrease in wholesale prices discussed above.
Cost of sales
Cost of sales decreased $275 million (14%) as a result of the decrease in wholesale motor fuel prices and from the divestiture of 17 company operated sites in May 2019 in connection with the first tranche of the asset exchange with Circle K and the conversion of 46 company operated sites to dealer operated sites discussed above. Partially offsetting this decrease was the impact of the increase in sites acquired in the asset exchanges with Circle K, the CST Fuel Supply Exchange and the acquisition of retail and wholesale assets mentioned above. In addition, cost of merchandise sales increased $54 million driven by the increase in company operated sites as discussed above.
Gross profit
The increase in gross profit was primarily driven by 1) an increase in motor fuel gross profit driven by DTW margins resulting from the movements in crude prices during the two years as well as the fact that a greater percentage of our wholesale volume is DTW-priced in 2020 in comparison to 2019; and 2) an increase in company operated sites, which increased merchandise gross profit. See “Results of Operations-Segment Results” for additional gross profit analyses.
Income from CST Fuel Supply equity interests and Operating expenses
See “Segment Results” for additional analyses.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $4.1 million (25%) primarily attributable to a $1.4 million increase in acquisition-related costs driven by the asset exchanges with Circle K, the CST Fuel Supply Exchange and the acquisition of retail and wholesale assets. In addition, credit loss expense increased $0.8 million and management fees increased $1.9 million related to the increase in headcount primarily stemming from the April 2020 acquisition of retail and wholesale assets.
Depreciation, amortization and accretion expense
Depreciation, amortization and accretion expense increased $13.7 million (25%) primarily due to $9.1 million of impairment charges recorded in connection with our ongoing real estate rationalization effort and the resulting reclassification of these sites to assets held for sale, as compared to $4.5 million for the comparable period of the prior year. In addition, we recorded additional depreciation and amortization related primarily to the assets acquired in the asset exchanges with Circle K, the CST Fuel Supply Exchange and the acquisition of retail and wholesale assets.
Gain (loss) on dispositions and lease terminations, net
During 2020, we recorded a $67.6 million gain on the sale of our 17.5% investment in CST Fuel Supply (see Note 4 to the financial statements for additional information). In addition, we recorded $19.3 million in gains related to the properties sold in the asset exchanges with Circle K and $6.4 million in gains related to the sale of sites in connection with our ongoing real estate rationalization effort. Partially offsetting these gains, we recorded a $10.9 million loss on lease terminations, including a write-off of deferred rent income, in connection with the April 2020 acquisition of retail and wholesale assets (see Note 5 to the financial statements for additional information).
During 2019, we recorded a $0.5 million loss on the sale of inventory to a third-party multi-site operator in connection with the conversion of the company operated Upper Midwest sites. In addition, we recorded a $0.6 million loss to write off deferred rent income related to DMS giving notice to sever 12 sites in early 2020 from the master lease with us. As a result of replacing dispensers in Alabama as a part of the rebranding effort of those sites, we recorded a $1.0 million loss on disposal. Partially offsetting these losses was a $0.5 million net gain on sales of assets.
Interest expense
Interest expense decreased $10.4 million (39%) primarily driven by a reduction in interest expense on borrowings under our credit facility due to a decrease in the average interest rate from 4.7% to 2.6%.
Income tax benefit
We recorded an income tax benefit of $7.9 million and $1.2 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The benefits were primarily driven by losses incurred by our taxable subsidiaries and changes in state apportionment. See Note 22 for additional information.
Segment Results
We present the results of operations of our segments consistent with how our management views the business. Therefore, our segments are presented before intersegment eliminations (which consist of motor fuel sold by our Wholesale segment to our Retail segment). These comparisons are not necessarily indicative of future results.
Wholesale
The following table highlights the results of operations and certain operating metrics of our Wholesale segment. The narrative following these tables provides an analysis of the results of operations of that segment (thousands of dollars, except for the number of distribution sites and per gallon amounts):
(a)
We adopted ASC 842 effective January 1, 2019 and as a result, results for 2020 and 2019 are not comparable to 2018. See Notes 2 and 24 to the financial statements for additional information.
(b)
Represents income from our equity interest in CST Fuel Supply. See Note 4 to the financial statements for information regarding the CST Fuel Supply Exchange.
(c)
In addition, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we distributed motor fuel to 13 sub-wholesalers who distributed to additional sites, respectively.
(d)
The increase in the independent dealer site count was primarily attributable to the 288 independent dealer contracts acquired in the CST Fuel Supply Exchange and the asset exchange with Circle K which resulted in 26 Circle K sites being converted to independent dealers.
(e)
The increase in the lessee dealer site count was primarily attributable to the 72 lessee dealer sites acquired in the asset exchanges with Circle K, the 18 lessee dealer sites acquired in the CST Fuel Supply Exchange and converting sites operated by DMS to lessee dealer sites, partially offset by the impacts of the acquisition of retail and wholesale assets that resulted in the termination of leases at 48 lessee dealer sites and the real estate rationalization effort.
(f)
The decrease in the DMS site count was primarily attributable to the acquisition of retail and wholesale assets that resulted in the termination of 54 leases with DMS and the conversion of sites operated by DMS to lessee dealer sites.
(g)
The decrease in the Circle K site count was primarily attributable to the asset exchange with Circle K, which resulted in 26 Circle K sites being converted to independent dealer sites.
(h)
The increase in the commission site count was primarily attributable to the 37 commission sites acquired in the CST Fuel Supply Exchange.
(i)
The increase in the company operated site count was primarily attributable to the 154 company operated sites from the acquisition of retail and wholesale assets.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Gross profit increased $24.4 million (19%), while operating income increased $10.2 million (9%). These results were driven by:
Motor fuel gross profit
The $30.9 million (43%) increase in motor fuel gross profit was primarily driven by DTW margins resulting from the movements in crude prices during the two years. In addition, particularly with the acquisition of retail and wholesale assets, a greater percentage of our wholesale volume is DTW-priced in 2020 in comparison to 2019. Volume increased 11% as a result of the asset exchanges with Circle K, the CST Fuel Supply Exchange and the acquisition of retail and wholesale assets, partially offset by the impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic. These increases were partially offset by lower terms discounts as a result of lower crude prices. See “Significant Factors Affecting our Profitability-The Significance of Crude Oil and Wholesale Motor Fuel Prices on Our Revenues, Cost of Sales and Gross Profit.”
Rent gross profit
Rent gross profit decreased $5.9 million (11%) primarily as a result of terminating leases in connection with the acquisition of retail and wholesale assets and $0.5 million in short-term rent concessions, partially offset by the impacts from the conversion of 46 company operated sites to dealer operated sites in the third quarter of 2019 and the CST Fuel Supply Exchange.
Income from CST Fuel Supply equity interests
Income from CST Fuel Supply equity interests decreased $11.6 million as a result of the March 2020 CST Fuel Supply Exchange. See Note 4 to the financial statements for additional information.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses increased $2.7 million (8%) primarily as a result of a $1.1 million increase in environmental costs related to increased remediation reserves and increased costs in compliance testing and monitoring and a $1.0 million increase in insurance costs due to the increase in controlled sites as a result of the acquisitions. In addition, we incurred increases in management fees related to the increase in headcount primarily stemming from the April 2020 acquisition of retail and wholesale assets and a general increase in operating expenses driven by the increase in the number of controlled sites due particularly to the asset exchanges with Circle K, the CST Fuel Supply Exchange and the conversion of 46 company operated sites to dealer operated sites in the third quarter of 2019.
Retail
The following table highlights the results of operations and certain operating metrics of our Retail segment. The narrative following these tables provides an analysis of the results of operations of that segment (thousands of dollars, except for the number of retail sites, gallons sold per day and per gallon amounts):
(a)
We reclassified revenues related to certain ancillary items such as car wash revenue, lottery commissions and ATM commissions from merchandise margin to other revenues to conform to the current year presentation, which amounted to $1.5 million and $3.7 million for 2019 and 2018, respectively. This reclassification also impacted the merchandise gross profit percentages reported for 2019 and 2018.
(b)
The increase in the commission site count was primarily attributable to the 37 commission sites acquired in the CST Fuel Supply Exchange.
(c)
The increase in the company operated site count was primarily attributable to the 154 company operated sites from the acquisition of retail and wholesale assets.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Gross profit increased $33.8 million (146%), while operating income decreased $1.9 million (58%). These results were impacted by:
Gross profit
•
Our motor fuel gross profit increased $7.5 million (147%) attributable to a 62% increase in volume driven by the increase in company operated and commission sites as a result of the April 2020 acquisition of retail and wholesale assets and the March 2020 CST Fuel Supply Exchange, partially offset by the divestiture of 17 company operated sites in May 2019 in connection with the first tranche of the asset exchange with Circle K, the conversion of 46 company operated sites to dealer operated sites in the third quarter of 2019 and the impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic. In addition, we realized a higher average margin per gallon as the higher retail fuel margins at our company operated sites comprised a larger percentage of our overall retail fuel margins in 2020 as compared to 2019.
•
Our merchandise gross profit increased $21.9 million (215%) as a result of the increase in company operated sites driven by the April 2020 acquisition of retail and wholesale assets, partially offset by the divestiture of 17 company operated sites in May 2019 in connection with the first tranche of the asset exchange with Circle K and the conversion of 46 company operated sites to dealer operated sites in the third quarter of 2019. Other revenue increased $3.1 million (207%) due to the same drivers.
•
Rent gross profit increased $1.3 million (21%) due primarily to the commission sites acquired in the April 2020 acquisition of retail and wholesale assets and the March 2020 CST Fuel Supply Exchange.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses increased $35.7 million (179%) due primarily to the increase in company operated and commission sites as a result of the April 2020 acquisition of retail and wholesale assets and CST Fuel Supply Exchange, partially offset by the divestiture of 17 company operated sites in May 2019 in connection with the first tranche of the asset exchange with Circle K and the conversion of 46 company operated sites to dealer operated sites in the third quarter of 2019. Our average company operated site count increased 197% from 2019 to 2020. Further, we lease a greater percentage of our company operated sites in 2020 as compared to 2019. Rent expense at our company operated sites increased $8.7 million.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We use non-GAAP financial measures EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Distributable Cash Flow and Distribution Coverage Ratio. EBITDA represents net income available to us before deducting interest expense, income taxes and depreciation, amortization and accretion (which includes certain impairment charges). Adjusted EBITDA represents EBITDA as further adjusted to exclude equity funded expenses related to incentive compensation and the Circle K Omnibus Agreement, gains or losses on dispositions and lease terminations, net, certain discrete acquisition related costs, such as legal and other professional fees and severance expenses associated with recently acquired companies, and certain other discrete non-cash items arising from purchase accounting. Distributable Cash Flow represents Adjusted EBITDA less cash interest expense, sustaining capital expenditures and current income tax expense. Distribution Coverage Ratio is computed by dividing Distributable Cash Flow by the weighted average diluted common units and then dividing that result by the distributions paid per limited partner unit.
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Distributable Cash Flow and Distribution Coverage Ratio are used as supplemental financial measures by management and by external users of our financial statements, such as investors and lenders. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are used to assess our financial performance without regard to financing methods, capital structure or income taxes and the ability to incur and service debt and to fund capital expenditures. In addition, Adjusted EBITDA is used to assess the operating performance of our business on a consistent basis by excluding the impact of items which do not result directly from the wholesale distribution of motor fuel, the leasing of real property, or the day to day operations of our retail site activities. EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Distributable Cash Flow and Distribution Coverage Ratio are also used to assess the ability to generate cash sufficient to make distributions to our unitholders.
We believe the presentation of EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Distributable Cash Flow and Distribution Coverage Ratio provides useful information to investors in assessing the financial condition and results of operations. EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Distributable Cash Flow and Distribution Coverage Ratio should not be considered alternatives to net income or any other measure of financial performance or liquidity presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Distributable Cash Flow and Distribution Coverage Ratio have important limitations as analytical tools because they exclude some but not all items that affect net income. Additionally, because EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Distributable Cash Flow and Distribution Coverage Ratio may be defined differently by other companies in our industry, our definitions may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies, thereby diminishing their utility.
The following table presents reconciliations of EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, and Distributable Cash Flow to net income, the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure, for each of the periods indicated (in thousands, except for per unit amounts):
(a)
As further discussed in Notes 2 and 24 to the financial statements, we adopted ASC 842 effective January 1, 2019, and as a result, our results for 2020 and 2019 are not directly comparable to the results for 2018. Most significantly, payments on our previous failed sale-leaseback obligations were characterized as principal and interest expense in periods prior to 2019. Starting in 2019, these payments are characterized as rent expense. These payments for the Wholesale and Retail segments amounted to approximately $6.7 million and $0.5 million for 2018, respectively. Of the total payments, $5.5 million was classified as interest expense in 2018.
(b)
As approved by the independent conflicts committee of the Board, the Partnership and Circle K mutually agreed to settle certain amounts due under the terms of the Circle K Omnibus Agreement in limited partner units of the Partnership. All charges allocated to us by Circle K under the Circle K Omnibus Agreement since the first quarter of 2018 through December 31, 2019, and all charges allocated to us under the Topper Group Omnibus Agreement since January 1, 2020, have been paid by us in cash.
(c)
We recorded gains on the sale of CAPL Properties in connection with the asset exchange with Circle K of $19.3 million in 2020. We also recorded gains on the sale of sites in connection with our ongoing real estate rationalization effort of $6.4 million in 2020. Also in 2020, we recorded a $67.6 million gain on the sale of our 17.5% investment in CST Fuel Supply. Also in 2020, we recorded a loss on lease terminations, including the non-cash write-off of deferred rent income associated with these leases, of $10.9 million.
In June 2018, we executed master fuel supply and master lease agreements with a third-party multi-site operator of retail motor fuel stations, to which we transitioned 43 sites in Florida from DMS in 2018. In 2018, in connection with this transition, we paid a $3.8 million contract termination payment to DMS. Additionally, we recorded a $2.4 million charge primarily to write off deferred rent income related to our recapture of these sites from the master lease agreement with DMS.
(d)
Relates to certain acquisition related costs, such as legal and other professional fees, separation benefit costs and purchase accounting adjustments associated with recently acquired businesses.
(e)
Under the Partnership Agreement, sustaining capital expenditures are capital expenditures made to maintain our long-term operating income or operating capacity. Examples of sustaining capital expenditures are those made to maintain existing contract volumes, including payments to renew existing distribution contracts, or to maintain our sites in conditions suitable to lease, such as parking lot or roof replacement/renovation, or to replace equipment required to operate the existing business.
(f)
Consistent with prior divestitures, the current income tax benefit in 2020 and 2019 excludes income tax incurred on the sale of sites. 2020 and 2019 also include the tax benefit of 100% bonus depreciation on the eligible assets acquired in the asset exchanges with Circle K as well as certain dispenser upgrades and rebranding costs.
(g)
On January 21, 2021, the Board approved a quarterly distribution of $0.5250 per unit attributable to the fourth quarter of 2020. The distribution was paid February 9, 2021 to all unitholders of record on February 2, 2021.
(h)
The distribution coverage ratio is computed by dividing Distributable Cash Flow by the weighted average diluted common units and then dividing that result by the distributions paid per limited partner unit.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Our principal liquidity requirements are to finance our operations, fund acquisitions, service our debt and pay distributions to our unitholders. We expect our ongoing sources of liquidity to include cash generated by our operations and borrowings under the revolving credit facility and, if available to us on acceptable terms, issuances of equity and debt securities. We regularly evaluate alternate sources of capital, including sale-leaseback financing of real property with third parties, to support our liquidity requirements.
Our ability to meet our debt service obligations and other capital requirements, including capital expenditures, acquisitions, and partnership distributions, will depend on our future operating performance, which, in turn, will be subject to general economic, financial, business, competitive, legislative, regulatory and other conditions, many of which are beyond our control. As a normal part of our business, depending on market conditions, we will, from time to time, consider opportunities to repay, redeem, repurchase or refinance our indebtedness. Changes in our operating plans, lower than anticipated sales, increased expenses, acquisitions or other events may cause us to seek additional debt or equity financing in future periods.
We believe that we will have sufficient cash flow from operations, borrowing capacity under the revolving credit facility and access to capital markets and alternate sources of funding to meet our financial commitments, debt service obligations, contingencies, anticipated capital expenditures and partnership distributions. However, we are subject to business and operational risks that could adversely affect our cash flow. A material decrease in our cash flows would likely produce an adverse effect on our borrowing capacity as well as our ability to issue additional equity and/or debt securities and/or maintain or increase distributions to unitholders.
See “Recent Developments-COVID-19 Pandemic” for a discussion of the impacts and potential impacts on our liquidity from the COVID-19 Pandemic as well as actions we have taken or could take to mitigate its impact.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes cash flow activity (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities increased $32.2 million for 2020 compared to 2019, primarily attributable to the incremental cash flow generated by the sites added through the asset exchanges with Circle K, the CST Fuel Supply Exchange, the acquisition of retail and wholesale assets and the strong DTW margins in 2020, partially offset by the impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic. Additionally, changes in working capital stemming primarily from the acquisition of retail and wholesale assets (particularly the related increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other current liabilities) also benefited net cash provided by operating activities in 2020 more than in 2019.
As is typical in our industry, our current liabilities exceed our current assets as a result of the longer settlement of real estate and motor fuel taxes as compared to the shorter settlement of receivables for fuel, rent and merchandise.
Investing Activities
We received $23.0 million from Circle K primarily in connection with the CST Fuel Supply Exchange that closed in March 2020 and the final tranche of the asset exchange with Circle K that closed in September 2020; see Notes 3 and 4 to the financial statements for additional information. In addition, we received $21.2 million in proceeds from disposals during 2020 in connection with our real estate rationalization effort and paid $28.2 million in connection with our April 2020 acquisition of retail and wholesale assets. Also, we incurred capital expenditures of $37.1 million in 2020.
In 2019, we incurred capital expenditures of $24.6 million. Additionally, in 2019, we received $3.1 million in proceeds related to the first and second tranches of the asset exchange with Circle K as a result of the inventory divested at the 17 company operated sites and the security deposits from dealers transferred by Circle K to us. We also received $4.9 million of proceeds on sales of assets.
Financing Activities
In 2020, we paid $77.9 million in distributions and made net repayments on our credit facility of $5.8 million.
In 2019, we paid $73.0 million in distributions and made net borrowings on our credit facility of $21.0 million.
Distributions
Distribution activity for 2020 was as follows (in thousands):
The amount of any distribution is subject to the discretion of the Board, which may modify or revoke our cash distribution policy at any time. Our Partnership Agreement does not require us to pay any distributions. As such, there can be no assurance we will continue to pay distributions in the future.
IDRs
We distributed $0.1 million to the Topper Group and $0.5 million to Circle K with respect to the IDRs in 2020 and 2019, respectively. See Note 23 for a discussion of the elimination of the IDRs, which closed on February 6, 2020.
Debt
As of December 31, 2020, our consolidated debt and finance lease obligations consisted of the following (in thousands):
Our revolving credit facility is secured by substantially all of our assets. Taking the interest rate swap contracts into account, our effective interest rate at December 31, 2020 was 2.10% (our applicable margin was 1.75% as of December 31, 2020). Letters of credit outstanding at December 31, 2020 totaled $4.0 million. The amount of availability under the revolving credit facility at February 22, 2021, after taking into consideration debt covenant restrictions, was $166.6 million.
The credit facility also contains certain financial covenants. We are required to maintain a consolidated leverage ratio (as defined in the credit facility) for the most recently completed four fiscal quarters of 4.75 to 1.00. Such threshold is increased to 5.50 to 1.00 for the quarter during a specified acquisition period. Upon the occurrence of a qualified note offering (as defined in the credit facility), the consolidated leverage ratio when not in a specified acquisition period is increased to 5.25 to 1.00, while the specified acquisition period threshold remains 5.50 to 1.00. Upon the occurrence of a qualified note offering, we are also required to maintain a consolidated senior secured leverage ratio (as defined in the credit facility) for the most recently completed four fiscal quarter period of not greater than 3.75 to 1.00. Such threshold is increased to 4.00 to 1.00 for the quarter during a specified acquisition period. We are also required to maintain a consolidated interest coverage ratio (as defined in the credit facility) of at least 2.50 to 1.00. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with these financial covenants.
See Note 13 to the financial statements for additional information on the credit facility.
Capital Expenditures
We make investments to expand, upgrade and enhance existing assets. We categorize our capital requirements as either sustaining capital expenditures, growth capital expenditures or acquisition capital expenditures. Sustaining capital expenditures are those capital expenditures required to maintain our long-term operating income or operating capacity. Acquisition and growth capital expenditures are those capital expenditures that we expect will increase our operating income or operating capacity over the long term. We have the ability to fund our capital expenditures by additional borrowings under our revolving credit facility or, if available to us on acceptable terms, accessing the capital markets and issuing additional equity, debt securities or other options, such as the sale of assets. Our ability to access the capital markets may have an impact on our ability to fund acquisitions. We may not be able to complete any offering of securities or other options on terms acceptable to us, if at all.
The following table outlines our capital expenditures and acquisitions (in thousands):
As noted previously, the increase in growth capital expenditures was largely driven by dispenser upgrades, EMV upgrades and rebranding of sites.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 are summarized below (in thousands):
Credit Facility
As discussed previously, our credit agreement matures April 25, 2024. See Note 13 to the financial statements for additional information.
Interest Payments on Debt
Such amounts include estimates of interest expense related to our credit facility assuming a 2.10% interest rate. The rate assumed takes into account the interest rate swap contracts.
Finance Lease Obligations
We have certain retail site properties under finance leases. Finance lease obligations in the table above include both principal and interest. See Note 13 to the financial statements for additional information.
Operating Lease Obligations
The operating lease obligations include leases for land, office facilities and retail sites. Operating lease obligations reflected in the table above include all operating leases that have initial or remaining non-cancelable terms in excess of one year and are not reduced by minimum rentals to be received by us under subleases. In addition, such amounts do not reflect contingent rentals that may be incurred in addition to minimum rentals.
Our principal executive offices are in Allentown, Pennsylvania, in an office space leased by the Topper Group, for which the rent is charged to us as a cost under the Topper Group Omnibus Agreement. Future lease payments on this office lease are included within operating lease obligations.
See Note 15 to the financial statements for additional information.
Other Liabilities
We have excluded asset retirement obligations and other liabilities for which the timing of payment or the amount is not determinable.
Under the terms of various supply agreements, the Partnership is obligated to minimum volume purchases measured in gallons of motor fuel. Future minimum volume purchase requirements are 580 million gallons in 2021, reducing to 274 million gallons in 2025. Future minimum volume purchase requirements from 2026 through 2030 total 1.2 billion gallons. The aggregate dollar amount of the future minimum volume purchase requirements is dependent on the future weighted average wholesale cost per gallon charged under the applicable supply agreements. The amounts and timing of the related payment obligations cannot reasonably be estimated reliably. As a result, payment of these amounts has been excluded from the table above. See Note 18 to the financial statements for additional information.
Concentration of Customers
Approximately 12% of our rent income for 2020 was from one multi-site operator.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Topper Group Omnibus Agreement contingently requires us to perform environmental remediation work as further discussed in Note 16 to the financial statements. We also have operating leases and motor fuel purchase commitments as previously discussed in “Contractual Obligations” and in Notes 15 and 18 to the financial statements.
Contingencies
Environmental Matters
See Note 17 to the financial statements for a discussion of environmental matters.
Legal Matters
See Note 18 to the financial statements for a discussion of legal matters.
Quarterly Results of Operations
See Note 26 to the financial statements for quarterly financial and operating data for each quarter of 2020 and 2019.
Outlook
As noted previously, the prices paid to our motor fuel suppliers for wholesale motor fuel (which affects our cost of sales) are highly correlated to the price of crude oil. The crude oil commodity markets are highly volatile, and the market prices of crude oil, and, correspondingly, the market prices of wholesale motor fuel, experience significant and rapid fluctuations, which affect our motor fuel gross profit. See “Significant Factors Affecting our Profitability-The Significance of Crude Oil and Wholesale Motor Fuel Prices on Our Revenues, Cost of Sales and Gross Profit” for additional information.
Our results for 2021 are anticipated to be impacted by the following:
•
Transactions effected pursuant to the Asset Exchange Agreement entered into with Circle K are anticipated to increase motor fuel volume and motor fuel gross profit.
•
The CST Fuel Supply Exchange is anticipated to increase motor fuel volume and motor fuel gross profit.
•
The acquisition of retail and wholesale contracts from the Topper Group and certain other parties is anticipated to increase gross profit both within the Wholesale and Retail segments.
•
We anticipate that we will continue to realize reductions in our fuel costs as a result of new or amended fuel purchase contracts.
•
Our volume starting in mid-March 2020 was and continues to be negatively impacted by the COVID-19 Pandemic, which negatively impacts fuel gross profit. See “Recent Developments-COVID-19 Pandemic” for additional information and actions we have and could take in the future to mitigate its impact.
We will continue to evaluate acquisitions on an opportunistic basis. Additionally, we will pursue acquisition targets that fit into our strategy. Whether we will be able to execute acquisitions will depend on market conditions, availability of suitable acquisition targets at attractive terms, acquisition related compliance with customary regulatory requirements, and our ability to finance such acquisitions on favorable terms and in compliance with our debt covenant restrictions.
New Accounting Policies
For information on recent accounting pronouncements impacting our business, see Note 2 to the financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies Involving Critical Accounting Estimates
We prepare our financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. See Note 2 to the financial statements for a summary of our significant accounting policies.
Critical accounting policies are those we believe are both most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results, and require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often because we must make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Judgments and uncertainties affecting the application of those policies may result in materially different amounts being reported under different conditions or using different assumptions. We believe the following policies to be the most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in preparing our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We have applied ASC 606 since January 1, 2018. The core principle of the guidance is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods and services. This guidance applies to over 90% of our revenues as the only primary revenue stream outside the scope of this guidance is rental income.
Revenues from the delivery of motor fuel are recorded at the time of delivery to our customers, by which time the price is fixed, title to the products has transferred and payment has either been received or collection is reasonably assured, net of applicable discounts and allowances. Incremental costs incurred to obtain certain contracts with customers are deferred and amortized over the contract term and are included in other noncurrent assets on the balance sheets. Amortization of such costs are classified as a reduction of operating revenues.
Revenues from the sale of convenience store products are recognized at the time of sale to the customer.
Revenues from leasing arrangements for which we are the lessor are recognized ratably over the term of the underlying lease.
In transactions in which we sell and lease back property, we apply guidance from ASC 606 in determining whether the transfer of the property should be accounted for as a sale. Specifically, we assess if we have satisfied a performance obligation by transferring control of the property.
In 2020, we closed on tranches of the Asset Exchange Agreement and CST Fuel Supply Exchange with Circle K, both representing largely nonmonetary transactions. We apply provisions of ASC 606, ASC 845 and ASC 860 as applicable to our nonmonetary exchanges based on the individual facts and circumstances of each transaction. For these particular transactions, we estimated the fair value of the assets divested and acquired based on an income approach using discount rates commensurate with the risk inherent in the cash flows, similar to how we estimate fair value in an asset acquisition or business combination as further described below. We record gains and losses as required by the applicable guidance, in these cases representing the excess of the fair value of the assets and cash consideration received less the carrying value of the assets divested. See Notes 3 and 4 to the financial statements for additional information.
Accounts receivable primarily result from the sale of motor fuels to customers. Our accounts receivable is generally considered as having a similar risk profile. Credit is extended to a customer based on an evaluation of the customer’s financial condition. In certain circumstances collateral may be required from the customer and fuel and lease agreements are generally cross-collateralized when applicable. Receivables are recorded at face value, without interest or discount.
The allowance for credit losses is generally based upon historical experience while also factoring in any new business conditions that might impact the historical analysis, such as market conditions and bankruptcies of particular customers. Credit loss expense is included in general and administrative expenses. We review all accounts receivable balances on at least a quarterly basis.
LGW collects motor fuel taxes, which consist of various pass-through taxes collected from customers on behalf of taxing authorities and remits such taxes directly to those taxing authorities. LGW’s accounting policy is to exclude the taxes collected and remitted from wholesale revenues and cost of sales and account for them as liabilities. LGWS’s retail sales and cost of sales include motor fuel taxes as the taxes are included in the cost paid for motor fuel and LGWS has no direct responsibility to collect or remit such taxes to the taxing authorities.
See Notes 7 and 24 to the financial statements for additional information on our revenues and related receivables.
Asset Acquisitions and Business Combinations
When closing on an acquisition, we must first determine whether substantially all of the fair value of the set of gross assets acquired is concentrated in a single identifiable asset or a group of similar identifiable assets. If this threshold is met, the set is not a business. If this threshold is not met, we determine whether the set meets the definition of a business.
A business is defined as an integrated set of assets and activities that is capable of being conducted and managed for the purpose of providing a return to investors or other owners, members or participants. A business typically has inputs, processes applied to those inputs and outputs that are used to generate a return to investors, but outputs are not required for a set to be a business. A business must include, at a minimum, an input and a substantive process that together significantly contribute to the ability to create outputs.
We account for asset acquisitions (i.e. transactions involving the acquisition of a set of assets that does not meet the definition of a business) in accordance with the guidance under ASC 805-50 and other applicable guidance. Asset acquisitions are generally accounted for by allocating the cost of the acquisition to the individual assets acquired and liabilities assumed on a relative fair value basis. Two of the key differences in accounting for transactions as asset acquisitions as compared to business combination are summarized below:
•
Transaction costs are capitalized as a component of the cost of the assets acquired rather than expensed as incurred;
•
Goodwill is not recognized. Rather, any excess consideration transferred over the fair value of the net assets acquired is allocated on a relative fair value basis to the identifiable net assets other than certain non-qualifying assets as defined in the guidance.
We account for business combinations in accordance with the guidance under ASC 805-Business Combinations. The purchase price is recorded for assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on fair value. The excess of the fair value of the consideration conveyed over the fair value of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
The income statement includes the results of operations for each acquisition from their respective date of acquisition.
Whether we account for a transaction as an asset acquisition or a business combination, determining the fair value of these items requires management’s judgment, the utilization of independent valuation experts and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions with respect to the timing and amounts of future cash inflows and outflows, discount rates, market prices and asset lives, among other items. The judgments made in the determination of the estimated fair value assigned to the assets acquired, the liabilities assumed and any noncontrolling interest in the investee, as well as the estimated useful life of each asset and the duration of each liability, can materially impact the financial statements in periods after acquisition, such as through depreciation and amortization.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the fair value of the consideration conveyed to acquire a business over the fair value of the net assets acquired. Goodwill is not amortized, but instead is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level at least annually, and more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that the goodwill might be impaired. The annual impairment testing date of goodwill is October 1.
In performing our annual impairment analysis, ASC 350-20, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other, allows us to use qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not (likelihood of more than 50%) that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill. We consider macroeconomic conditions such as developments in equity and
credit markets, industry and market conditions such as the competitive environment, cost factors such as changes in our cost of fuel, our financial performance and our unit price.
If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, no further testing is necessary. However, if we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then we perform the goodwill impairment test.
In the goodwill impairment test, the reporting unit’s carrying amount (including goodwill) and its fair value are compared. If the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than the carrying value, an impairment charge is recognized for the deficit up to the amount of goodwill recorded.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had goodwill totaling $88.8 million. Of the December 31, 2020 balance, $74.2 million was assigned to the wholesale reporting unit and $14.6 million was assigned to the retail reporting unit. After assessing the totality of events and circumstances, we determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting units exceed their carrying amounts and therefore goodwill is not impaired at December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Tax Matters
As a limited partnership, we are not subject to federal and state income taxes. Income tax attributable to our taxable income, which may differ significantly from income for financial statement purposes, is assessed at the individual level of the unit holder. We are subject to a statutory requirement that non-qualifying income, as defined by the Internal Revenue Code, cannot exceed 10% of total gross income for the calendar year. If non-qualifying income exceeds this statutory limit, we would be taxed as a corporation. The non-qualifying income did not exceed the statutory limit in any period.
Certain activities that generate non-qualifying income are conducted through our wholly owned taxable corporate subsidiary, LGWS. Current and deferred income taxes are recognized on the earnings of LGWS. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and are measured using enacted tax rates.
Valuation allowances are initially recorded and reevaluated each reporting period by assessing the likelihood of the ultimate realization of a deferred tax asset. We consider a number of factors in assessing the realization of a deferred tax asset, including the reversal of temporary differences, projections of future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. The amount of deferred tax assets ultimately realized may differ materially from the estimates utilized in the computation of valuation allowances and may materially impact the financial statements in the future.