Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or elsewhere in this report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and our performance and future success, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” You should review the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
In this discussion, we use financial measures that are considered non-GAAP financial measures under Securities and Exchange Commission rules. These rules regarding non-GAAP financial measures require supplemental explanation and reconciliation, which are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Investors should not consider non-GAAP financial measures in isolation from or in substitution for, financial information presented in compliance with United States generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP.
This section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Company Overview
CarGurus is a global, online automotive marketplace connecting buyers and sellers of new and used cars. Using proprietary technology, search algorithms, and innovative data analytics, we believe we are building the world’s most trusted and transparent automotive marketplace and creating a differentiated automotive search experience for consumers. Our trusted marketplace empowers consumers with unbiased third-party validation on pricing and dealer reputation as well as other information that aids them in finding “Great Deals from Top-Rated Dealers.”
We are headquartered in Cambridge, Massachusetts and were incorporated in the State of Delaware on June 26, 2015. We operate principally in the United States. In addition to the United States, we operate online marketplaces under the CarGurus brand in Canada and the United Kingdom. We also operated online marketplaces in Germany, Italy, and Spain until we ceased the operations of each of these marketplaces in the second quarter of 2020. In the United States and the United Kingdom, we also operate the Autolist and PistonHeads online marketplaces, respectively, as independent brands. We have subsidiaries in the United States, Canada, Ireland, and the United Kingdom. Additionally, we have two reportable segments, United States and International. See Note 14 of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on our segment reporting and geographical information.
We generate marketplace subscription revenue from dealers primarily through Listings and Dealer Display subscriptions, and advertising and other revenue from automobile manufacturers and other auto-related brand advertisers as well as partnerships with financing services companies. We generated revenue of $551.5 million in 2020 and $588.9 million in 2019, representing a year-over-year decrease of 6%.
In 2020, we generated net income of $77.6 million and our Adjusted EBITDA was $160.8 million, compared to a net income of $42.1 million and Adjusted EBITDA of $77.0 million in 2019. See “Adjusted EBITDA” below for more information regarding our use of Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, and a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to our net income.
COVID-19 Update
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, now referred to as COVID-19, surfaced and in 2020 was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization after spreading globally. This pandemic has caused an international health crisis and resulted in significant disruptions to the global economy as well as businesses and capital markets around the world.
The COVID-19 pandemic and its adverse effects have become widespread in the locations where we, and our customers, suppliers and third-party business partners conduct business and as a result, we have experienced disruptions in our operations. For example, in March 2020, we closed all of our offices (including our corporate headquarters) and began requiring our employees to work remotely until further notice. In addition, in an effort to limit the spread of COVID-19, many countries, as well as states and localities in the United States, implemented or mandated and continue to implement or mandate significant restrictions on travel and commerce, shelter-in-place or stay-at-home orders, and business closures. Many
of these orders resulted in restrictions on the ability of consumers to buy and sell automobiles by restricting operations at dealerships and/or by closing or reducing the services provided by certain service providers upon which dealerships rely. In addition, these restrictions and continued concern about the spread of the disease have impacted car shopping by consumers and disrupted the operations of car dealerships, which has adversely affected the market for automobile purchases. While consumer demand has improved since the initial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the automotive industry is experiencing, and may continue to experience, inventory supply problems, especially resulting from wholesale used-car auction closures and escalating auction prices, which have adversely affected the level of used-car inventory held by our paying dealers and displayed on our websites.
As a result of the travel and commerce restrictions and the impact on their businesses, for periods during the year ended December 31, 2020 a number of our dealer customers temporarily closed or operated on a reduced capacity, and many dealerships remain temporarily closed, continue to operate on a reduced capacity, and/or otherwise face significant financial challenges. Such closures and circumstances led some paying dealers to cancel their subscriptions and/or reduce their spending with us, which has had and may continue to have a material adverse effect on our revenues and our business. We also experienced an increase in account delinquencies from dealer customers challenged by the COVID-19 pandemic that failed to pay us on time or at all.
Further, because of the significant financial challenges that dealerships have faced and continue to face as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we took measures to help our paying dealers maintain their business health during the COVID-19 pandemic. We proactively reduced the subscription fees for paying dealers by at least 50% on all marketplace subscriptions for the April and May 2020 service periods, as well as provided a fee reduction on all June 2020 marketplace subscriptions of 20% for paying dealers in the United States and Canada and 50% for paying dealers in the United Kingdom. These fee reductions resulted in a modification to contracts with initial contractual periods greater than one month. For any contract modified, we calculated the remaining transaction price and allocated the consideration over the remaining performance obligations. These fee reductions materially and adversely impacted revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting in an approximately $50 million decrease in marketplace subscription revenue. During the December 2020 and February 2021 service periods, we also suspended charging subscription fees for subscribing dealers in the United Kingdom. These fee reductions did not materially impact revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 and are not expected to materially impact revenue for the year ending December 31, 2021. We continue to monitor and assess the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our paying dealers and may in the future take additional measures to help our paying dealers maintain their business health during the COVID-19 pandemic.
These effects from the COVID-19 pandemic on our revenue caused us to implement certain cost-savings measures across our business. For example, during the second quarter of 2020, we initiated a cost-savings initiative that included a reduction in our workforce of approximately 13%, restricted future hiring, and limited discretionary spend across our business, including by eliminating, reducing or pausing certain vendor relationships and ceasing certain international operations and expansion efforts. In particular, we ceased marketplace operations in Germany, Italy, and Spain, and halted any new international expansion efforts, which we believe allows us to focus our financial and human capital resources on our more established international markets in Canada and the United Kingdom. We also reduced consumer marketing across both algorithmic traffic acquisition and brand spend during the year ended December 31, 2020 in comparison to the year ended December 31, 2019 in an effort to reduce expenses and as a result of suppressed dealer inventory and the resulting reduced demand for leads by dealers.
In May 2020, cancellations by paying dealers began to stabilize, which we believe resulted from the resumption of consumer activity as well as the fee reductions that we provided to our customers. In July 2020, we returned to normal contractual billings in all markets until subscription fees were reduced again for the December 2020 and February 2021 service periods for paying dealers in the United Kingdom. Additionally, we increased our consumer marketing expenses as consumer activity increased and governments began to implement phased re-opening policies.
We continue to monitor and assess the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our commercial operations, including the future impact on our revenue. However, we cannot at this time accurately predict what effects these conditions will ultimately have on our future revenue and operations. See the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Key Business Metrics
We regularly review a number of metrics, including the key metrics listed below, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections, and make operating and strategic decisions. We believe it is important to evaluate these metrics for the United States and International segments. The
International segment derives revenues from marketplace subscriptions, advertising services, and other revenues from customers outside of the United States. International markets perform differently from the United States market due to a variety of factors, including our operating history in each market, our rate of investment, market size, market maturity, competition and other dynamics unique to each country.
Monthly Unique Users
For each of our websites, we define a monthly unique user as an individual who has visited any such website within a calendar month, based on data as measured by Google Analytics. We calculate average monthly unique users as the sum of the monthly unique users of each of our websites in a given period, divided by the number of months in that period. We count a unique user the first time a computer or mobile device with a unique device identifier accesses any of our websites during a calendar month. If an individual accesses a website using a different device within a given month, the first access by each such device is counted as a separate unique user. If an individual uses multiple browsers on a single device and/or clears their cookies and returns to our site within a calendar month, multiple users would be recorded. We view our average monthly unique users as a key indicator of the quality of our user experience, the effectiveness of our advertising and traffic acquisition, and the strength of our brand awareness. Measuring unique users is important to us and we believe it provides useful information to our investors because our marketplace subscription revenue depends, in part, on our ability to provide dealers with connections to our users and exposure to our marketplace audience. We define connections as interactions between consumers and dealers on our marketplace through phone calls, email, managed text and chat, and clicks to access the dealer’s website or map directions to the dealership.
(1)
Includes users from the Autolist website.
Monthly Sessions
We define monthly sessions as the number of distinct visits to our websites that take place each month within a given time frame, as measured and defined by Google Analytics. We calculate average monthly sessions as the sum of the monthly sessions in a given period, divided by the number of months in that period. A session is defined as beginning with the first page view from a computer or mobile device and ending at the earliest of when a user closes their browser window, after 30 minutes of inactivity, or each night at midnight (i) Eastern Time for our United States and Canada websites, other than the Autolist website, (ii) Pacific Time for the Autolist website, (iii) Greenwich Mean Time for our U.K. websites, and (iv) Central European Time (or Central European Summer Time when daylight savings is observed) for our Germany, Italy, and Spain websites, which ceased operations in the second quarter of 2020. A session can be made up of multiple page views and visitor actions, such as performing a search, visiting vehicle detail pages, and connecting with a dealer. We believe that measuring the volume of sessions in a time period, when considered in conjunction with the number of unique users in that time period, is an important indicator to us of consumer satisfaction and engagement with our marketplace, and we believe it provides useful information to our investors because the more satisfied and engaged consumers we have, the more valuable our service is to dealers.
(1)
Includes sessions from the Autolist website.
Number of Paying Dealers
We define a paying dealer as a dealer account with an active, paid marketplace subscription at the end of a defined period. The number of paying dealers we have is important to us and we believe it provides valuable information to investors because it is indicative of the value proposition of our marketplace products, as well as our sales and marketing success and opportunity, including our ability to retain paying dealers and develop new dealer relationships.
(1)
Includes paying dealers from the Autolist website.
(2)
In our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2020, filed with the SEC on August 6, 2020, we announced that we had modified our method for calculating paying dealers to align our data with an enterprise system upgrade, or the Internal System Upgrade, and had replaced our Average Annual Revenue per Subscribing Dealer key metric with Quarterly Average Revenue per Subscribing Dealer, or QARSD. As a result of the Internal System Upgrade, and to provide consistency in our year-to-year comparisons, we have recast our paying dealer calculation as of December 31, 2019 to reflect the updated calculation methodology.
Quarterly Average Revenue per Subscribing Dealer (QARSD)
We define QARSD, which is measured at the end of a fiscal quarter, as the marketplace subscription revenue during that trailing quarter divided by the average number of paying dealers in that marketplace during the quarter. We calculate the average number of paying dealers for a period by adding the number of paying dealers at the end of such period and the end of the prior period and dividing by two. This information is important to us, and we believe it provides useful information to investors, because we believe that our ability to grow QARSD is an indicator of the value proposition of our products and the return on investment, or ROI, that our paying dealers realize from our products. In addition, increases in QARSD, which we believe reflect the value of exposure to our engaged audience in relation to subscription cost, are driven in part by our ability to grow the volume of connections to our users and the quality of those connections, which result in increased opportunity to upsell package levels and cross-sell additional products to our paying dealers.
Adjusted EBITDA
To provide investors with additional information regarding our financial results, we monitor and have presented within this Annual Report on Form 10-K Adjusted EBITDA, which is a non-GAAP financial measure. This non-GAAP financial measure is not based on any standardized methodology prescribed by United States generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, and is not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income, adjusted to exclude: depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation expense, acquisition-related expenses, restructuring expenses, other income, net, and the provision for (benefit from) income taxes. We have presented Adjusted EBITDA within this Annual Report on Form 10-K because it is a key measure used by our management and board of directors to understand and evaluate our operating performance, generate future operating plans, and make strategic decisions regarding the allocation of capital. In particular, we believe that the exclusion of certain items in calculating Adjusted EBITDA can produce a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our business.
We use Adjusted EBITDA to evaluate our operating performance and trends and make planning decisions. We believe Adjusted EBITDA helps identify underlying trends in our business that could otherwise be masked by the effect of the expenses that we exclude. Accordingly, we believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results, enhancing the overall understanding of our past performance and future prospects, and allowing for greater transparency with respect to key financial metrics used by our management in its financial and operational decision-making. In addition, we evaluate our Adjusted EBITDA in relation to our revenue. We refer to this as Adjusted EBITDA margin and define it as Adjusted EBITDA divided by total revenue.
Our Adjusted EBITDA is not prepared in accordance with GAAP, and should not be considered in isolation of, or as an alternative to, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. There are a number of limitations related to the use of Adjusted EBITDA rather than net income, which is the most directly comparable GAAP equivalent. Some of these limitations are:
•
Adjusted EBITDA excludes depreciation and amortization expense and, although these are non-cash expenses, the assets being depreciated may have to be replaced in the future;
•
Adjusted EBITDA excludes stock-based compensation expense, which will be, for the foreseeable future, a significant recurring expense for our business and an important part of our compensation strategy;
•
Adjusted EBITDA excludes transactions and one-time acquisition-related expenses incurred by us during a reporting period, which may not be reflective of our operational performance during such period, for acquisitions that have been completed as of the filing date of our annual or quarterly report (as applicable) relating to such period;
•
Adjusted EBITDA excludes restructuring expenses incurred by us during a reporting period, which may not be reflective of our operational performance during such period;
•
Adjusted EBITDA excludes other income, net which primarily includes interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents, and investments, sublease income and net foreign exchange gains and losses;
•
Adjusted EBITDA excludes the provision for (benefit from) income taxes; and
•
other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these limitations, we consider, and you should consider, Adjusted EBITDA together with other operating and financial performance measures presented in accordance with GAAP.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income, the most directly comparable measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, for each of the periods presented.
(1)
Excludes stock-based compensation expense of $753 for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the expense reduction plan approved by our Board of Directors on April 13, 2020 to address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, or the Expense Reduction Plan, as the amount is already included within the stock-based compensation line item in the Reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA.
Components of Consolidated Income Statements
Revenue
We derive revenue from two sources: (1) marketplace subscription revenue, which consists primarily of Listings and Dealer Display subscriptions, and (2) advertising and other revenue, which consists primarily of display advertising revenue from auto manufacturers and other auto-related brand advertisers as well as partnerships with financing services companies.
Marketplace Subscription Revenue
We offer multiple types of marketplace Listings packages to our dealers through our CarGurus U.S. platform (availability varies on our other marketplaces): Restricted Listings (formerly referred to as Basic Listings), which is free; and various levels of Listings packages, which each require a paid subscription under a monthly, quarterly, semiannual, or annual subscription basis.
Our subscriptions for customers generally auto-renew on a monthly basis and are cancellable by dealers with 30 days’ advance notice at the end of the committed term, although during the second quarter of 2020 we did not require 30 days’ advance notice of termination from dealers who cancelled as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Subscription pricing is determined based on a dealer’s inventory size, region, and our assessment of the connections and ROI the platform will provide them and is subject to discounts and/or fee reductions that we may offer from time to time. We also offer all dealers on our platform access to our Dealer Dashboard, which includes a performance summary, Dealer Insights tool, and user review management platform. Only dealers subscribing to a paid Listings package also have access to the Pricing Tool, Market Analysis tool and our IMV Scan tool.
In addition to displaying inventory in our marketplace and providing access to the Dealer Dashboard, we offer dealers subscribing to certain of our Listings packages other subscription advertising and customer acquisition products and enhancements, including Dealer Display, which is marketed under our Real-time Performance Marketing suite. With Dealer Display, dealers can buy display advertising that appears in our marketplace, on other sites on the internet and/or on Facebook, a highly converting social platform. Such advertisements can be targeted by the user’s geography, search history, CarGurus website activity (including showing a consumer relevant vehicles from a dealer’s inventory that the consumer has not yet discovered on our marketplace), and a number of other targeting factors, allowing dealers to increase their visibility with in-market consumers and drive qualified traffic for dealers.
We also offer paid Listings packages for the Autolist website and paid Listings and display products for the PistonHeads website.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced a material adverse impact on our marketplace revenue as paying dealers cancelled their subscriptions with us (including, in some cases, with our permission prior to the end of the applicable contract term and notice period) and due to the fee reductions that we provided to customers for the April, May and June service periods in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in reductions in the overall transaction price. In May 2020, cancellations by paying dealers began to stabilize, which we believe resulted from the resumption of consumer activity as well as the fee reductions that we provided to our customers. In July 2020, we returned to normal contractual billings in all markets until subscription fees were reduced again for the December 2020 and February 2021 service periods for paying dealers in the United Kingdom.
Advertising and Other Revenue
Advertising and other revenue consists primarily of non-dealer display advertising revenue from auto manufacturers and other auto-related brand advertisers sold on a cost per thousand impressions, or CPM, basis. An impression is an advertisement loaded on a web page. In addition to advertising sold on a CPM basis, we also have advertising sold on a cost per click basis. Auto manufacturers and other brand advertisers can execute advertising campaigns that are targeted across a wide variety of parameters, including demographic groups, behavioral characteristics, specific auto brands, categories such as Certified Pre-Owned, and segments such as hybrid vehicles.
Advertising and other revenue also includes revenue from partnerships with certain financing services companies pursuant to which we enable eligible consumers on our CarGurus U.S. website to pre-qualify for financing on cars from dealerships that offer financing through such companies. We primarily generate revenue from these partnerships based on the number of funded loans from consumers who pre-qualify with our lending partners through our site.
We also offer non-dealer display products for the Autolist and PistonHeads websites.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced a material adverse impact on our advertising revenue as some advertisers cancelled or reduced their advertising with us (including, in certain cases, with our permission prior to the end of the applicable contract term). In May 2020, cancellations by advertising customers began to stabilize, which we believe resulted from the resumption of consumer activity.
In addition, a reduction in consumer visits to our sites during the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in the delivery of fewer impressions for our advertising customers than anticipated, which caused an adverse impact on our advertising revenue. This impact was partially offset by the increase in consumer visits over the remainder of the year to our sites as we increased our consumer marketing expenses in response to the recovery in consumer car shopping activity.
Revenue from partnerships with financing services companies was not adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
For a description of our revenue accounting policies, see “- Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Estimates.”
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue primarily consists of costs related to supporting and hosting our product offerings. These costs include salaries, benefits, incentive compensation, and stock-based compensation for our customer support team and third-party service provider costs such as data center and networking expenses, allocated overhead costs, depreciation expense associated with our property and equipment, and amortization of capitalized website development costs. We allocate overhead costs, such as rent and facility costs, information technology costs, and employee benefit costs, to all departments based on headcount. As such, general overhead expenses are reflected in cost of revenue and each operating expense category. Despite our implementation of the Expense Reduction Plan, we expect these expenses to increase as we continue to scale our business and introduce new products.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel and related expenses for our sales and marketing team, including salaries, benefits, incentive compensation, commissions, stock-based compensation, and travel costs; costs associated with consumer marketing, such as traffic acquisition, brand building, and public relations activities; costs associated with dealer marketing, such as content marketing, customer and promotional events, and industry events; amortization of internal-use software; and allocated overhead costs. A portion of our commissions that are related to obtaining a new contract is capitalized and amortized over the estimated benefit period of customer relationships. All other sales and marketing costs are expensed as incurred. We expect sales and marketing expenses to fluctuate from quarter to quarter as we respond to the COVID-19 pandemic and changes in the competitive landscape affecting our consumer audience and brand awareness, which will impact our quarterly results of operations.
Product, Technology, and Development
Product, technology, and development expenses, which include research and development costs, consist primarily of personnel and related expenses for our development team, including salaries, benefits, incentive compensation, stock-based compensation and allocated overhead costs. Other than website development and internal-use software costs as well as other costs that qualify for capitalization, research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Despite our implementation of the Expense Reduction Plan, we expect product, technology, and development expenses to increase as we invest in additional engineering resourcing to develop new solutions and make improvements to our existing platform.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel and related expenses for our executive, finance, legal, people & talent, and administrative teams, including salaries, benefits, incentive compensation, and stock-based compensation, in addition to the costs associated with professional fees for external legal, accounting and other consulting services, insurance premiums, payment processing and billing costs, and allocated overhead costs. General and administrative costs are expensed as the products and services are provided. Despite our implementation of the Expense Reduction Plan, we expect general and administrative expenses to increase as we continue to scale our business.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses consist of depreciation on property and equipment and amortization of intangible assets.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net consists primarily of interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents, and investments, sublease income and net foreign exchange gains and losses.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes
We are subject to federal and state income taxes in the United States and taxes in foreign jurisdictions in which we operate. We have recorded a provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of our consolidated taxable income position and recognized a benefit from income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2019 as a result of stock-based compensation benefits recorded. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities based on temporary differences between the financial reporting and income tax bases of assets and liabilities using statutory rates. We regularly assess the need to record a valuation allowance against net deferred tax assets if, based upon the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Our valuation allowances against our net deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 were both immaterial.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our selected consolidated income statements data for each of the periods indicated. The period-to-period comparison of financial results is not necessarily indicative of future results.
The following table sets forth our selected consolidated income statements data as a percentage of revenue for each of the periods indicated.
Note amounts in tables above may not sum due to rounding.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
Revenue by Source
Overall revenue decreased $37.5 million, or 6%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Marketplace subscription revenue decreased by 8% and advertising and other revenue increased by 6%.
Marketplace subscription revenue decreased $41.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 and represented 88% of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 89% of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease in marketplace subscription revenue was attributable primarily to the approximately $50 million impact of fee reductions that we provided to our paying dealers during the second quarter of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Of the approximately $50 million in billing concessions, approximately $47 million resulted in revenue reductions during the second quarter of 2020, with the remaining impact spread over the life of the contract term. We also provided fee reductions to paying dealers for the December 2020 and February 2021 service periods. These fee reductions resulted in reductions in the overall transaction price. The decrease in marketplace subscription revenue was also attributable to a 9% decrease in the number of United States and International paying dealers, to 30,631 as of December 31, 2020 from 33,618 as of December 31, 2019 as paying dealers cancelled their subscriptions with us (including, in some cases, with our permission prior to the end of the applicable contract term and notice period) primarily as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Advertising and other revenue increased $3.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 and represented 12% of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 11% of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due primarily to a $7.4 million increase in other revenue primarily due to revenue from partnerships with financing services companies. The increase in advertising and other revenue was offset by a $3.8 million decrease in advertising revenue as some advertisers cancelled or reduced their advertising with us (including, in some cases, with our permission prior to the end of the applicable contract term) primarily as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Revenue by Segment
United States revenue decreased $35.2 million, or 6%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease in United States revenue was attributable primarily to the approximately $47 million impact of fee reductions that we provided to our paying dealers during the second quarter of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. These fee reductions resulted in reductions in the overall transaction price. The decrease in United States revenue was also attributable to a 9% decrease in United States paying dealers as paying dealers cancelled their subscriptions with us (including, in certain cases, with our permission prior to the end of the applicable contract term and notice period) primarily as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. This decrease was offset in part by the increase in United States revenue from partnerships with financing services companies of $7.7 million.
International revenue decreased $2.3 million, or 7%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease in international revenue was attributable primarily to the approximately $3 million impact of fee reductions that we provided to our paying dealers during the second quarter of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We also provided fee reductions to paying dealers for the December 2020 and February 2021 service periods. These fee reductions resulted in reductions in the overall transaction price. The decrease in international revenue was also attributable to a 9% decrease in the number of International paying dealers as paying dealers cancelled their subscriptions with us (including, in certain cases, with our permission prior to the end of the applicable contract term and notice period) primarily as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased $6.4 million, or 18%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due primarily to a $3.1 million increase in fees related to provisioning advertising campaigns on our websites, a $2.0 million increase in data center and hosting costs, a $1.7 million increase in amortization due to the write-off of international websites in connection with the Expense Reduction Plan and amortization of website development costs, and a $1.6 million increase primarily related to a reduction of vendor rebates. These increases were offset in part by a $1.8 million decrease in salaries and employee-related costs due to a 31% decrease in average headcount primarily in connection with the Expense Reduction Plan. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2020 is inclusive of cost of revenue associated with Autolist of $0.9 million.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses decreased $136.9 million, or 35%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due primarily to a $131.6 million decrease in advertising costs, a $2.3 million decrease in travel related expenses, a $2.2 million decrease in consulting and recruiting expenses, a $2.0 million decrease in employee expenses due to employees working remotely, and a $1.5 million decrease in marketing costs related to events and vendor expenses. These decreases were offset in part by a $1.5 million increase in employee severance and related benefits expense due to the Expense Reduction Plan and a $1.0 million increase in rent costs due to additional office space at 55 Cambridge Parkway, in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Product, Technology, and Development Expenses
Product, technology, and development expenses increased $16.3 million, or 23%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due primarily to a $11.1 million increase in salaries and employee-related costs, exclusive of stock-based compensation expense, which increased $5.6 million. The increase in salaries and employee-related costs and stock-based compensation expense was due primarily to a 19% increase in average headcount to support our growth plans and product innovations. The increase in product, technology, and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 was also due in part to a $2.1 million increase in rent costs due to additional office space at 55 Cambridge Parkway, in Cambridge, Massachusetts. These increases were offset in part by a, $1.1 million decrease in employee expenses due to employees working remotely, $0.5 million decrease in consulting and recruiting expenses, a decrease of $0.4 million in travel expenses, and a decrease in other product, technology, and development expenses as a result of the Expense Reduction Plan. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2020 is inclusive of product, technology, and development expenses associated with the integration and development of Autolist technology of $5.3 million.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $11.7 million, or 23%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due primarily to a $2.6 million increase in salaries and employee-related costs, exclusive of stock-based compensation expense, which increased $4.9 million. The increase in salaries and employee-related costs and stock-based compensation expense was due primarily to a 5% increase in average headcount to support our expanded operations as we continue to grow our business. The increase in general and administrative expenses was also due in part to a $2.4 million increase in tax payments, a $1.1 million increase in legal expenses primarily due to acquisition-related expenses and a $1.0 million increase in insurance expenses. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2020 was offset in part by a decrease in various general and administrative expenses as a result of cost-savings efforts we implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2020 is inclusive of general and administrative expenses associated with Autolist of $2.1 million.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
Depreciation and amortization expenses increased $1.6 million, or 34%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to an increase in amortization of intangible assets related to the acquired intangible assets from Autolist and an increase in depreciation related to the leasehold improvements associated with additional office space leased at 55 Cambridge Parkway in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Other Income, net
Other income, net decreased $3.0 million, or 69%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The $1.9 million decrease in interest income was due primarily to lower investments in and return on certificates of deposit during the year ended December 31, 2020. The $1.1 million decrease in other income, net was primarily due to a $0.9 million decrease in a foreign currency gain. In the year ended December 31, 2019, we had a foreign currency gain associated with an intercompany receivable related to the acquisition of PistonHeads.
Provision for (Benefit From) Income Taxes
The difference in provision for (benefit from) income taxes recorded during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, was principally due to lower income before income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2019 and $10.9 million excess stock-based compensation benefits recorded during the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the higher income before income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020, offset by benefits generated under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act.
Income (Loss) from Operations by Segment
United States income from operations increased $47.0 million, or 64%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was due to decreases in operating expenses of $88.4 million related to cost savings efforts in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, offset by decreases in revenue of $35.2 million and increases cost of revenue of $6.2 million.
International loss from operations decreased $16.5 million, or 42% in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to decreases in operating expenses of $18.9 million due to ceasing of operations in certain markets and cost savings related to the Expense Reduction Plan, offset by decreases in revenue of $2.3 million and increases in cost of revenue of $0.1 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash, Cash Equivalents and Investments
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents of $190.3 million and $59.9 million, respectively, and investments in certificates of deposit with terms of greater than 90 days but less than one year of $100.0 million and $111.7 million, respectively.
Sources and Uses of Cash
Our cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities, as reflected in the consolidated statements of cash flows, are summarized in the following table:
Our operations have been financed primarily from operating activities. We generated cash from operating activities of $156.7 million during 2020 and $70.1 million during 2019.
We believe that our existing sources of liquidity will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months from the date of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. During the second quarter of 2020 in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, we implemented the Expense Reduction Plan, pursuant to which we reduced our workforce, ceased operation of certain international marketplaces, halted expansion efforts in any new international markets, and implemented targeted reductions in sales and marketing expenses, including across both algorithmic traffic acquisition and brand spend, and discretionary operating expenses. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including the further impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, our revenue, costs associated with our sales and marketing activities and the support of our product, technology, and development efforts, our investments in international markets, and the timing and extent of our cost savings related to the Expense Reduction Plan. Cash from operations could also be affected by various risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and other risks detailed in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
To the extent that existing cash, cash equivalents, and investments and cash from operations are insufficient to fund our future activities, we may need to raise additional funds through a public or private equity or debt financing. Additional funds may not be available on terms favorable to us, or at all, including due to increased volatility in the capital markets attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities of $156.7 million during 2020 was due primarily to net income of $77.6 million, adjusted for $45.1 million of stock-based compensation expense, $22.2 million of deferred taxes, $11.6 million of amortization of deferred contract costs, $11.3 million of depreciation and amortization and $1.9 million of provision for doubtful accounts. Cash provided by operating activities was also attributable to a $7.5 million increase in accrued expenses, accrued income taxes, and other liabilities, a $3.9 million decrease in accounts receivable, and a $3.5 million decrease in prepaid expenses, prepaid income taxes, and other assets. The increases in cash flow from operations were partially offset by a $15.1 million decrease in accounts payable, and a $11.4 million increase in deferred contract costs.
Cash provided by operating activities of $70.1 million during 2019 was due primarily to net income of $42.1 million, adjusted for $34.3 million of stock-based compensation expense, $8.4 million of amortization of deferred contract costs and $7.8 million of depreciation and amortization, partially offset by $3.7 million of deferred taxes. Cash provided by operating activities was also attributable to a $4.3 million increase in accounts payable, a $2.8 million increase in accrued expenses, accrued income taxes, and other liabilities and a $1.2 million increase in deferred revenue, partially offset by a $16.0 million increase in deferred contract costs, a $9.6 million increase in accounts receivable, and a $1.5 million decrease in lease obligations.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities of $16.9 million during 2020 was due to $21.1 million of acquisition cash payments, net of cash acquired, $4.6 million related to the capitalization of website development costs, and $3.0 million of purchases of property and equipment, offset in part by $111.7 million of maturities in certificates of deposit, net of investments in certificates of deposit of $100.0 million.
Cash used in investing activities of $22.3 million during 2019 was due to $19.1 million of acquisition cash payments, $11.2 million of purchases of property and equipment and $3.0 million related to the capitalization of website development costs. This was offset by $188.9 million of maturities of certificates of deposit, net of investments in certificates of deposit of $177.8 million.
Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities of $10.1 million during 2020 was due primarily to the payment of withholding taxes on net share settlements of restricted stock units of $11.2 million, partially offset by $1.1 million related to the proceeds from the issuance of common stock related to the exercise of vested stock options.
Cash used in financing activities of $14.7 million during 2019 was due primarily to the payment of withholding taxes and option costs on net share settlements of restricted stock units and stock options of $16.5 million, partially offset by $1.8 million related to the proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Contractual Obligations and Known Future Cash Requirements
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We do not have any debt or material finance obligations as of December 31, 2020. All of our property, equipment, and internal-use software have been purchased with cash, with the exception of amounts related to unpaid property and equipment and internal-use software as disclosed in the consolidated statements of cash flows and immaterial amounts related to obligations under one finance lease as of December 31, 2020. We have no material long-term purchase obligations outstanding with any vendors or third parties.
Leases
Our primary operating lease obligations consist of various leases for office space in: Boston, Massachusetts; Cambridge, Massachusetts; San Francisco, California; and Dublin, Ireland. We also have an operating lease obligation for data center space in Needham, Massachusetts.
Our leases have various lease terms expected to continue through 2038. The terms of our Massachusetts and San Francisco lease agreements provide for rental payments that increase on an annual basis. The leases in Boston, Massachusetts and Cambridge, Massachusetts have associated letters of credit, which are recorded as restricted cash within the consolidated balance sheet. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, restricted cash was $10,627 and $10,803, respectively, and primarily related to cash held at a financial institution in an interest-bearing cash account as collateral for the letters of credit related to the contractual provisions for the Company’s building leases. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, portions of restricted cash were classified as short-term assets and long-term assets.
On January 25, 2021, the Company entered into a lease for approximately 61,826 square feet of office space in Addison, Texas. Details of this acquisition are more fully described in Note 16 of our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Set forth below is information concerning our known contractual obligations at December 31, 2020 that are fixed and determinable.
The table above includes leases signed but not yet commenced as of December 31, 2020 and is based on expected commencement dates.
Acquisitions
On January 14, 2021 we completed the acquisition of a 51% interest in CarOffer, LLC, an automated instant vehicle trade platform based in Plano, Texas. Details of this acquisition are more fully described in Note 16 of our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements or leases that are less than twelve months in duration, that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts of assets and liabilities, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period.
Although we regularly assess these estimates, actual results could differ materially from these estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from our estimates if these results differ from historical experience, or other assumptions do not turn out to be substantially accurate, even if such assumptions are reasonable when made. Changes in estimates are recorded in the period in which they become known.
Significant estimates relied upon in preparing the consolidated financial statements include the determination of sales allowance and variable consideration in our revenue recognition, allowance for doubtful accounts, the expensing and capitalization of product, technology, and development costs for website development and internal-use software, the valuation and recoverability of goodwill and intangible assets and other long-lived assets, the recoverability of our net deferred tax assets and related valuation allowance and stock-based compensation. Accordingly, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies, and believe that of our significant accounting policies, which are described in Note 2 to the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, these involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity.
Revenue Recognition
Sources of Revenue
We derive revenue from two sources: (1) marketplace subscription revenue, which consists primarily of Listings and Dealer Display subscriptions, and (2) advertising and other revenue, which consists primarily of display advertising revenue from auto manufacturers and other auto-related brand advertisers as well as partnerships with financing services companies.
Marketplace Subscription Revenue
We offer multiple types of marketplace Listings packages to our dealers through our CarGurus U.S. platform (availability varies on our other marketplaces): Restricted Listings (formerly referred to as Basic Listings), which is free; and various levels of Listings packages, which each require a paid subscription under a monthly, quarterly, semiannual, or annual subscription basis.
Our subscriptions for customers generally auto-renew on a monthly basis and are cancellable by dealers with 30 days’ advance notice at the end of the committed term, although during the second quarter of 2020 we did not require 30 days’ advance notice of termination from dealers who cancelled as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Subscription pricing is determined based on a dealer’s inventory size, region, and our assessment of the connections and ROI the platform will provide them and is subject to discounts and/or fee reductions that we may offer from time to time. We also offer all dealers on our platform access to our Dealer Dashboard, which includes a performance summary, Dealer Insights tool, and user review management platform. Only dealers subscribing to a paid Listings package also have access to the Pricing Tool, Market Analysis tool and our IMV Scan tool.
Dealer customers do not have the right to take possession of our software.
In addition to displaying inventory in our marketplace and providing access to the Dealer Dashboard, we offer dealers subscribing to certain of our Listings packages other subscription advertising and customer acquisition products and enhancements, including Dealer Display, which is marketed under our Real-time Performance Marketing suite. With Dealer Display, dealers can buy display advertising that appears in our marketplace, on other sites on the internet and/or on Facebook, a highly converting social media platform. Such advertisements can be targeted by the user’s geography, search history, CarGurus website activity (including showing a consumer relevant vehicles from a dealer’s inventory that the consumer has not yet discovered on our marketplace), and a number of other targeting factors, allowing dealers to increase their visibility with in-market consumers and drive qualified traffic for dealers.
Payment is typically due on first day of each calendar month and is recorded as accounts receivable or short-term deferred revenue when payment is received in advance of services being delivered to the customers.
We also offer paid Listings packages for the Autolist website and paid Listings and display products for the PistonHeads website.
Advertising and Other Revenue
Advertising and other revenue consists primarily of non-dealer display advertising revenue from auto manufacturers and other auto-related brand advertisers sold on a cost per thousand impressions, or CPM, basis. An impression is an advertisement loaded on a web page. In addition to advertising sold on a CPM basis, we also have advertising sold on a cost per click basis. Auto manufacturers and other brand advertisers can execute advertising campaigns that are targeted across a wide variety of parameters, including demographic groups, behavioral characteristics, specific auto brands, categories such as Certified Pre-Owned, and segments such as hybrid vehicles. We do not provide minimum impression guarantees or other types of minimum guarantees in our contracts with customers. Pricing is primarily based on advertisement size and position on our websites and mobile applications, and fees are billed monthly in arrears. Unbilled accounts receivable relate to services rendered in the current period, but generally not invoiced until the subsequent period.
We sell advertising directly to auto manufacturers and other auto related brand advertisers, as well as indirectly through revenue sharing arrangements with advertising exchange partners. Company-sold advertising is not subject to revenue sharing arrangements. Company-sold advertising revenue is recognized based on the gross amount charged to the advertiser. Partner-sold advertising revenue is recognized based on the net amount of revenue received from the content partners.
Revenue from advertising sold directly by us is recorded on a gross basis because we are the principal in the arrangement, control the ad placement and timing of the campaign, and establish the selling price. We enter into contractual arrangements directly with advertisers and are directly responsible for the fulfillment of the contractual terms including any remedy for issues with such fulfillment.
Advertising revenue subject to revenue sharing agreements between us and advertising exchange partners is recognized based on the net amount of revenue received from the partner. The advertising partner is responsible for fulfillment, including the acceptability of the services delivered. In partner-sold advertising arrangements, the advertising partner has a direct contractual relationship with the advertiser. There is no contractual relationship between us and the advertiser for partner-sold transactions. When an advertising exchange partner sells advertisements, the partner is responsible for fulfilling the advertisements, and accordingly, we have determined the advertising partner is the principal in the arrangement. Additionally, for auction-based partner agreements, we have latitude in establishing the floor price, but the final price established by the exchange server is at market rates.
Customers are billed monthly in arrears and payment terms are generally thirty to sixty days from the date invoiced.
Advertising and other revenue also includes revenue from partnerships with certain financing services companies pursuant to which we enable eligible consumers on our CarGurus U.S. website to pre-qualify for financing on cars from dealerships that offer financing through such companies. We primarily generate revenue from these partnerships based on the number of funded loans from consumers who pre-qualify with our lending partners through our site.
We also offer non-dealer display products for the Autolist and PistonHeads websites.
Revenue Recognition
Accounting Standards Codifications, or ASC, Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606, outlines a comprehensive five-step revenue recognition model based on the principle that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. To achieve this core principle, we apply the following five steps:
1)
Identify the contract with a customer
2)
Identify the performance obligations in the contract
3)
Determine the transaction price
4)
Allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract
5)
Recognize revenue when or as we satisfy a performance obligation
Marketplace Subscription Revenue
For dealer listings, we provide a single similar service each day for a period of time. Each time increment (i.e., one day), rather than the underlying activities, is distinct and substantially the same and therefore our performance obligation is to provide a series of daily activities over the contract term. Similar to the dealer listings, the dealer display advertising is considered a promise to provide a single similar service each day. Each time increment is distinct and substantially the same and therefore our performance obligation is to provide a series of daily activities over the contract term.
Total consideration for marketplace subscription revenue is stated within the contracts. There are no contractual cash refund rights, but credits may be issued to a customer at our sole discretion. At the portfolio level, there is also variable consideration, that needs to be included in the transaction price. Variable consideration consists of sales allowances, usage fees, and concessions that change the transaction price of the unsatisfied or partially unsatisfied performance obligation. We recognize that there are times when there is a customer satisfaction issue or other circumstance that will lead to a credit. Due to the known possibility of future credits, a monthly sales allowance review is performed to defer revenue at a portfolio level for such future adjustments in the period of incurrence. We establish sales allowances at the time of revenue recognition based on our history of adjustments and credits provided to our customers. In assessing the adequacy of the sales allowance, we evaluate our history of adjustments and credits made through the date of the issuance of the financial statements. Estimated sales adjustments, credits and losses may vary from actual results which could lead to material adjustments to the financial statements. Sales allowances are recorded as a reduction to revenue in the consolidated income statements.
Performance obligations are satisfied over time as the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefit of the service. Revenue is recognized ratably over the subscription period beginning on the date we start providing services to the customer under the contract. Revenue is presented net of any taxes collected from customers.
Advertising and Other Revenue
For advertising revenue, the performance obligation is to publish the agreed upon campaign on our websites and load the related impressions.
Advertising contracts state the transaction price within the agreement with payment being based on the number of clicks or impressions delivered on our websites. Total consideration is based on output and deemed variable consideration constrained by an agreed upon delivery schedule. Additionally, there are generally no contractual cash refund rights. Certain contracts do contain the right for credits in situations in which impressions are not displayed in compliance with contractual specifications. At an individual contract level, we may give a credit for a customer satisfaction issue or other circumstance. Due to the known possibility of future credits, a monthly review is performed to defer revenue at an individual contract level for such future adjustments in the period of incurrence.
As consideration is driven by the number of impressions delivered on our websites, the consideration for each period is allocated to the period in which the service was rendered.
Performance obligations for company-sold advertising revenue and partner-sold advertising revenue are satisfied over time as impressions are delivered. Revenue is recognized based on the total number of impressions delivered within the specified period. Revenue from advertising sold directly by us is recognized based on the gross amount charged to the advertiser and advertising revenue sold by partners is recognized based on the net amount of revenue received from the content partners. Revenue is presented net of any taxes collected from customers.
Other revenue includes revenue from contracts for which the performance obligation is a series of distinct services with the same level of effort daily. For these contracts, we estimate the value of the variable consideration in determining the transaction price and allocate it to the performance obligation. Revenue is estimated and recognized on a ratable basis over the contractual term. We reassess the estimate of variable consideration at each reporting period.
Contracts with Multiple Performance Obligations
We periodically enter into arrangements that include Listings and Dealer Display within marketplace subscription revenue. These contracts include multiple promises that we evaluate to determine if the promises are separate performance obligations. Performance obligations are identified based on services to be transferred to a customer that are distinct within the context of the contractual terms. Once the performance obligations have been identified, we determine the transaction price, which includes estimating the amount of variable consideration to be included in the transaction price, if any. If required, the transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation in the contract based on a relative standalone selling price method as the performance obligation is being satisfied. For our arrangements that include Listings and Dealer Display, the performance obligations were satisfied over a consistent period of time and therefore the allocations did not impact the revenue recognized.
Costs to Obtain a Contract
Commissions paid to sales representatives and payroll taxes are considered costs to obtain a contract. Under ASC 606, the costs to obtain a contract require capitalization and amortization of those costs over the period of benefit. Although the guidance specifies the accounting for an individual contract with a customer, as a practical expedient, we have opted to apply the guidance to a portfolio of contracts with similar characteristics. We have opted to apply another practical expedient to immediately expense the incremental cost of obtaining a contract when the underlying related asset would have been amortized over one year or less. As such, we applied this practical expedient to advertising contracts as the term is one year or less and these contracts do not renew automatically. The practical expedient is not applicable to marketplace subscription contracts as the period of benefit including renewals is anticipated to be greater than one year as commissions paid on contract renewals are not commensurate with the commissions paid on the initial contract. The assets are periodically assessed for impairment.
For marketplace subscription customers, the commissions paid on contracts with new customers, in addition to any commission amount related to incremental sales, are capitalized and amortized over the estimated benefit period of the customer relationship taking into account factors such as peer estimates of technology lives and customer lives as well as our own historical data. Commissions paid that are not directly related to obtaining a new contract are expensed as incurred.
Additionally, we allocate employer payroll tax expense to the commission expense in proportion to the overall payroll taxes paid during the respective period. As such, capitalized payroll taxes are amortized in the same manner as the underlying capitalized commissions.
The assets recognized for costs to obtain a contract were $20.0 million and $20.1 million as of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, respectively. Amortization expense recognized during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 related to costs to obtain a contract were $11.6 million and $8.4 million, respectively.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Accounts receivable are recorded based on the amount due from the customer and do not bear interest.
We are exposed to credit losses primarily through our trade accounts receivable. We offset gross trade accounts receivable with an allowance for doubtful accounts. The allowance for doubtful accounts is our best estimate of the amount of probable credit losses in our existing accounts receivable and is based upon historical loss trends, the number of days that billings are past due, an evaluation of the potential risk of loss associated with specific accounts, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts of economic conditions.
Amounts are charged against the allowance after all means of collection have been exhausted, the potential for recovery is considered remote and when it is determined that expected credit losses may occur. We do not have any off-balance sheet credit exposure related to our customers. Provisions for allowances for doubtful accounts are recorded in general and administrative expense within the consolidated income statements. Unbilled accounts receivable are recorded for services rendered in the current period, but generally not invoiced until the subsequent period.
We also consider current economic trends when evaluating the adequacy of the allowance for doubtful accounts. If circumstances relating to specific customers change, or unanticipated changes occur in the general business environment, particularly as it affects auto dealers, such as the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, our estimate of the recoverability of receivables could be further adjusted.
In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, we assessed the implications on accounts receivable and increased its allowance for doubtful accounts to $616 as of December 31, 2020 as compared to $240 as of December 31, 2019. The increase in account delinquencies due to the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in $1,930 of bad debt expense and $1,554 of write offs, net of recoveries for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Below is a summary of the changes in our allowance for doubtful accounts for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We evaluate the recoverability of long-lived assets, such as property and equipment and intangible assets, for impairment at least annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. During this review, we re-evaluate the significant assumptions used in determining the original cost and estimated lives of long-lived assets. Although the assumptions may vary from asset to asset, they generally include operating results, changes in the use of the asset, cash flows, and other indicators of value. Management then determines whether the remaining useful life continues to be appropriate, or whether there has been an impairment of long-lived assets based primarily upon whether expected future undiscounted cash flows are sufficient to support the assets’ recovery. Recoverability of these assets is measured by comparison of the carrying amount of the asset to the future undiscounted cash flows the asset is expected to generate. If the asset is considered to be impaired, the amount of any impairment is measured as the difference between the carrying value and the fair value of the impaired asset.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not identify any impairment of long-lived assets other than $1.2 million of write-offs in capitalized website development costs, of which $0.8 million related to the exit of certain international markets. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we did not identify any impairment of long-lived assets.
Capitalized Website Development and Internal-Use Software Costs
We capitalize certain costs associated with the development of our websites and internal-use software products after the preliminary project stage is complete and until the software is ready for its intended use. Research and development costs incurred during the preliminary project stage or costs incurred for data conversion activities, training, maintenance, and general and administrative or overhead costs are expensed as incurred. Capitalization begins when the preliminary project stage is complete, management authorizes and commits to the funding of the software project with the required authority, it is probable the project will be completed, the software will be used to perform the functions intended and certain functional and quality standards have been met. Qualified costs incurred during the operating stage of our software applications relating to upgrades and enhancements are capitalized to the extent it is probable that they will result in added functionality, while costs that cannot be separated between maintenance of, and minor upgrades and enhancements to, websites and internal-use software are expensed as incurred.
Capitalized website and software development costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over an estimated useful life of three years beginning with the time when the product is ready for intended use. Amounts amortized are presented through cost of revenue. We evaluate the useful lives of these assets on an annual basis and tests for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances occur that could impact the recoverability of these assets.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we capitalized $6.4 million and $4.2 million of website development costs, respectively. We recorded amortization expense associated with our capitalized website development costs of $3.3 million, including write offs of $0.8 million of capitalized website development costs related to the exit of certain international markets, and $1.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Since the adoption of ASU 2018-15, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other - Internal-Use Software (Subtopic 350-24): Customer’s Accounting for Implementation Costs Incurred in a Cloud Computing Arrangement that is a Service Contract (ASU 2018-15), on January 1, 2019, we evaluate upfront costs including implementation, set-up or other costs (collectively, implementation costs) for hosting arrangements under the internal-use software framework. Costs related to preliminary project activities and post implementation activities are expensed as incurred, whereas costs incurred in the development stage are generally capitalized. Capitalized implementation costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over an estimated useful life of the term of the hosting arrangement, taking into consideration several other factors such as, but not limited to, options to extend the hosting arrangement or options to terminate the hosting arrangement, beginning with the time when the software is ready for intended use. Amounts amortized are presented through operating expense, rather than depreciation or amortization. We evaluate the useful lives of these assets on an annual basis and tests for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances occur that could impact the recoverability of these assets.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we launched separate initiatives designed to evaluate and enhance our enterprise applications. During the year ended December 31, 2020 we capitalized $0.3 million of implementation costs in other non-current assets. During the year ended December 31, 2019 we capitalized $2.6 million and $0.6 million of implementation costs in other non-current assets and in prepaid expenses, prepaid income taxes and other current assets, respectively. We recorded amortization expense associated with our internal-use software of $0.7 million and $0.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Business Combinations
Valuation of Acquired Assets and Liabilities
We measure all consideration transferred in a business combination at its acquisition-date fair value. Consideration transferred is determined by the acquisition-date fair value of assets transferred, liabilities assumed, including contingent consideration obligations, as applicable. We measure goodwill as the excess of the consideration transferred over the net of the acquisition-date amounts of assets acquired less liabilities assumed.
We make significant assumptions and estimates in determining the fair value of the acquired assets and liabilities as of the acquisition date, especially the valuation of intangible assets and certain tax positions. We record estimates as of the acquisition date and reassess the estimates at each reporting period up to one year after the acquisition date. Changes in estimates made prior to finalization of purchase accounting are recorded to goodwill.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets are recorded at their estimated fair value at the date of acquisition. We amortize intangible assets over their estimated useful lives on a straight-line basis. Amortization is recorded over the relevant estimated useful lives ranging from three to eleven years.
We evaluate the useful lives of these assets on an annual basis and test for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances occur that could impact the recoverability of these assets. If the estimate of an intangible asset’s remaining useful life is changed, we amortize the remaining carrying value of the intangible asset prospectively over the revised remaining useful life.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not identify any impairment of our intangible assets.
Goodwill
Goodwill is recorded when consideration paid in a purchase acquisition exceeds the fair value of the net assets acquired. Goodwill is not amortized, but rather is tested for impairment annually or more frequently if facts and circumstances warrant a review. Conditions that could trigger a more frequent impairment assessment include, but are not limited to, a significant adverse change in certain agreements, significant underperformance relative to historical or projected future operating results, an economic downturn affecting automotive marketplaces, increased competition, a significant reduction in our stock price for a sustained period or a reduction of our market capitalization relative to net book value.
We have determined that we have two reporting units, United States and International, as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020. We elected to bypass the optional qualitative test for impairment and proceed to Step 1 which is a quantitative impairment test. We evaluate impairment annually on October 1 by comparing the estimated fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. We estimate fair value using a market approach, based on market multiples derived from public companies that we identify as peers. In 2020, we calculated the fair value of our reporting units using the market approach, which required us to estimate the forecasted revenue and estimate revenue market multiples using publicly available information for each of our reporting units. Developing these assumptions required the use of significant judgment and estimates. Actual results may differ from these forecasts.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not identify any impairment of our goodwill.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with the liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized based on temporary differences between the financial reporting and income tax bases of assets and liabilities using statutory rates. In addition, this method requires a valuation allowance against net deferred tax assets if, based upon the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We account for uncertain tax positions recognized in the consolidated financial statements by prescribing a more-likely-than-not threshold for financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. Interest and penalties, if applicable, related to uncertain tax positions would be recognized as a component of income tax expense. We have no recorded liabilities for uncertain tax positions as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act subjects a U.S. shareholder to tax on global intangible low-taxed income, or GILTI, earned by certain foreign subsidiaries. An entity can make an accounting policy election, per the FASB Staff Q&A, Topic 740, No. 5, Accounting for Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income, either to recognize deferred taxes for temporary basis differences expected to reverse as GILTI in future years or to provide for the tax expense related to GILTI in the year the tax is incurred as a period expense only. We elected to account for GILTI as a period cost in the year the tax is incurred.
Stock-Based Compensation
For stock-based awards issued under our stock-based compensation plans, the fair value of each award is determined on the date of grant. We recognize compensation expense for service-based awards on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period for each separate vesting portion of the award, with the amount of compensation expense recognized at any date at least equaling the portion of the grant-date fair value of the award that is vested at that date.
For RSUs granted subsequent to the IPO, the fair value is determined based on the closing price of our Class A common stock as reported on the Nasdaq Global Select Market on the date of grant.
We issue shares for stock option exercises and RSUs out of our shares available for issuance. No options were granted during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
We account for forfeitures when they occur. The tax effect of differences between tax deductions related to stock compensation and the corresponding financial statement expense compensation are recorded to tax expense. Excess tax benefits recognized on stock-based compensation expense are classified as an operating activity in the consolidated statements of cash flows.
During 2020, we recorded immaterial tax demerits related to stock-based compensation as compared to $11.1 million of excess tax benefits related to stock-based compensation during 2019.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Information concerning recently issued accounting pronouncements may be found in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.