ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this report. See also “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this Annual Report.
OVERVIEW
CASI Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (“CASI” or the “Company”) (Nasdaq: CASI) is a U.S. biopharmaceutical company focused on developing and commercializing innovative therapeutics and pharmaceutical products in China, the United States, and throughout the world. We are focused on acquiring, developing and commercializing products that augment our hematology oncology therapeutic focus as well as other areas of unmet medical need. We are executing our plan to become a biopharmaceutical leader by launching medicines in the greater China market leveraging our China-based regulatory, clinical and commercial competencies and our global drug development expertise. Our operations in China are conducted primarily through two of our subsidiaries: (i) CASI Pharmaceuticals (China) Co., Ltd. (“CASI China”), which is wholly owned and is located in Beijing, China, and (ii) CASI Pharmaceuticals (Wuxi) Co., Ltd. (“CASI Wuxi”), which is located in Wuxi, China.
We launched in China our first commercial product, EVOMELA® (Melphalan for Injection) in August 2019. In China EVOMELA is approved for use as a conditioning treatment prior to stem cell transplantation and as a palliative treatment for patients with multiple myeloma. Our other core hematology/oncology assets in our pipeline include:
● CNCT19 is an autologous CD19 CAR-T investigative product (CNCT19) being developed by our partner Juventas Cell Therapy Ltd (“Juventas”) for which we have co-commercial and profit-sharing rights. CNCT19 is being developed as a potential treatment for patients with hematological malignancies which express CD19 including, B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (“B-ALL”) and B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (“B-NHL”). China Phase 1 studies have been substantially completed by Juventas, with the Phase 2 B-NHL registration study in China currently enrolling. The Phase 2 B-ALL registration study is expected to start by the end of March 2021. In December 2020, Juventas received a breakthrough therapy designation for CNCT19 in the treatment of adults with relapsed/refractory B-ALL from the Chinese Center for Drug Evaluation, a division of the China National Medical Products Administration.
● BI-1206 is an antibody which has a novel mode-of-action, blocking the inhibitory antibody checkpoint receptor FcγRIIB to unlock anti-cancer immunity in both hematological malignancies and solid tumors for which we have exclusive greater China rights BI-1206 is our partner’s lead drug candidate and is being investigated in a Phase 1/2 trial, in combination with anti-PD1 therapy Keytruda® (pembrolizumab), in solid tumors, and in a Phase 1/2a trial in combination with MabThera® (rituximab) in patients with relapsed/refractory non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). BioInvent International AB, released positive interim results from its Phase 1/2a trial that suggests that novel anti-FcyRIIB antibody BI-1206 restores activity
of rituximab in patients with relapsed/refractory non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. An FDA End of Phase 1 meeting for the NHL development program is planned for the third quarter of 2021.
● CB-5339 is an oral second-generation, small molecule valosin-containing protein (VCP)/p97inhibitor for which we have exclusive greater China rights. CB-5339 was added to our portfolio in March 2020 pursuant to a license agreement with our partner, Cleave Therapeutics, Inc. (“Cleave”). CB-5339 is being evaluated by Cleave in a Phase 1 clinical trial in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), while the National Cancer Institute (NCI) is sponsoring and evaluating CB-5339 in a Phase 1 clinical trial of patients with solid tumors and lymphomas.
● CID-103 is a full human IgG1 anti-CD38 monoclonal antibody recognizing a unique epitope that has demonstrated encouraging preclinical efficacy & safety profile compared to other anti-CD38 monoclonal antibodies for which we have exclusive global rights. CID-103 is being developed for the treatment of patients with multiple myeloma. The CID-103 Phase 1 study in EU was initiated in March 2021.
Other assets in our pipeline for which we have exclusive rights in China are Octreotide Long Acting Injectable (“LAI”), for which we plan to begin the China registration study in 2021, and a novel formulation of Thiotepa, for which our partner plans to begin the China registration study in 2021. Thiotepa is used as a conditioning treatment for certain allogeneic haemopoietic stem cell transplants. Subject to regulatory and marketing approvals, we intend to advance and commercialize these established products in China.
The Company’s assets include a few FDA-approved ANDAs which the Company is evaluating due to generic drug pricing reforms by the Chinese government and its impact on the pricing and competitiveness of these products. The Company also has greater China rights to ZEVALIN® (Ibritumomab Tiuxetan), a CD20-directed radiotherapeutic antibody that is approved in the U.S. to treat patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (“NHL”) and MARQIBO® (vincristine sulfate LIPOSOME injection) a novel, sphingomyelin/cholesterol liposome-encapsulated, formulation of vincristine sulfate, a microtubule inhibitor, approved by the FDA for the treatment of adult patients with Philadelphia chromosome-negative (Ph-) acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in second or greater relapse or whose disease has progressed following two or more anti-leukemia therapies. However, due to the evolving standard of care environment, the rare and niche indication for these products, and our commitment to prioritize resources, the Company is currently evaluating its options for these products.
CASI has built a fully integrated, world class biopharmaceutical company dedicated to the successful development and commercialization of innovative and other therapeutic products. The Company will continue to pursue building a robust pipeline of drug candidates for development and commercialization in China as our primary market, and if rights are available for the rest of the world. For in-licensed products, we use a market-oriented approach to identify pharmaceutical/biotechnology candidates that we believe have the potential for gaining widespread market acceptance, either globally or in China, and for which development can be accelerated under our drug development strategy. We have focused on US/EU approved product candidates, and product candidates with proven targets or product candidates that have reduced clinical risk with a greater emphasis on innovative therapeutics. Our business development strategy is currently focused on acquiring additional targeted drugs and immuno-oncology therapeutics through licensing that will expand our hematology-oncology franchise. In many cases our business development strategy includes direct equity investments in the licensor company.
We believe our China operations offer a significant market and growth potential due to the extraordinary increase in demand for high quality medicines coupled with regulatory reforms in China that facilitate the entry of new pharmaceutical products into the country. We will continue to in-license clinical-stage and late-stage drug candidates, and leverage our cross-border operations and expertise, and hope to be the partner of choice to provide access to the China market. We expect the implementation of our plans will include leveraging our resources and expertise in both the U.S. and China so that we can maximize regulatory, development and clinical strategies in both countries.
The Company’s commercial product, EVOMELA, was originally licensed from Spectrum Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (“Spectrum”) and the Company had a supply agreement with Spectrum to support the Company’s application for import drug registration and for commercialization purposes. On March 1, 2019, Spectrum completed the sale of its portfolio of FDA-approved hematology/oncology products including EVOMELA to Acrotech Biopharma L.L.C. (“Acrotech”). The original supply agreement with Spectrum was assumed by Acrotech; Spectrum agreed to continue with a short-term supply agreement for EVOMELA for the initial commercial product supply in connection with the Company’s launch, with the long-term supply assumed by Acrotech. During the second quarter 2020, the Company completed a plan to change the manufacturing site for EVOMELA to an alternative manufacturer that significantly reduced the cost of revenue since the third quarter 2020.
As part of the long-term strategy to support our future clinical and commercial manufacturing needs and to manage our supply chain for certain products, on December 26, 2018, we established CASI Pharmaceuticals (Wuxi) Co., Ltd. (“CASI Wuxi”), between the Company and WUXI Huicheng Yuanda Investment Enterprise (LP), to develop a future GMP manufacturing facility that will be located in the Wuxi Huishan Economic Development Zone in Jiangsu Province, China. In November 2019, CASI Wuxi entered into a fifty-year lease agreement for the right to use state-owned land in China for the construction of a manufacturing facility. In April 2020, CASI Wuxi received RMB 15.9 million (equivalent to $2.2 million) from the Jiangsu Province Wuxi Huishan Economic Development Zone as government grant for this development project which was recorded as deferred income in April 2020. On August 27, 2020, CASI Wuxi entered into a Construction Project Contract for RMB 74,588,000 (equivalent to $10,923,000) to complete the phase 1 project of CASI Wuxi's research and development production base. The estimated completion date is October 2023.
Since its inception in 1991, the Company has incurred significant losses from operations and, as of December 31, 2020, has incurred an accumulated deficit of $570.5 million. In 2012, with new leadership, the Company shifted its business strategy to China and has since built an infrastructure in China that includes sales and marketing, medical affairs, regulatory and clinical development and in the foreseeable future, manufacturing. In 2014, the Company changed its name to “CASI Pharmaceuticals, Inc.” The majority of the Company’s operations are now located in China. The Company expects to continue to incur operating losses for the foreseeable future due to, among other factors, its continuing clinical and development activities and expansion of our operations. Our operations in China are conducted primarily through two of our subsidiaries, CASI Pharmaceuticals (China) Co., Ltd. (“CASI China”) and CASI Pharmaceuticals (Wuxi) Co., Ltd. (“CASI Wuxi”). Our Beijing office is primarily responsible for our day-to-day operations and our commercial team of over 80 hematology and oncology sales and marketing specialists based in China. CASI Wuxi is part of the long-term strategy to support our future clinical and commercial manufacturing needs, to manage our supply chain for certain products, and to develop a GMP manufacturing facility in China.
Taking into consideration the cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020, the Company believes that it has sufficient resources to fund its operations at least one year beyond the date that the audited consolidated financial statements are issued. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had a balance of cash and cash equivalents of $57.1 million of which $4.5 million was held by CASI China, and $19.5 million was held by CASI Wuxi. The Company intends to continue to exercise tight controls over operating expenditures and will continue to pursue opportunities, as required, to raise additional capital and will also actively pursue non- or less-dilutive capital raising arrangements.
On February 23, 2018, the Company entered into a Common Stock Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC (“HCW”). Pursuant to the terms of the Sales Agreement, the Company may sell from time to time, at its option, shares of the Company’s common stock, through HCW, as sales agent. On July 19, 2019, the Company entered into an amendment to the Sales Agreement reducing the maximum amount that may be sold under the Sales Agreement to $20 million. In 2018, the Company issued 143,248 shares under the Sales Agreement resulting in net proceeds to the Company of $475,000. As of March 30, 2021, $19.5 million remained available under the Sales Agreement. As discussed below, the Company will need to obtain a waiver from the SEC of the Form S-3 eligibility requirements or obtain an effective registration statement on Form S-1 in order to sell additional shares pursuant to this Sales Agreement if it chooses to sell under this Sales Agreement before October 2021.
On July 19, 2019, the Company entered into an Open Market Sale AgreementSM with Jefferies LLC (the “Open Market Agreement”). Pursuant to the terms of the Open Market Agreement, the Company may elect to sell from time to time, at its option, up to $30 million in shares of the Company’s common stock, through Jefferies LLC, as sales agent. In 2019, the Company issued 59,000 shares under the Open Market Agreement resulting in net proceeds to the Company of $182,000. During 2020, there were 434,000 shares issued under the Open Market Agreement with net proceeds of $1,357,000. As of March 30, 2021, the Company has issued 493,000 shares with net proceeds of $1,539,000. As of March 30, 2021, $28.4 million remained available under the Open Market Agreement. As discussed below, the Company will need to obtain a waiver from the SEC of the Form S-3 eligibility requirements or obtain an effective registration statement on Form S-1 in order to sell additional shares pursuant to this Sales Agreement if it chooses to sell under this Sales Agreement before October 2021.
On July 24, 2020, the Company closed an underwritten public offering of 23 million shares of common stock (the “Offering”) and generated gross proceeds of $43.7 million before deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by CASI. Certain insiders, including CASI’s Chairman and CEO, and CASI’s President, purchased shares of common stock in the Offering at the public offering price and on the same terms as the other purchasers in this Offering. The Company is using the net proceeds of this offering for working capital and general corporate purposes, which include, but are not limited to advancing the Company’s product portfolio, acquiring the rights to new product candidates and general and administrative expenses.
On November 20, 2020, we filed a Form S-3 registration statement with the SEC utilizing a “shelf” registration process. On December 2, 2020, the Form S-3 registration statement was declared effective by the SEC. Pursuant to this shelf registration statement, we may sell debt or equity securities in one or more offerings up to a total public offering price of $150 million. As a result of our failure to timely file a periodic report with the SEC in connection with the adoption of our amended and restated bylaws, absent a waiver of the Form S-3 eligibility requirements, we are ineligible to use or file new short form registration statements on Form S-3 until October 1, 2021, assuming we continue to timely file our required Exchange Act reports. In the interim, however, the Company may raise capital pursuant to a registration statement on Form S-1 or on a private placement basis.
On March 24, 2021, the Company closed an underwriting agreement (the “Underwriting Agreement”) with Oppenheimer & Co. Inc., as representative of the several underwriters named therein (the “Underwriters”), providing for the offer and sale of 15,853,658 shares of the Company’s common stock (the “Offering”) at a price to the public of $2.05 per share. In addition, the Company granted the Underwriters an option to purchase up to an additional 2,378,048 shares of common stock, which terminates on the earlier of 30 days and the day before the Company files to the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. The Offering closed on March 26, 2021. The gross proceeds to CASI from the Offering are approximately $32.5 million, excluding the over-allotment option and before deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by CASI.
Certain insiders, including CASI’s Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, purchased shares of common stock in the Offering at the public offering price and on the same terms as the other purchasers in this Offering. The Company has agreed to pay the underwriters a commission of 1% of the gross proceeds raised from certain such insiders, and 6% of the gross proceeds raised in the offering from other investors.
The Offering is being made by means of a written prospectus supplement and accompanying prospectus forming part of a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration Statement No. 333-250801), previously filed with the SEC on November 20, 2020, which was declared effective on December 2, 2020. The Company filed a final prospectus supplement, dated March 24, 2021, with the SEC relating to the Offering.
Pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement, the Company’s directors and executive officers entered into agreements in substantially the form agreed to by the Underwriters providing for a 90-day “lock-up” period with respect to sales of specified securities, subject to certain exceptions.
During the second quarter 2020, the Company completed the plan to change the manufacturing site for EVOMELA to an alternative manufacturer that has significantly reduced the cost of revenue since the third quarter of 2020. Due to the manufacturer change, and to the effects of COVID-19 to our marketing and sales activities and supply chain, revenues for the second quarter of 2020 experienced an expected temporary decrease. We have returned to expected levels of sales in the third quarter of 2020.
Our partner, Juventas, experienced some delay in the start of the CNCT19 clinical trials in the first quarter of 2020 but the Juventas CNCT-19 clinical trials program is currently back on track with both clinical trials underway. The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted our targeted start time of our CID-103 trial due to the lock down of many medical facilities in Europe. We expect to initiate this trial in March 2021. As the pandemic continues to unfold, the extent of the pandemic’s effect on our operations will depend in large part on future developments, which cannot be predicted with confidence at this time.
In June 2019, the Company entered into a license agreement for worldwide license to commercialize an autologous anti-CD19 T-cell therapy product (CNCT19) from Juventas Cell Therapy Ltd (“Juventas”) (the “Juventas license agreement”). Juventas is a China-based company engaged in cell therapy. The terms of the agreement include RMB 70 million ($10 million) of milestone payments upon the registration of Phase II clinical trial of CNCT19 and sales royalty payments. The milestone became probable to be met during the quarter ended September 30, 2020. As a result, the Company paid the milestone payment of RMB 70 million to Juventas in September 2020, which was expensed as acquired in-process research and development in the accompanying consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive income for the year ended December 31, 2020.
In September 2020, Juventas and its shareholders (including CASI Biopharmaceuticals) agreed to certain terms and conditions required by a new third-party investor to facilitate the Series B financing of Juventas, pursuant to which the Company agreed to amend and supplement the original licensing agreement (the "Supplementary Agreement") by agreeing to pay Juventas certain percentage of profits generated from commercial sales of CNCT19. The Supplementary Agreement also specifies a minimum annual target net profit to be distributed to Juventas and certain other terms and obligations. In return, the Company obtained additional equity interests in Juventas.
In November 2020, Juventas Cell Therapy Ltd completed the Series B financing.
In June 2019, in conjunction with its license agreement entered into with Juventas, the Company, through CASI Biopharmaceuticals, made an RMB 80 million ($11,788,000) investment in Juventas, a privately held, China-based company, in Juventas' Series A plus equity, which represented a 16.327% equity interest on a fully diluted basis, and the right to appoint a non-voting board observer. The Company was entitled with substantive liquidation preference over the founding shareholder of Juventas. In addition, the Juventas' founding shareholder provided a put option to the Company pursuant to which the Company can put the equity investment to the founding shareholder at a fixed return of 8% per annum upon occurrence of certain events.
In September 2020, in conjunction with the Supplementary Agreement entered into with Juventas, the Company obtained additional Series A plus equity interest in Juventas with substantive liquidation preference over Juventas' founding shareholder, resulting in the Company's equity ownership increasing to 16.45% (post-Juventas Series B financing) on a fully diluted basis. CASI Biopharmaceuticals is also entitled to appoint a director to Juventas’ board of directors. Juventas' founding shareholder also provided a put option to the Company pursuant to which the Company can put the additional equity investment to the founding shareholder at RMB 70 million plus a fixed return of 8% per annum upon occurrence of certain events. The transaction closed on September 29, 2020.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND THE USE OF ESTIMATES
The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates. Our critical accounting policies, including the items in our financial statements requiring significant estimates and judgments, are as follows:
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets, including property, plant and equipment, operating lease right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and intangible assets subject to amortization, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Such events and circumstances include the use of the asset or asset group in current research and development projects and any potential alternative uses of the asset or asset group. If circumstances require a long-lived asset or asset group be tested for possible impairment, the Company first compares undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by that asset or asset group to its carrying value. If the carrying value of the long-lived asset or asset group is not recoverable on an undiscounted cash flow basis, an impairment is recognized to the extent that the carrying value exceeds its fair value. Fair value is determined through various valuation techniques including discounted cash flow models, quoted market values and third-party independent appraisals, as considered necessary. Impairment charges related to fixed assets were $0 and $386,000 for the years ended in December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Impairment charges related to intangibles were $1.5 million and $0 for the years ended in December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company records compensation expense associated with service and performance-based stock options in accordance with provisions of authoritative guidance. The estimated fair value of service-based awards is determined using option pricing models that use unobservable inputs and is generally amortized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. The estimated fair value of performance-based awards is measured on the grant date and is recognized when it is determined that it is probable that the performance condition will be achieved.
Fair value measurement of additional equity interest in Juventas Cell Therapy Ltd
In June 2019, the Company entered into a license agreement for worldwide license to commercialize a product from Juventas Cell Therapy Ltd (“Juventas”), a privately held, China-based company. In conjunction with the license agreement, the Company made an investment in Juventas. In September 2020, Juventas and its shareholders (including the Company) agreed to certain terms and conditions required by a new third-party investor to facilitate the Series B financing of Juventas, pursuant to which the Company agreed to amend and supplement the original licensing agreement. In return, the Company obtained additional equity interests in Juventas. The fair value of the additional equity interests was RMB 83.7 million ($12.3 million) which was estimated using significant estimates and assumptions, including multiples of selected comparable companies in applying the market approach model. The comparable companies were chosen based on a peer group of comparable publicly traded companies with product candidates as a potential treatment for similar indications and in similar stage of development to Juventas' product candidate.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Operating Items
Revenues
Product Sales
Revenues consist of product sales of EVOMELA that launched during August 2019. Revenue was $15.0 million for the year ended 2020 compared to $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Lease Income
Lease income consists primarily of an equipment lease with a Juventas (a related party). Lease income was $140,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $68,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Operating Expenses
Costs of Revenues
Costs of revenues consists primarily of the cost of inventories of EVOMELA and sales-based royalties related to the sale of EVOMELA.
Costs of revenues were $9.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is due to the launch of EVOMELA that occurred during August 2019. The increase in cost of revenues is partially offset by a decrease in unit cost of inventories of EVOMELA as a result of the new alternate manufacturer now in place.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development (R&D) expenses consist primarily of compensation and other expenses related to research and development personnel, research collaborations, costs associated with internal and contract preclinical testing and clinical trials of our product candidates, including the costs of manufacturing drug substance and drug product, regulatory maintenance costs, facilities expenses, and amortization expense of acquired ANDAs.
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $11.5 million, compared with $9.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in R&D expenses primarily due to an increase in R&D expenses incurred related to the development of CID-103 and costs associated with the EVOMELA post marketing study. These costs were partially offset by reduced regulatory costs associated with our ANDAs and reduced costs associated with preclinical development activities related to an immune-oncology program terminated in 2019.
Included in our research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 are direct project costs of $3.0 million related to our ANDAs acquired in 2018, $2.4 million for drugs in-licensed from Acrotech (previously Spectrum), $4.3 million for preclinical development activities primarily related to the CID-103 program. Included in our research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 are direct project costs of $5.1 million related to our ANDAs acquired in 2018, $1.0 million for drugs in-licensed from Acrotech (previously Spectrum), $1.1 million for preclinical development activities primarily related to the CID-103 program, and $550,000 for preclinical development activities related to a terminated immune-oncology program.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses include compensation and other expenses related to finance, business development and administrative personnel, professional services, investor relations and facilities.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $19.7 million, compared with $27.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in general and administrative expenses was primarily because the 2019 period
included costs related to sales and marketing efforts to prepare for the August 2019 launch of EVOMELA, as well as lower professional fees and travel costs incurred during the 2020 period.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
Selling and marketing expenses are the direct costs related to the sales of EVOMELA that was launched in China in August 2019 such as sales force salaries, advertising, and other marketing efforts.
Selling and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $7.8 million, compared with $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gain (loss) on disposal of intangible assets
Gain on disposal of intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.2 million, compared to a loss of $408,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The gain on disposal is due to the $1.2 million gain on the sale of twenty one ANDAs during the 2020 period.
Impairment of intangible assets
Impairment of intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.5 million, compared to $0 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The impairment of intangible assets was primarily due to the reduction of the carrying value of intangible assets to their fair value.
Acquired in-process Research and Development
Acquired in-process R&D expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $17.8 million, compared with $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Acquired in-process R&D expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 comprised of the two 2020 milestone fees paid related to Pharmathen of $1.7 million, the 2020 milestone fees paid to Juventas of $10.3 million and fees paid to BioInvent of $5.9 million. Acquired in-process R&D expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 included the $5.9 million acquisition of the Black Belt’s license in April 2019 and $1.1 million milestone fee paid to Pharmathen.
Non-Operating Items
Interest income, net
Interest income, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.9 million compared with $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest income, net, is mainly due to the decrease in rates of return from available cash management strategies due to the current economic environment offset by interest income of $375,000 from 2020 loans made to Juventas (a related party).
Other income
Other income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $82,000 compared with $5,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Other income of $35,000 relates to amortization recognized for the 2020 CASI Wuxi’s receipt of RMB 15.9 million (equivalent to $2.2 million) from the Jiangsu Province Wuxi Huishan Economic Development Zone as government grant for the development of leased state owned land in China for the construction of a manufacturing facility. The grant was recorded as deferred income in April 2020. The grant is been amortized over the term of the lease of the land.
Foreign exchange gains and losses
Foreign exchange losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.3 million compared with gains of $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The foreign exchange transactions recorded in the consolidated financial statements are primarily due to USD denominated cash accounts that are held by our Chinese subsidiaries.
Change in fair value of investment in equity securities
The change in fair value of investment in equity securities for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $4.3 million and ($288,000) respectively. The changes represent unrealized gains and losses on the Company’s equity investment securities.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
To date, we have been engaged primarily in research and development activities. As a result, we have incurred and expect to continue to incur operating losses in 2020 and the foreseeable future. Based on our current plans, we expect our current available cash and cash equivalents to meet our cash requirements for at least through March 15, 2022.
We will require significant additional funding to fund operations until such time, if ever, we become profitable. We intend to augment our cash balances by pursuing other forms of capital infusion, including strategic alliances or collaborative development opportunities with organizations that have capabilities and/or products that are complementary to our capabilities and products in order to continue the development of our potential product candidates that we intend to pursue to commercialization. If we seek strategic alliances, licenses, or other alternative arrangements, such as arrangements with collaborative partners or others, to raise further financing, we may need to relinquish rights to certain of our existing product candidates, or products we would otherwise seek to develop or commercialize on our own, or to license the rights to our product candidates on terms that are not favorable to us.
We will continue to seek to raise additional capital to fund our commercialization efforts, expansion of our operations, research and development, and for the acquisition of new product candidates, if any. We intend to explore one or more of the following alternatives to raise additional capital:
● selling additional equity securities;
● out-licensing product candidates to one or more corporate partners;
● completing an outright sale of non-priority assets; and/or
● engaging in one or more strategic transactions.
We also will continue to manage our cash resources prudently and cost-effectively.
There can be no assurance that adequate additional financing under such arrangements will be available to us on terms that we deem acceptable, if at all. If additional funds are raised by issuing equity securities, dilution to existing stockholders may result, or the equity securities may have rights, preferences, or privileges senior to those of the holders of our common stock. If we fail to obtain additional capital when needed, we may be required to delay or scale back our commercialization efforts, our advancement of the Spectrum products, and the ANDA products, or plans for other product candidates, if any.
At December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $57.1 million, with working capital of $66.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, $4.5 million of the Company’s cash balance was held by the Company’s wholly-owned subsidiary in China and $19.5 million of the Company’s cash balance was held by CASI Wuxi.
FINANCING ACTIVITIES
March 2021 Underwritten Public Offering
On March 24, 2021, the Company closed an underwriting agreement (the “Underwriting Agreement”) with Oppenheimer & Co. Inc., as representative of the several underwriters named therein (the “Underwriters”), providing for the offer and sale of 15,853,658 shares of the Company’s common stock (the “Offering”) at a price to the public of $2.05 per share. In addition, the Company granted
the Underwriters an option to purchase up to an additional 2,378,048 shares of common stock, which terminates on the earlier of 30 days and the day before the Company files to the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. The Offering closed on March 26, 2021. The gross proceeds to CASI from the Offering are approximately $32.5 million, excluding the over-allotment option and before deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by CASI.
Certain insiders, including CASI’s Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, purchased shares of common stock in the Offering at the public offering price and on the same terms as the other purchasers in this Offering. The Company has agreed to pay the underwriters a commission of 1% of the gross proceeds raised from certain such insiders, and 6% of the gross proceeds raised in the offering from other investors.
The Offering is being made by means of a written prospectus supplement and accompanying prospectus forming part of a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration Statement No. 333-250801), previously filed with the SEC on November 20, 2020, which was declared effective on December 2, 2020. The Company filed a final prospectus supplement, dated March 24, 2021, with the SEC relating to the Offering.
Pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement, the Company’s directors and executive officers entered into agreements in substantially the form agreed to by the Underwriters providing for a 90-day “lock-up” period with respect to sales of specified securities, subject to certain exceptions.
“Shelf” Registration Statement
On November 20, 2020, we filed a Form S-3 registration statement with the SEC utilizing a “shelf” registration process. In December 2020, the Form S-3 registration statement was declared effective by the SEC. Pursuant to this shelf registration statement, we may sell debt or equity securities in one or more offerings up to a total public offering price of $150 million. We believe that this shelf registration statement currently provides us additional flexibility with regard to potential financings that we may undertake when market conditions permit or our financial condition may require.
As a result of our failure to timely file a periodic report with the SEC in connection with the adoption of our amended and restated bylaws, absent a waiver of the Form S-3 eligibility requirements, we are ineligible to use or file new short form registration statements on Form S-3 until October 1, 2021, assuming we continue to timely file our required Exchange Act reports. In the interim, however, the Company may raise capital pursuant to a registration statement on Form S-1 or on a private placement basis.
July 2020 Underwritten Public Offering
On July 24, 2020, the Company closed an underwritten public offering of 23 million shares of common stock (the “Offering”) and generated gross proceeds of $43.7 million before deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by CASI.
Certain insiders, including CASI’s Chairman and CEO, and CASI’s President, purchased shares of common stock in the Offering at the public offering price and on the same terms as the other purchasers in this Offering. The Company is using the net proceeds of this offering for working capital and general corporate purposes, which include, but are not limited to advancing the Company’s product portfolio, acquiring the rights to new product candidates and general and administrative expenses.
Sales Agreements
On February 23, 2018, the Company entered into a Common Stock Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC (“HCW”). Pursuant to the terms of the Sales Agreement, the Company may sell from time to time, at its option, shares of the Company’s common stock, through HCW, as sales agent. On July 19, 2019, the Company entered into an amendment to the Sales Agreement reducing the maximum amount that may be sold under the Sales Agreement to $20 million.
In 2018, the Company issued 143,248 shares under the Sales Agreement resulting in net proceeds to the Company of $475,000. As of March 30, 2021, 19.5 million remained available under the Sales Agreement.
On July 19, 2019, the Company entered into an Open Market Sale AgreementSM with Jefferies LLC (the “Open Market Agreement”). Pursuant to the terms of the Open Market Agreement, the Company may elect to sell from time to time, at its option, up to $30 million in shares of the Company’s common stock, through Jefferies LLC, as sales agent. In 2019, the Company issued 59,000
shares under the Open Market Agreement resulting in net proceeds to the Company of $182,000. During 2020, there were 434,000 shares issued under the Open Market Agreement with net proceeds of $1,357,000. As of March 30, 2021, the Company has issued 493,000 shares with net proceeds of $1,539,000. As of March 30, 2021, $28.4 million remained available under the Open Market Agreement. As a result of our failure to timely file a periodic report with the SEC in connection with the adoption of our amended and restated bylaws, absent a waiver of the Form S-3 eligibility requirements, we are ineligible to use or file new short form registration statements on Form S-3 until October 1, 2021, assuming we continue to timely file our required Exchange Act reports. In the interim, until October 21, 2021, absent a waiver, however, the Company may raise capital pursuant to a registration statement on Form S-1 or on a private placement basis.
INTEREST RATE CHANGES
Management does not believe that our working capital needs are sensitive to changes in interest rates.
OFF-BALANCE-SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We had no off-balance sheet arrangements during fiscal year 2020.