ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The statements contained in this report that are not statements of historical fact, including without limitation, statements containing the words “believes,” “expects,” “anticipates” and similar words, constitute forward-looking statements that are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties. From time to time we may make other forward-looking statements. Investors are cautioned that such forward-looking statements are subject to an inherent risk that actual results may materially differ as a result of many factors, including the risks discussed from time to time in this report, including the risks described under “Risk Factors” in any filings we have made with the SEC.
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. On an on-going basis, we evaluate these estimates, including those related to useful lives of real estate assets, cost reimbursement income, bad debts, impairment, net lease intangibles, contingencies and litigation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. There can be no assurance that actual results will not differ from those estimates.
Company Background
Cannabis Global, Inc. is located at 520 S. Grand Avenue, Suite 320, Los Angeles, California 90071. Our telephone number is (310) 986-4929 and our website is www.cannabisglobalinc.com. Our shares of Common Stock are quoted on the OTC Markets Pink Tier, operated by OTC Markets Group, Inc., under the ticker symbol “CBGL.”
Current Operations
Natural Plant Extract of California, Inc.
The Company operates and manages Natural Plant Extract of California, Inc. (NPE) which holds two active California cannabis licenses: (i) a Type 7 Manufacturing License; and, (ii) a Distribution License. These licenses allow NPE to distribute cannabis products in the State of California. Our operations at the NPE facility emphasize product manufacturing and distribution. We began taking customer orders for products manufactured at the NPE facility on April 21, 2021. These products included several types of cannabis products, including:
· Cannabis flower packaged in various weights, which are sold to California licensed cannabis retailers and distributors;
· Cannabis Pre-rolls, which are sold to California licensed cannabis retailers and distributors; and,
· Cannabis edible products, which are sold to California licensed cannabis retailers and distributors
The cannabis products are Schedule 1 Controlled Substances under the Controlled Substances Act, and so are illegal under federal law.
Our sales from the above product categories amount to 97% of our operating revenues. Our cannabis research and development efforts have not generated material revenue as of the date of this filing.
Comply Bag™
Comply Bag™ features a multi-layer, low-density polyethylene outer shell that protects valuable shipments and allows manufacturers, buyers, and processors full view of contents to assess quality. Each Comply Bag™ contains financial institution-grade tamper-evident seams, self-sealing closures, and sequential numbering to ensure what is sent is what is received. In addition, because all U.S. states have implemented specific regulations for the tracking and tracing of cannabis shipments from seed to sale, Comply Bags™ features regulator demanded tracking features, such as those required in the California Cannabis Track-and-Trace (CCTT) system, including Unique Identifier Tags (UID) mandated by California via its contracted service provider, METRC, Inc. The Comply Bag™ is currently available for purchase.
Cannabis-Related Research and Development
We also have an active research and development program primarily focused on creating and commercialize engineered technologies delivering hemp extracts and cannabinoids to the human body. Additionally, we invest, or provide managerial services, in specialized areas of the regulated hemp and cannabis industries.
Our R&D programs included the following:
1. Development of new routes and vehicles for hemp extract and cannabinoid delivery to the human body.
2. Production of unique polymeric nanoparticles and fibers for use in oral and dermal cannabinoid delivery.
3. Research and commercialization of new methodologies to isolate and/or concentrate various cannabinoids and other substances that comprise industrial hemp oil and other extracts.
4. Establishment of new methods to increase the bioavailability of cannabinoids to the human body utilizing nanoparticles and other proven bioenhancers, including naturally occurring and insect produced glycosides.
5. Development of other novel inventions for the delivery of cannabinoids to the human body, which at this time are considered trade secrets by the Company.
The Company’s strategy is to develop a growing portfolio of intellectual property relating to the processing of hemp extracts and cannabinoids into forms that are easily and efficiently delivered to the human body and to companion animals.
The Company owns no issued patents. The Company’s patent activity to date is disclosed below. There are two categories of patents: (i) expired provisional patent applications which the Company now maintains as trade secrets; and, (ii) filed patent applications currently pending review by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (U.S.P.T.O.) and the International Patent Cooperation Union.
Expired Provisional Patents
A provisional patent application is a document issued by the U.S.P.T.O., that helps protect a new invention from being copied during the 12-month period before a formal patent application is filed. It is intended to give an inventor time to explore the idea, test its commercial feasibility, or refine a product before committing to the expensive and time-intensive process of a formal application. The Company filed the following provisional patent applications but chose not to pursue the filing of formal patent applications. The provisional patents thus lapsed 12 months after each respective filing, and the Company now maintains the intellectual properties related to each expired provisional patent application as a trade secret. Each of the following provisional patent applications were filed with the U.S.P.T.O.
Cannabinoid Delivery System and Method of Making
This provisional patent was filed September 13, 2019 (U.S. #62/900,181). A formal patent application was required to be filed by September 13, 2020. The Company chose to not pursue a formal patent application for this method patent and decided to maintain the intellectual properties as trade secrets. The provisional patent dealt the infusion of cannabis compounds into pharmaceuticals, foods, and beverages.
Water Soluble Compositions With Enhanced Bioavailability
This provisional patent was filed September 24, 2019 (U.S. #62/905,129). A formal patent application was required to be filed by September 24, 2020. The Company chose to not pursue a formal patent application for this method patent and decided to maintain the intellectual properties as trade secrets. The provisional patent dealt the infusion of cannabis compounds into pharmaceuticals, foods, and beverages.
Printed Shape Changing Article for the Delivery of Cannabinoids
This provisional patent was filed October 1, 2019 (U.S. #62/909,189). A formal patent application was required to be filed by October 1, 2020. The Company chose to not pursue a formal patent application for this method patent and decided to maintain the intellectual properties as trade secrets. The provisional patent dealt the infusion of cannabis compounds into pharmaceuticals, foods, and beverages.
Electrosprayed and Electrospun Cannabinoid Compositions
This provisional patent was filed November 4, 2019 (U.S. #62/930,358). A formal patent application was required to be filed by November 4, 2020. The Company chose to not pursue a formal patent application for this method patent and decided to maintain the intellectual properties as trade secrets. The provisional patent dealt the infusion of cannabis compounds into pharmaceuticals, foods, and beverages.
Cannabinoid Enriched Composition and Method of Treating a Medical Condition Therewith
This provisional patent was filed December 11, 2019 (U.S. #62/946,894). A formal patent application was required to be filed by December 11, 2020. The Company chose to not pursue a formal patent application for this method patent and decided to maintain the intellectual properties as trade secrets. The provisional patent dealt the infusion of cannabis compounds into pharmaceuticals, foods, and beverages.
Article, Method and Apparatus for Producing a Cannabinoid Enriched Beverage
This provisional patent was filed January 16, 2020 (U.S. #62/962,040). A formal patent application was required to be filed by January 16, 2021. The Company chose to not pursue a formal patent application for this method patent and decided to maintain the intellectual properties as trade secrets. The provisional patent dealt the infusion of cannabis compounds into pharmaceuticals, foods, and beverages.
Printed Shape Changing Article for Delivery of Cannabinoids
This provisional patent was filed September 23, 2020 U.S. (#62/082,399). A formal patent application was required to be filed by September 23, 2021. The Company chose to not pursue a formal patent application for this method patent and decided to maintain the intellectual properties as trade secrets. The provisional patent dealt the infusion of cannabis compounds into pharmaceuticals, foods, and beverages.
Filed Pending Patent Applications
A Cannaboside Composition and Method to Produce
This patent application was filed on January 18, 2021 (U.S.P.T.O. #17/151,607) and is currently pending review by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. The Company currently filed this patent application for international patent protection through the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT/US2021/013830). The Patent Cooperation Treaty was ratified by the United States and 152 other countries which constitute the International Patent Cooperation Union for the cooperation in the filing, searching, and examination, of applications for the protection of inventions, and for rendering special technical services amongst the treaty members. The application is pending. This patent application seeks protection for a method to allow the easier mixing of cannabis into foods and beverages. Generally, cannabis extracts are oil-based and do not mix well with water-based foods and beverages. The technology invented by the company involves feeding oil-based cannabis extracts to insects. The insects then process the extracts through their bodies resulting in water-based compounds being excreted in the insect bodies. These newly created water-soluble compounds can then be harvested for use in foods, beverages, or pharmaceuticals. The patent claims coverage of both the process to create the compounds, and the use of the compounds in foodstuffs and pharmaceutical preparations.
Electrosprayed and Electrospun Cannabinoid Compositions and Process to Produce
This patent application was filed on November 4, 2020 (U.S.P.T.O. #17/089,497 and is currently pending review by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. The Company currently filed this patent application for international patent protection through the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT/US2020/058937). The Patent Cooperation Treaty was ratified by the United States and 152 other countries which constitute the International Patent Cooperation Union for the cooperation in the filing, searching, and examination, of applications for the protection of inventions, and for rendering special technical services amongst the treaty members. The application is pending. The compositions invented by the company are nanoparticles and nanofibers made from cannabinoids. Nanoparticles and nanofibers are very small units of a substance. In the case of the technologies invented by the company, the units of cannabinoids created are in the areas between 100 nanometer and 700 nanometers wide. One nanometer is equal to one billionth of a meter. It is thought that cannabinoids of these sizes are more available to the human body and can be utilized in a host of different product applications to increase efficacy. An added feature of the invented technology is that the nanoparticles and nanofibers are based on all natural ingredients. This differs, in the company's opinion, significantly from other preparations that previously existed. Considering growing consumer taste for clean label products, the company believes natural compositions of cannabinoids will be highly preferred by consumers.
Cannabinoid Enriched Composition and Method of Using
This patent application was filed on December 11, 2020 (U.S.P.T.O. 17/120,042) and is currently pending review by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. The Company currently filed this patent application for international patent protection through the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT/US2021/64683). The Patent Cooperation Treaty was ratified by the United States and 152 other countries which constitute the International Patent Cooperation Union for the cooperation in the filing, searching, and examination, of applications for the protection of inventions, and for rendering special technical services amongst the treaty members. The application is pending. This patent application was filed on December 11, 2020 (U.S.P.T.O. 17/120,042) and is currently pending review by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. The Company currently filed this patent application for international patent protection through the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT/US2021/64683). The Patent Cooperation Treaty was ratified by the United States and 152 other countries which constitute the International Patent Cooperation Union for the cooperation in the filing, searching, and examination, of applications for the protection of inventions, and for rendering special technical services amongst the treaty members. The application is pending. Specifically, the technology for which the company seeks protection are cannabinoids in the form of free-flowing powders that can be used in foods and beverages. The Company believes use of the technology could potentially significantly lower manufacturing costs for numerous manufacturers. Cannabinoids are typically sticky and unstable substances that are difficult to work with relative to the manufacturing of foods, beverages, and pharmaceutical products. The cannabinoid containing free-flowing powders invented by the company are significantly easier for manufacturers to utilize, thus potentially reducing manufacturing costs.
Trademarks
• Trademark - Hemp You Can Feel™ - On August 27, 2019, the Company filed a trademark application with the U.S.P.T.O. for its Hemp You Can Feel™ trade name. The U.S. Application Serial Number is 88595425. On June 24, 2020, the Company received a Notice of Nonfinal Office Action from the USPTO indicating the Company would have six months to respond to issues presented the Company by USPTO or be abandoned. The Company plans to re-file the application.
• Trademark - Gummies You Can Feel™. The Company received a Notice of Allowance from the USPTO on March 24, 2020. The U.S. Serial Number for the trademark is 88590925.
• Trademark - Comply Bag™. During January of 2021, the Company filed a trademark application with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) for its Comply Bag™ trade name. The application is pending.
• There can be no assurance any trademark protection will be provided, or that we will be successful in protecting our trademarks if issued.
Hemp You Can Feel Products -Suspended Operations
Our Hemp You Can Feel products reflect our research and development into hemp infused foods and beverages. Our research and development focus are solely on “Industrial Hemp” containing .3% or less of THC. As of the date of this filing, our Hemp You Can Feel Product research and development operations are suspended pending regulatory guidance from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. We intend to restart our research and development if and when the FDA issues regulatory guidance on the labeling, manufacturing and regulatory approval of industrial hemp and hemp-based CBD products under the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.
To date, our research and development consisted of development of the following products, none of which are available for sale as of the date of this filing:
• Hemp You Can Feel™ Alcohol Replacement Cocktail Mixers - This is a line of alcohol-free cocktail mixers marketed online via our own website site and via our marketing partners. All products in this line test as having non-detectable levels of THC.
• Hemp You Can Feel™ Coffee Products - This is a line of hemp infused coffee products. All products in this line test as having non-detectable levels of THC.
• Hemp You Can Feel™ Gummies - This is a line of all-natural hemp infused candy products. All products in this line test as having non-detectable levels of THC.
• Hemp You Can Feel™ Sweeteners - A line of natural and artificial sweeteners.
• Hemp You Can Feel™ Coffee Pod and Single Serving Beverage Pod Infusion System - Based on internally developed technology and those developed by the Company’s contract research organization, the Company developed product lines consisting of infusion technologies designed to easily and to accurately dose single serving coffee and other beverage pods.
Polymeric Nanoparticles and Polymeric Nanofibers Research Program
The Company has an active research and development program to develop novel polymeric nanoparticles and nanofibers of cannabinoids and hemp extracts. Polymeric nanoparticles are very small solid particles with a size in the range of 10-1000 nanometers (nm or billionth of a meter) and are made of biodegradable and biocompatible polymers or copolymers, in which cannabinoids or other active ingredients can be entrapped or encapsulated. Polymeric nanoparticles are noted for and have attractive characteristics, such as small size, near water solubility, high degrees of bioavailability, long shelf life and stability during storage. These properties are thought to be especially beneficial relative to delivery of cannabinoids and hemp extracts to the human body.
Polymeric nanofibers are fibers with diameters several orders of magnitude smaller than conventional fibers, typically in the size range of a few nanometers to one micrometer. Due to their large surface areas per unit mass and extremely small pore size, these nanofibers demonstrate unique properties, making the technology especially well-suited to transdermal delivery of active ingredients, including cannabinoids.
Project Varin
The primary goal of Project Varin is the development of THC-V delivery methods that improve bioavailability of the cannabinoid to the human body. The project was recently expanded to include cannabinol (CBN) an additional rare cannabinoid.
In the first stage of the program researchers produced THC-V polymeric nanoparticles and nanofibers based on the Company’s patent-pending technologies. In the second phase of development, the Company plans to apply its ongoing cannabinoid glycosides research to THC-V, in order to produce THC-V with unparalleled levels of availability at minimal usage levels.
As a result of Project Varin, the Company has developed several new methods to produce cannabinoid nanoparticles and nanofibers, which the Company plans to formulate into food and beverage ingredients for used in its own products or to be sold to other companies for inclusion in food, beverage, or other consumer goods. The Company plans to continue other areas of delivery systems research via Project Varin including its programs pertaining to cannabinoid glycosides, polymeric cannabinoid nanoparticles and nanofibers, and its hemp extract-based alcohol replacement technologies.
Edible, Dissolvable Film Enhanced with Solid Nanoparticles of Cannabinoids Research Program
The Company is seeking to commercialize a unique invention of edible, disposable film enhanced with solid nanoparticles of cannabinoids under an agreement with Kirby & Padgett, LLC, a California limited liability company, entered into during June of 2019. Management believes there are numerous applications for such a product, such as a container for ready-made foods, protein powders, vitamins, and nutraceuticals that can be simply dropped into cold beverages, thus allowing the consumer to avoid additional steps of mixing ingredients. Additionally, since the film is impregnated with what is believed to be highly bioavailable cannabinoids, the film will perhaps serve a dual purpose as a delivery vehicle for cannabinoids to the body. Future versions of the film could include ingredients such as vitamins, trace minerals or active pharmaceutical ingredients. On June 6, 2019, the Company entered into a joint intellectual property ownership and consulting agreement with Kirby & Padgett, LLC, a California Limited liability company in order to more fully develop and to commercialize the invention. Any intellectual property developed under the collaboration effort will be considered joint property with all rights, title and interest assigned jointly to the Company and Kirby. Each Party shall work with the other Party relative to all business and monetization of such new Joint Intellectual Property and neither Party shall have any preferred rights over the other. Additionally, either party shall have the right to market the new invention with any and all revenues, costs, and profits to be shared on a fifty percent/fifty percent (50%/50%) shares by the parties. All expenses will be agreed to in advance, with each Party sharing based on predetermined percentages of such expenses.
Our Marketing Programs
The Company has only recently begun its marketing programs, focusing its efforts first research and development, product formulation, packaging and company reorganization.
On May 6, 2020, the Company signed a joint venture agreement with RxLeaf, Inc. (“RxLeaf”) a Delaware corporation, creating a joint venture for the purpose of marketing the Company’s products to consumers. Under the terms of the agreement, the Company will produce products, which will be sold by RX Leaf via its digital marketing assets. The Company agreed to share the profits from the joint venture on a 50/50 basis.
The Company’s product are available on the RxLeaf website at www.rxleaf.com, and on its sister company site www.cannadish.net. The Company’s products are also offered by H Smart Inc. (dba hempSMART) at www.hempsmart.com.
Results of Operations
Revenues
Revenues for the fiscal year ending August 31, 2021 were $1,601,037 compared to product revenues of $27,004 during the fiscal year ending August 31, 2020. The increase in product revenues was primarily attributable to the acquisition of NPE in February 2021, plus marketing and sales of new products into the market.
Costs of Sales
Cost of revenues for the fiscal year ending August 31, 2021 was $1,416,779 compared to $24,521 for the fiscal year ending August 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to the results of NPE since it was acquired in February 2021, and other raw materials purchases commencing as the Company began production of products for sale to customers.
Gross Profit
For the fiscal year ending August 31, 2021, we generated a gross profit of $184,258 compared to a gross profit of $2,483 for the fiscal year ending August 31, 2020. The increase in gross margin is attributable to an increase in sales in fiscal 2021 from the NPE Acquisition.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the fiscal year ending August 31, 2021 totaled $2,128,182 compared to $3,626,375 for the period ending August 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to the following:
1) A decrease in consulting services to $305,413 for the fiscal year ending August 31, 2021 compared to $2,033,801 for the fiscal year ending August 31, 2020. Consulting services decreased as a result expiration of several consultant agreements retained to assist the Company in its launch of its business operations in 2020, and significant stock-based compensation in the prior year.
2) A decrease in professional fees to $481,368 for the fiscal year ending August 31, 2021 compared to $717,548 for the previous reporting period. The decrease was due to fees paid in 2020 relating to the reorganization of the Company.
3) A decrease in advertising expense to $64,667 for the fiscal year ending August 31, 2021 compared to $213,302 for the previous reporting period.
Operating Loss
The operating loss for fiscal year ending August 31, 2021 decreased to $1,943,924 from the $3,623,892 for the period ending August 31, 2020. The decrease in operating losses for the fiscal year ending August 31, 2020 was directly attributable to increased product sales and decreased operating expenses, as outlined above.
Other Income and Expenses
During the period ending August 31, 2021, we experienced a significant increase in other expenses, mainly as a result of interest expenses, which were $7,437,340 compared to $1,422,469 for the year ending August 31, 2020, as a result of new convertible notes and derivative discounts on the increase convertible debt. Additionally, the Company realized a gain on change in fair value of derivatives of $2,022,060, loss on investment of $55,435 and a loss on cancellation of debt of $36,841. The Company also recognized an equity method loss of $211,376 primarily related to the NPE investment prior to the Company obtaining control in February 2021, and a loss on the acquisition of $454,768. The net result was an increase in the other loss category to a loss of $6,172,058 compared to a loss of $1,305,456 for the period ending August 31, 2020.
Net Loss
Net loss for the fiscal year ending August 31, 2021, was $8,115,982, an increase from $4,929,348 for the fiscal year ending August 31, 2020. The increase in the net loss was primarily attributable to the significant increases in interest expenses during the fiscal year ending August 31, 2021 compared to interest expenses for the fiscal year ending August 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of August 31, 2021, and August 31, 2020 our cash and cash equivalent balances were $30,813 and $2,338, respectively.
Our primary internal sources of liquidity during the year ended August 31, 2021 were provided by proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes payable, Series B Convertible preferred stock, and the sale of unregistered common shares of the Company as follows:
On September 2, 2020, the Company issued two convertible promissory notes with an aggregate principal amount of $107,000, with the Company receiving proceeds of $100,000 after original issue discount of $5,000 and deferred finance costs of $2,000. The notes mature in September 2021 and bear interest at 12% per annum. Commencing one hundred eighty (180) days following the issuance date of the notes, the noteholders shall have the right to convert all or any part of the outstanding and unpaid principal balance of the note, at any time, into shares of common stock of the Company at variable conversion price of 60% of the lowest previous twenty (20) trading day closing trade prices of the Company’s common stock, subject to adjustment. The Company is prohibited from effecting a conversion of the note to the extent that, as a result of such conversion, the noteholder, together with its affiliates, would beneficially own more than 4.99% of the number of shares of the Company’s common stock outstanding immediately after giving effect to the issuance of shares of common stock upon conversion of the note.
On September 22, 2020, the Company issued a convertible note in the amount of $78,000. The note matures on September 22, 2021 and bears 8% interest rate per annum. The note is convertible into common shares at 37% discount for the average of the two lowest trading price of the common stock during the 15 trading day period ending on the latest complete trading day prior to the conversion date.
On September 24, 2020, the Company issued a convertible note in the amount of $78,000. The note matures on June 24, 2021 and bears 10% interest rate per annum. The note is convertible into common shares at a fixed conversion price of $0.06 or a conversion discount at rate of 30% to the lowest trading price during the previous twenty (20) trading days to the date of a conversion notice; whichever is lower.
On September 30, 2020, the Company entered into a securities exchange agreement with Marijuana Company of America, Inc., a Utah corporation (“MCOA”). By virtue of the agreement, the Company issued 7,222,222 shares of its restricted common stock to MCOA in exchange for 650,000,000 shares of MCOA restricted common stock. The Company and MCOA also entered into a lock up leak out agreement which prevents either party from sales of the exchanged shares for a period of 12 months. Thereafter the parties may sell not more than the quantity of shares equaling an aggregate maximum sale value of $20,000 per week, or $80,000 per month until all Shares and Exchange Shares are sold.
On November 16, 2020, the Company sold an aggregate 3,000,000 shares of Company common stock, par value $0.001, equal in value to $177,000 based on the closing price on November 16, 2020. Of the total sold, 1,500,000 shares of common stock were sold to Edward Manolos and 1,500,000 shares of common stock were sold to Thang Nguyen. The sales were made in regards to the Company’s acquisition of Ethos, and its disclosures under Item 1.01 are incorporated herein by reference. The Company issued the above shares of its common stock pursuant to the exemption from the registration requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, available to the Company by Section 4(a)(2) promulgated thereunder due to the fact that it was an isolated issuance and did not involve a public offering of securities. Messrs. Manolos and Nguyen were “accredited investors” and/or “sophisticated investors” pursuant to Section 501(a)(b) of the Securities Act, who provided the Company with representations, warranties and information concerning their qualifications as “sophisticated investors” and/or “accredited investors.” The Company provided and made available to Messrs. Manolos and Nguyen full information regarding its business and operations. There was no general solicitation in connection with the offer or sale of the restricted securities. Messrs. Manolos and Nguyen acquired the restricted common stock for their own accounts, for investment purposes and not with a view to public resale or distribution thereof within the meaning of the Securities Act. The restricted shares cannot be sold unless subject to an effective registration statement by the Company, or by an exemption from registration requirements of Section 5 of the Securities Act-the existence of any such exemption subject to legal review and approval by the Company.
On December 1, 2020, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement in connection with the issuance of an 8% convertible note with the principal amount of $33,500, with an accredited investor. The note is convertible anytime after 180 days of issuance at a variable conversion price of 63% of the Market Price at time of conversion. Market Price is defined as the average of the two lowest trading prices during the fifteen (15) days prior to conversion. The Note and Purchase Agreement are attached to this filing. The Company received net cash proceeds of $30,000.
On December 1, 2020, the Company entered into an additional Securities Purchase Agreement in connection with the issuance of an 8% convertible note with the principal amount of $33,500, with an accredited investor. The note is convertible anytime after 180 days of issuance at a variable conversion price of 63% of the Market Price at time of conversion. Market Price is defined as the average of the two lowest trading prices during the fifteen (15) days prior to conversion. The Company received net cash proceeds of $30,000.
On January 3, 2021, we entered into a settlement agreement with Robert L. Hymers, III (“Hymers”) concerning five delinquent payments totaling $100,000 due under the stock purchase agreement whereby the Company purchased 266,667 shares of common stock of Natural Plant Extract of California Inc., a California corporation (“NPE”), The Company was required to make $20,000 monthly for a period of twenty-seven (27) months to Hymers, with the first payment commencing September 1, 2020 and the remaining payments due and payable on the first day of each subsequent month until Hymers received $540,000. On January 3, 2021, we entered into a settlement concerning the outstanding payments by agreeing to issue to Hymers a total of 1,585,791 shares of registered common stock from our S-1 registration statement made effective during February 2021.
On January 5, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement in connection with the issuance of an 10% convertible note with the principal amount of $110,000, with an accredited investor. The note is convertible at a fixed conversion price of $0.005. In the event of default by the Company, or after the public announcement of a change of control transaction as defined in the agreement, the conversion price is $0.001. The Company received net proceeds of $97,500.
On January 5, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement in connection with the issuance of an 10% convertible note with the principal amount of $110,000, with an accredited investor. The note is convertible at a fixed conversion price of $0.05. In the event of default by the Company, or after the public announcement of a change of control transaction as defined in the agreement, the conversion price is $0.01. The Company received net proceeds of $97,500.
On January 12, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement in connection with the issuance of an 10% convertible note with the principal amount of $115,500, with an accredited investor. The note is convertible beginning 61 days from issuance at a fixed conversion price of $0.10 per share or 60% or the lowest trading price for ten days prior to conversion in the event that the Company’s stock trades at less than $0.10 per share. The Company received net proceeds of $100,000.
On January 26, 2021, the Company entered into two Securities Purchase Agreements in connection with the issuance of two 10% convertible note with the principal amount of $487,750, with an accredited investor. The note is convertible at 70% of the average of the three lowest trading prices for 20 days prior to conversion. The Company received net proceeds of $431,000.
On February 3, 2021, the Registrant completed the sale of an aggregate of 4,700,000 registered shares of common stock registered on Form S-1 (File No. 333-250038) in two transactions in exchange for a total purchase price of $282,000. The parties to the transactions were the Registrant and BHP Capital NY, Inc., and Platinum Point Capital, LLC. There was no material relationship, other than in respect of the transactions, between BHP Capital NY, Inc., Platinum Point Capital, LLC and the Registrant or any of its affiliates, or any director or officer of the Registrant, or any associate of any such director or officer. BHP Capital NY, Inc. purchased 2,350,000 registered common shares in exchange for $141,000. Platinum Point Capital, LLC purchased 2,350,000 registered common shares in exchange for $141,000.
On January 27, 2021 Cannabis Global, Inc. (the “Registrant”) closed a material definitive agreement (MDA) with Edward Manolos, a director and related party. Pursuant to the MDA, the Registrant purchased from Mr. Manolos 266,667 shares of common stock in Natural Plant Extract of California Inc., a California corporation (“NPE”), representing 18.8% of the outstanding capital stock of NPE on a fully diluted basis. NPE operates a licensed psychoactive cannabis manufacturing and distribution business operation in Lynwood, California. NPE is a privately held corporation. Under the terms of the MDA, the Registrant acquired all beneficial ownership over the NPE shares in exchange for a purchase price of two million forty thousand dollars ($2,040,000). In lieu of a cash payment, the Registrant agreed to issue Mr. Manolos 11,383,929 restricted common shares, valued for purposes of the MDA at $0.1792 per share. In connection with the MDA, the Registrant became a party to a Shareholders Agreement by and among Alan Tsai, Hymers, Betterworld Ventures, LLC, Marijuana Company of America, Inc. and NPE. The Shareholders Agreement contains customary rights and obligations, including restrictions on the transfer of the Shares. Additionally, the Registrant intends, upon completion of the terms and conditions of the Material Definitive Agreement, to control the production, manufacturing and distribution of both NPE and the Registrant’s products.
On February 16, 2021, we purchased 266,667 shares of common stock of Natural Plant Extract of California Inc., a California corporation (“NPE”), from Alan Tsai, in exchange for the issuance of 1,436,368 common shares. Other than with respect to the transaction, there was no material relationship between Mr. Tsai and the Registrant. By virtue of the transaction, the Registrant acquired 18.8% of the outstanding capital stock of NPE, bringing its total beneficial ownership in NPE to 56.5%. NPE operates a licensed psychoactive cannabis manufacturing and distribution business operation in Lynwood, California. By virtue of its 56.5% ownership over NPE, the Company will control production, manufacturing and distribution of both NPE and Company products. In connection with the MDA, the Registrant became a party to a Shareholders Agreement by and among Edward Manolos, a director of the Company, Robert L. Hymers III, Betterworld Ventures, LLC, Marijuana Company of America, Inc. and NPE. The Shareholders Agreement contains customary rights and obligations concerning operations, management, including restrictions on the transfer of the Shares.
On February 16, 2021, the Company sold 1,133,334 registered common shares to accredited investors, realizing $68,000.
On February 18, 2021, the Company sold 683,333 registered common shares to an accredited investor, realizing proceeds of $41,000.
On February 28, 2021, the Company sold 153,000 Preferred Series B shares to an accredited investor, realizing proceeds of $153,000. The proceeds were not received until March 2021, and the agreement was accounted for as a liability based on the terms of the Preferred Series B designation.
On March 19, 2021, the Company sold 78,500 Preferred Series B shares to an accredited investor, realizing gross proceeds of $78,500, and the agreement was accounted for as a liability based on the terms of the Preferred Series B designation.
On April 22, 2021, the Company sold 53,750 Preferred Series B shares to an accredited investor, realizing gross proceeds of $53,750, and the agreement was accounted for as a liability based on the terms of the Preferred Series B designation.
On May 27, 2021, the Company sold 43,500 Preferred Series B shares to an accredited investor, realizing gross proceeds of $43,500, and the agreement was accounted for as a liability based on the terms of the Preferred Series B designation.
On March 8, 2021, the Company sold a convertible note with a face value of $215,000. The note carries interest at 10% annually with a maturity date of March 8, 2022 with a Conversion Price that shall be equal to the lesser of $0.10 per share (the “Fixed Conversion Price”), or seventy percent (70%) of the average the three (3) lowest traded prices during the twenty (20) consecutive trading day period ending on the trading day immediately prior to the applicable conversion date.
On March 16, 2021, the Company sold a convertible note with a face value of $215,000. The note carries interest at 10% annually with a maturity date of March 16, 2022 with a Conversion Price that shall be equal to the lesser of $0.10 per share (the “Fixed Conversion Price”), or seventy percent (70%) of the average the three (3) lowest traded prices during the twenty (20) consecutive trading day period ending on the trading day immediately prior to the applicable conversion date.
On March 25, 2021, the Company sold 1,314,188 registered common shares at a price of $0.06 for a total purchase price of $78,851.28 from the Registration Statement effective November 19, 2020.
On May 20, 2021, the Company sold a convertible note to an accredited investor for proceeds of $130,000 at 8% per annum with a maturity date of May 20, 2022 with a Conversion Price of Common Stock equal to 60% of the lowest trading price of the Common Stock which the Company’s shares are traded for the fifteen prior trading days of Notice of Conversion.
On June 16, 2021, the Company sold a convertible note to an accredited investor for proceeds of $135,000 at 8% per annum with a maturity date of June 16, 2022 with a Variable Conversion Price at a discount rate of 35% for the average of the two (2) lowest Trading Prices for the Common Stock during the fifteen (15) Trading Day period ending on the latest complete Trading Day prior to the Conversion Date. The note becomes convertible 180 days from issuance.
On July 14, 2021, the Company sold 38,500 Preferred Series B shares to an accredited investor, realizing gross proceeds of $38,500, and the agreement was accounted for as a liability based on the terms of the Preferred Series B designation.
On August 4, 2021, the Company sold a convertible note to an accredited investor for gross proceeds of $110,000 at 8% per annum with a maturity date of August 4, 2022 with a Variable Conversion Price at a discount rate of 40% of the lowest Trading Price for the Common Stock during the fifteen (15) Trading Day period ending on the latest complete Trading Day prior to the Conversion Date. The note becomes convertible 180 days from issuance.
We plan to use the proceeds from sales of the primary offering to partially finance our business operations. We also intend to utilize cash on hand, loans and other forms of financing such as the sale of additional equity and debt securities and other credit facilities to conduct our ongoing business, and to also conduct strategic business development and implementation of our business plans generally. We are not intending to use any off-balance sheet financing arrangements.
Operating Activities
For the fiscal year ending August 31, 2021 and the fiscal year ending August 31, 2020, the Company used cash for operating activities of $1,471,051 and $1,522,141, respectively. Operating activities consisted of corporate overhead and initial research and development projects. The decrease in operating activity costs was primarily due to the reduction in consulting costs and decreased activities relating to reorganization of the business operations and implementation of new research and development programs.
Investing Activities
For the fiscal years ended August 31, 2021 and August 31, 2020 net cash used in investment activities was $7,311 and $15,499, respectively. Investing activities during the year ended August 31, 2020 consisted of equipment purchases used to produce new products. For the fiscal year ending August 31, 2021, investing activities consisted of equipment purchases of $9,511, and $2,200 of cash acquired in the acquisition of NPE.
Financing Activities
During the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021, the Company had cash inflows from financing activities of $1,506,837, consisting of $509,851 from the sales of common shares, $2,136,250 from convertible notes payable which were offset with repayments on convertible notes payable of $964,500 and repayments on notes payable of $174,764. During the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020, the Company had cash inflows from financing activities of $1,387,896 including $714,612 via the sales of common shares, $673,284 from convertible notes payable.
Other Contractual Obligations
Our Company entered into a one-year lease during August of 2019 for a commercial food production facility located in Los Angeles, California. The one-year lease at a base rate of $3,600 per month through September of 2020. Subsequent to the end of the financial reporting period, ending May 31, 2021, the Company agreed to extend the lease for commercial food production facility located in Los Angeles, California, on a month-to-month basis. As of May 31, 2021, the obligation was completed with the month-to-month contact ending in that date.
On June 5, 2020, the Company entered into an Assignment and Amendment to Commercial Lease Agreement whereby it leased commercial property located at 11116 Wright Road, Los Angeles, CA 90262. The monthly rent is $11,000 per month. The lease terminates on June 30, 2022. The premises is used in connection with NPE’s operations including Cannabis delivery and operation in accordance with applicable city, county and California state law including, but not limited to, the state cannabis licensing and program rules and local ordinances.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
We review new accounting standards as issued. Although some of these accounting standards issued or effective after the end of our previous fiscal year may be applicable to the Company, we have not identified any standards that we believe merit further discussion. We do not expect the adoption of any recently issued accounting pronouncements to have a significant impact on our financial position, results of operations, or cash flows.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported in those statements. We have made our best estimates of certain amounts contained in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities. However, application of our accounting policies involves the exercise of judgment and use of assumptions as to future uncertainties, and, as a result, actual results could differ materially from these estimates. Management believes that the estimates, assumptions, and judgments involved in the accounting policies described below have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements.
We cannot predict what future laws and regulations might be passed that could have a material effect on our results of operations. We assess the impact of significant changes in laws and regulations on a regular basis and update the assumptions and estimates used to prepare our financial statements when we deem it necessary.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
We consider all highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less to be cash equivalents. Cash and cash equivalents are held in operating accounts at a major financial institution.
Inventory
Inventory is primarily comprised of work in progress. Inventory is valued at cost, based on the specific identification method, unless and until the market value for the inventory is lower than cost, in which case an allowance is established to reduce the valuation to market value. As of August 31, 2021, and August 31, 2020, market values of all of our inventory were at cost, and accordingly, no such valuation allowance was recognized.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivables are recorded at the net value of face amount less any allowance for doubtful accounts. On a periodic basis, we evaluate our accounts receivable and, based on a method of specific identification of any accounts receivable for which we deem the net realizable value to be less than the gross amount of accounts receivable recorded, we establish an allowance for doubtful accounts for those balances. In determining our need for an allowance for doubtful accounts, we consider historical experience, analysis of past due amounts, client creditworthiness and any other relevant available information. However, our actual experience may vary from our estimates. If the financial condition of our clients were to deteriorate, resulting in their inability or unwillingness to pay our fees, we may need to record additional allowances or write-offs in future periods. This risk is mitigated to the extent that we collect retainers from our clients prior to performing significant services.
The allowance for doubtful accounts, if any, is recorded as a reduction in revenue to the extent the provision relates to fee adjustments and other discretionary pricing adjustments. To the extent the provision relates to a client's inability to make required payments on accounts receivables, the provision is recorded in operating expenses. As of August 31, 2021, and August 31, 2020, we had no allowance for doubtful accounts, respectively.
Property and Equipment, net
Property and Equipment is stated at net book value, cost less depreciation. Maintenance and repairs are expensed as incurred. Depreciation of owned equipment is provided using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, ranging from two to seven years. Depreciation of capitalized construction in progress costs, a component of property and equipment, net, begins once the underlying asset is placed into service and is recognized over the estimated useful life. Property and equipment is reviewed for impairment as discussed below under “Accounting for the Impairment of Long-Lived Assets.” We did not capitalize any interest as of August 31, 2021 and as of August 31, 2020.
Accounting for the Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We evaluate long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Upon such an occurrence, recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by comparing the carrying amount of an asset to forecasted undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. For long-lived assets held for sale, assets are written down to fair value, less cost to sell. Fair value is determined based on discounted cash flows, appraised values or management's estimates, depending upon the nature of the assets. We have not recorded any impairment charges related to long-lived assets during the year ended August 31, 2021, and August 31, 2020.
Beneficial Conversion Feature
If the conversion features of conventional convertible debt provide for a rate of conversion that is below market value at issuance, this feature is characterized as a beneficial conversion feature (“BCF”). We record a BCF as a debt discount pursuant to Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ACF”) Topic 470-20 Debt with Conversion and Other Options. In those circumstances, the convertible debt is recorded net of the discount related to the BCF, and we amortize the discount to interest expense over the life of the debt using the effective interest method.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 606, Revenue Recognition. The guidance presents a single five-step model for comprehensive revenue recognition that requires an entity to recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services.
In accordance with FASB ASC Topic 606, Revenue Recognition, we recognize revenue when persuasive evidence of a significant financing component exists in our consulting and product sales contracts. We examine and evaluate when our customers become liable to pay for goods and services; how much consideration is paid as compared to the cash selling price of the goods or services; and, the length of time between our performance and the receipt of payment.
Product Sales
Revenue from product sales, including delivery fees, is recognized when an order has been obtained from the customer, the price is fixed and determinable when the order is placed, the product is shipped, title has transferred and collectability is reasonably assured. Generally, we drop-ship orders to our clients with shipping-point or destination terms. For any shipments with destination terms, the Company defers revenue until delivery to the customer. Given the facts that (1) our customers exercise discretion in determining the timing of when they place their product order; and, (2) the price negotiated in our product sales is fixed and determinable at the time the customer places the order, we are not of the opinion that our product sales indicate or involve any significant customer financing that would materially change the amount of revenue recognized under the sales transaction, or would otherwise contain a significant financing component for us or the customer under FASB ASC Topic 606.
Costs of Revenues
Our policy is to recognize costs of revenue in the same manner in conjunction with revenue recognition. Cost of revenues includes the costs directly attributable to revenue recognition and includes compensation and fees for services, travel and other expenses for services and costs of products and equipment. Selling, general and administrative expenses are charged to expense as incurred.
Stock-Based Compensation
Restricted shares are awarded to employees and entitle the grantee to receive shares of restricted common stock at the end of the established vesting period. The fair value of the grant is based on the stock price on the date of grant. We recognize related compensation costs on a straight-line basis over the requisite vesting period of the award, which to date has been one year from the grant date.
Income Taxes
We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns in accordance with applicable accounting guidance for accounting for income taxes, using currently enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. We record a valuation allowance when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. For the years ended August 31, 2020 and August 31, 2019 we incurred no income taxes and had no liabilities related to federal or state income taxes.
Loss Contingencies
From time to time the Company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of business. On at least a quarterly basis, consistent with ASC 450-20-50-1C, if the Company determines that there is a reasonable possibility that a material loss may have been incurred, or is reasonably estimable, regardless of whether the Company accrued for such a loss (or any portion of that loss), the Company will confer with its legal counsel, consistent with ASC 450. If the material loss is determinable or reasonably estimable, the Company will record it in its accounts and as a liability on the balance sheet. If the Company determines that such an estimate cannot be made, the Company's policy is to disclose a demonstration of its attempt to estimate the loss or range of losses before concluding that an estimate cannot be made, and to disclose it in the notes to the financial statements under Contingent Liabilities.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
We report net income (loss) per common share in accordance with FASB ASC 260, “Earnings per Share”. This statement requires dual presentation of basic and diluted earnings with a reconciliation of the numerator and denominator of the earnings per share computations. Basic net income (loss) per share is computed by dividing net income attributable to common stockholders by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period and excludes the effects of any potentially dilutive securities. Diluted net income (loss) per share gives effect to any dilutive potential common stock outstanding during the period. The computation does not assume conversion, exercise or contingent exercise of securities that would have an anti-dilutive effect on earnings.
Related Party Transactions
We follow FASB ASC subtopic 850-10, “Related Party Transactions”, for the identification of related parties and disclosure of related party transactions.
Pursuant to ASC 850-10-20, related parties include: a) affiliates of the Company; b) entities for which investments in their equity securities would be required, absent the election of the fair value option under the Fair Value Option Subsection of Section 825-10-15, to be accounted for by the equity method by the investing entity; c) trusts for the benefit of employees, such as pension and profit-sharing trusts that are managed by or under the trusteeship of management; d) principal owners of the Company; e) management of the Company; f) other parties with which the Company may deal if one party controls or can significantly influence the management or operating policies of the other to an extent that one of the transacting parties might be prevented from fully pursuing its own separate interests; and g) other parties that can significantly influence the management or operating policies of the transacting parties or that have an ownership interest in one of the transacting parties and can significantly influence the other to an extent that one or more of the transacting parties might be prevented from fully pursuing its own separate interests.
Material related party transactions are required to be disclosed in the consolidated financial statements, other than compensation arrangements, expense allowances, and other similar items in the ordinary course of business. However, disclosure of transactions that are eliminated in the preparation of consolidated or combined financial statements is not required in those statements. The disclosures shall include: a) the nature of the relationship(s) involved; b) a description of the transactions, including transactions to which no amounts or nominal amounts were ascribed, for each of the periods for which statements of operation are presented, and such other information deemed necessary to an understanding of the effects of the transactions on the financial statements; c) the dollar amounts of transactions for each of the periods for which statements of operations are presented and the effects of any change in the method of establishing the terms from that used in the preceding period; and d) amounts due from or to related parties as of the date of each balance sheet presented and, if not otherwise apparent, the terms and manner of settlement.
Variable Interest Entities
The Company accounts for arrangements that are not controlled through voting or similar rights as variable interest entities (“VIEs”). An enterprise is required to consolidate a VIE if it is the primary beneficiary of the VIE. A VIE is created when (i) the equity investment at risk is not sufficient to permit the entity to finance its activities without additional subordinated financial support from other parties, or (ii) the entity’s equity holders as a group either: (a) lack the power, through voting or similar rights, to direct the activities of the entity that most significantly impact the entity’s economic performance, (b) are not obligated to absorb expected losses of the entity if they occur, or (c) do not have the right to receive expected residual returns of the entity if they occur. If an entity is deemed to be a VIE, the enterprise that is deemed to have a variable interest, or combination of variable interests, that provides the enterprise with a controlling financial interest in the VIE, is considered the primary beneficiary and must consolidate the VIE. Investments where the Company has significant influence, but not control, and joint ventures which are VIEs in which the Company is not the primary beneficiary, are recorded under the equity method of accounting on the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
As of August 31, 2020, the Company held a variable interest in an entity for which it directly held an 18.8% equity interest, and indirectly controlled 37.6% of the equity. The entity was not determined to be a VIE under ASC 810, as it did not meet the criteria outlined above. Since the Company indirectly controls less than 50% of the voting interest of the entity, the entity is not consolidated, and the Company accounted for the investment under the equity method of accounting in accordance with ASC 321. Since the entity in which the Company holds its investment does not have a readily determinable fair value, the Company elected to account for the investment under the measurement alternative, accounting for the investment at cost less impairment, plus or minus any changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for the same investment. During the year ended August 31, 2021, the Company acquired an additional 37.6% and had majority control. The Company accounted for the control acquisition as a business combination and consolidates the entity within its financial statements.