ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion may contain forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, including those set forth under the heading “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results and the timing of selected events discussed below could differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by, these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a research and clinical development biopharmaceutical company focused on addressing unmet medical needs in disorders of the complement and coagulation systems. Proteases are the natural regulators of these biological systems. We engineer proteases to create both improved or novel molecules to treat diseases that result from dysregulation of the complement and coagulation cascades. Our protease engineering platform has generated two late-stage clinical programs including marzeptacog alfa (activated) (“MarzAA”), a subcutaneously (“SQ”) administered next-generation engineered coagulation Factor VIIa (“FVIIa”) for the treatment of episodic bleeding in subjects with rare bleeding disorders. Our complement pipeline includes a preclinical program partnered with Biogen International GmbH (“Biogen”) for dry age-related macular degeneration (“AMD”), an improved complement factor I protease for SQ prophylaxis in patients with complement factor I (“CFI”) deficiency and C4b-degraders designed to target disorders of the classical complement pathway as well as other complement programs in development.
The product candidates generated by our protease engineering platform have improved functional properties such as longer half-life, improved specificity, higher potency and increased bioavailability. These characteristics potentially allow for improved efficacy, SQ administration of recombinant coagulation factors and complement inhibitors, or less frequently dosed intravitreal therapeutics.
Our most advanced product candidate is MarzAA, a next-generation SQ FVIIa that is entering a registrational Phase 3 trial (MAA-304) in patients with Hemophilia A or B with inhibitors. We also plan to initiate a Phase 1/2 trial of MarzAA in Factor VII Deficiency, Glanzmann Thrombasthenia, and Hemophilia A with inhibitor patients on prophylaxis Hemlibra for treatment of episodic bleeding (MAA-202).
Our complement portfolio is led by the development candidates CB 4332 and CB 2782-PEG. CB 4332 is a wholly owned first-in-class improved CFI intended for lifelong prophylactic SQ administration in individuals with CFI deficiency. CB 2782-PEG is a potential best-in-class C3 degrader product candidate in preclinical development for the treatment of dry AMD that we have licensed to Biogen. We have several engineered protease programs in discovery or early non-clinical development. These programs all target diseases caused by deficient regulation of the complement system.
Our next most advanced hemophilia product candidate is dalcinonacog alfa (“DalcA”), a next-generation SQ FIX, which has shown efficacy and safety in a Phase 2b clinical trial in individuals with Hemophilia B. We have a discovery stage Factor IX gene therapy construct, CB 2679d-GT for Hemophilia B, that has demonstrated superiority compared with the Padua FIX variant in preclinical models.
The following table summarizes our current development programs.
We are experiencing operational and other challenges as a result of the COVID-19 global pandemic, which could delay or halt our development programs. See Recent Other Developments and Item 1A - Risk Factors for further discussion of the current and expected impact on our business and development programs.
Recent Development Program Updates
MarzAA
We are initiating a registrational Phase 3 trial (MAA-304) for our most advanced product candidate, MarzAA, a potent, subcutaneously administered, next-generation Factor VIIa variant.
The Phase 3 registration trial - MAA-304 - is an open-label, global, multi-center, randomized, cross-over study, designed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of MarzAA for on-demand treatment of spontaneous or traumatic bleeding episodes, in adolescents and adults with congenital Hemophilia A or B with inhibitors, compared with Standard of Care, either IV rFVIIa or IV FEIBA. The study will enroll approximately 60 subjects to treat 244 eligible bleeding episodes with each treatment. The primary endpoint is hemostatic efficacy using a standard 4-point assessment scale at the 24-hour timepoint. The study will assess the effectiveness of SQ MarzAA, using up to three doses to treat a bleeding episode, compared with the Standard of Care. We plan to submit our first report to the Data and Safety Monitoring Board (“DSMB”) in 2021 and our final DSMB report in the middle of 2022.
We also plan to initiate a Phase 1/2 trial (MAA-202) of MarzAA for treatment of bleeding in Factor VII Deficiency, Glanzmann Thrombasthenia, and in individuals with Hemophilia A with inhibitors treated with Hemlibra in 2021 and to report interim PK data mid-year.
Complement
We currently have several protease programs in preclinical discovery or early non-clinical development. Common to the programs is that they target diseases caused by deficient regulation of the complement system. One ocular program for dry AMD is partnered with Biogen; the remaining complement programs are focused on systemic complement disorders and are wholly owned by Catalyst.
Our complement portfolio is led by the development candidates CB 4332 and CB 2782-PEG. CB 4332 is a wholly owned first-in-class improved CFI intended for lifelong prophylactic SQ administration in individuals with CFI
deficiency. CB 2782-PEG is a potential best-in-class C3 degrader product candidate in preclinical development for the treatment of dry AMD that we have licensed to Biogen. We have several engineered protease programs in discovery or early non-clinical development. These programs all target diseases caused by deficient regulation of the complement system.
CB 2782-PEG is an engineered pegylated C3 degrader that we designed with a best-in-class anti-C3 profile for dry AMD. Dry AMD is an ocular disease leading to vision loss and blindness for which there is currently no approved therapies. Complement hyperreactivity plays an important role in dry AMD. Using the protease CB 2782-PEG to degrade C3 allows for the neutralization of C3 activity. It is expected that maintaining low C3 in the eye can significantly slow disease progression in dry AMD in patients who would otherwise lose their vision over time.
Currently, there are no therapeutic options approved to specifically replace the deficient CFI protein with a well-functioning CFI to treat these disorders. While not specifically targeting CFI deficiency, eculizumab and ravulizumab are indicated for use in aHUS. Neither eculizumab nor ravulizumab address the root cause of the CFI deficiency; instead, they are designed to prevent the downstream effects of uncontrolled complement activity. Patients with aberrant CFI may therefore still have uncontrolled complement activation downstream of CFI. This may cause deposition of complement proteins, for example, on red blood cells, and some CFI patients may have a worse prognosis than others even when on non-replacement therapy. CB 4332 is designed to address this unmet need by providing a therapeutic option that corrects the root problem of these diseases by simple, fast and easy SQ administration.
We have additional early stage complement targeted discovery programs that have not yet been disclosed. The programs target different proteins from C3b and C4b.
DalcA
DalcA is a next-generation SQ Factor IX product candidate for the prophylactic treatment of individuals with Hemophilia B.
In 2020, we completed an open-label Phase 2b study to evaluate the ability of DalcA to maintain steady state protective Factor IX levels above 12% in six individuals with severe hemophilia B. Each subject received a single intravenous dose, followed by daily SQ doses of DalcA for 28 days during which FIX activity levels, clotting parameters, half-life, safety, tolerability and anti-drug antibody formation were monitored.
At the World Federation of Hemophilia Virtual Summit in June 2020, we reported that 28 days of daily SQ dosing of DalcA at 100 IU/kg achieved protective target FIX levels of >12% in all participants, with FIX levels of up to 27% and a half-life of 2.5 to 5.1 days. No bleeds were reported during the 28 days of dosing and the 5 day wash-out, demonstrating effective prophylaxis and the potential for lower or less frequent dosing. Injection volumes were less than 1 mL. One subject withdrew on day 7 after reporting injection site reactions (“ISR”) from the first 3 SQ doses. No neutralizing anti-drug antibodies were detected, and no serious adverse events were reported. A single non-neutralizing anti-drug antibody to DalcA was observed at the end of study time point and had no clinical effect. Some subjects reported mild ISR of pain and/or redness, primarily with the initial injections. No thrombotic events occurred, and blood coagulation markers did not show any prothrombotic signals.
Factor IX Gene Therapy
Our Factor IX gene therapy construct CB 2679d-GT has demonstrated a 2-fold to 3-fold higher activity resulting in improved clotting time and blood loss in a preclinical Hemophilia B mouse model compared with the Padua variant of Factor IX. Fidanacogene elaparvovec (Pfizer/Spark), AMT-061 (uniQure),TAK-748 (Takeda) and FLT180A (Freeline) use the Padua FIX variant as the transgene in their AAV-based gene therapy clinical programs. Fidanacogene elaparvovec, AMT-061 and FLT180A have demonstrated encouraging Factor IX levels in their respective Phase 1/2 and Phase 2/3 studies with median Factor IX activity levels in the upper end of the mild to normal ranges. By its increased activity, CB 2679d-GT has the potential to reach higher Factor IX activity levels at lower vector doses which could improve tolerability of the vector as well as efficacy of the transgene, and ultimately lower manufacturing costs.
We have licensed AAV technology from The Board of Trustees of The Leland Stanford Junior University (“Stanford”) and are currently optimizing the vector under a sponsored research agreement with Stanford. Data presented at European Association for Haemophilia and Allied Disorders (“EAHAD”) show that the combination of our proprietary potency enhanced CB 2679d-GT Factor IX construct with a novel chimeric AAV capsid may reduce the vector dose required in gene therapy while maintaining high Factor IX levels.
We reported at the World Federation of Hemophilia Virtual Summit in June 2020 that studies of CB 2679d-GT in Hemophilia B mice have demonstrated a 4-fold reduction in blood loss and an 8-fold reduction in bleeding time when compared with the same dose of the Padua variant of FIX.
We also reported that in a non-human primate study evaluating expression and tolerability, CB 2679d-GT in the novel chimeric capsid KP1 was well tolerated with high FIX expression that stabilized to approximately 25% to 50% FIX above baseline levels at the 6-week interim data cutoff. The novel chimeric capsid had differentiated and superior response to anti-capsid neutralizing antibodies compared to that observed for the LK03 comparator during the screening of non-human primates for the study.
Recent Collaborations
In December 2019, we entered into a license and collaboration agreement with Biogen to develop and commercialize CB 2782-PEG and our other anti-C3 proteases for the potential treatment of dry AMD and other disorders. Under the collaboration agreement, we will perform pre-clinical and manufacturing activities, and Biogen is solely responsible for funding the pre-clinical and manufacturing activities and performing IND-enabling activities, worldwide clinical development, and commercialization. We received a $15.0 million upfront payment from Biogen in January 2020 for the grant of an exclusive license and the related know-how, and we are eligible to receive up to $340.0 million in milestone payments, along with tiered royalties for worldwide net sales of this product candidate up to low double-digits. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $5.8 million in collaboration revenue. Unless earlier terminated, the agreement will remain in effect until the expiry of all royalty obligations. Biogen has the right to terminate the agreement at will, on a product-by-product basis or in its entirety at any time upon 60 days prior written notice. In addition, either party has the right to terminate the agreement following a material breach that remains uncured for 90 days, or in connection with an insolvency event involving the other party.
We also collaborated with Mosaic Biosciences (“Mosaic”) in the development of our Complement product candidates including CB 2782-PEG. Under the collaboration agreement, as amended in December 2019, Mosaic will perform all future services for a fee, and pursuant to a subsequent amendment in May 2020, Mosaic received a one-time cash payment of $0.8 million and is eligible to receive up to $4.0 million in potential future milestone payments related to regulatory and clinical development events for CB 2782-PEG and an additional anti-complement product candidate in cash, or in common stock if the Company elects, in lieu of our obligations to pay Mosaic a double-digit percentage of funds we receive from Biogen or any other amounts we receive related to sublicense fees, research and development payments, or any other research, regulatory, clinical or commercial milestones and royalties on any other development candidates. We now own one hundred percent of all future payment streams related to these product candidates.
Recent Manufacturing Updates
Drug Substance manufacturing
We have a long-term development and manufacturing services agreement with AGC Biologics, Inc. (“AGC”). AGC has global manufacturing sites and we use their facilities in the U.S. and Europe for drug substance manufacturing of MarzAA, DalcA, and CB 2782-PEG. We have successfully manufactured MarzAA to support our global Phase 3 clinical trial to evaluate the safety and efficacy of MarzAA for on-demand treatment and control of bleeding episodes in subjects with Hemophilia A or Hemophilia B with inhibitors. As of December 2020, we have successfully completed two large-scale GMP batches of MarzAA that will be sufficient to support the Phase 3 clinical trial through its completion. Additionally, we have entered into a firm purchase commitment, with AGC, to validate the MarzAA manufacturing process including production of three Process Performance Qualification batches.
In January 2020, we completed a successful CMC Scientific Advice meeting with the Paul Ehrlich Institute in the EU which endorsed our current CMC strategy and manufacturing activities required for registration filing for the MarzAA program.
Drug Product manufacturing
We have a long-term clinical supply services agreement with Catalent Indiana, LLC (“Catalent”). Catalent has facilities in the U.S. and Europe and conducts drug product development and manufacturing for MarzAA and DalcA. We successfully completed development work for a variety of vial sizes which supports flexible dosing.
We also work with Symbiosis Pharmaceutical Services Limited on drug product manufacturing for MarzAA on a fee-for-services basis. Symbiosis has a facility in the United Kingdom. In 2020, two drug product manufacturing batches were successfully completed at Symbiosis to support MarzAA pivotal trials.
The two MarzAA drug product batches manufactured at Symbiosis in 2020, were also successfully packaged and labeled at Catalent to support MarzAA pivotal trials.
Other Recent Developments
COVID-19 business impact
The global coronavirus pandemic has resulted in widespread requirements for individuals to work from their homes, strained medical facilities worldwide and is causing disruptions to certain pharmaceutical manufacturing and product supply chains. We are experiencing operational and other challenges as a result of the COVID-19 global pandemic, which have delayed our enrollment in MAA-304 and MAA-202, and which may delay or halt our development in these or other programs.
Recent Financing
In the first quarter of 2021, we sold an aggregate of 9,185,000 shares of common stock (including 485,000 shares sold pursuant to the exercise of the underwriters’ overallotment option) at a price of $5.75 per share. The net proceeds, after deducting $3.5 million in underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses, were approximately $49.3 million.
In June 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 4,615,384 shares of common stock at a price of $6.50 per share. The net proceeds, after deducting $2.0 million in underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us, were approximately $28.0 million.
In February 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 5,307,692 shares of common stock (including 692,307 shares sold pursuant to the exercise of the underwriters’ overallotment option) at a price of $6.50 per share. The net proceeds, after deducting $2.5 million in underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us, were $32.0 million.
We have no products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. From inception to December 31, 2020, we have raised net proceeds of approximately $452.9 million, primarily from private placements of convertible preferred stock, proceeds from our merger with Targacept, issuances of shares of common stock and warrants, including $76.4 million in total revenue received from our license and collaboration agreements.
We have never been profitable and have incurred significant operating losses in each year since inception. Our net losses were $56.2 million and $55.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $314.8 million. As of December 31, 2020, our cash, cash equivalents and investments balance were $81.9 million. Substantially all our operating losses were incurred in our research and development programs and in our general and administrative operations.
We expect to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for at least the next several years as we continue the preclinical, manufacturing and clinical development, and seek regulatory approval for our drug candidates. Our operating losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year due to timing of preclinical, manufacturing, clinical development programs and regulatory guidance spending.
Financial Overview
License and Collaboration Revenue
License and collaboration revenue consist of revenue earned for performance obligations satisfied pursuant to our Biogen Agreement. In December 2019, we entered into a license and collaboration agreement with Biogen. In consideration for the grant of an exclusive license and related know-how, we received an up-front license payment of $15.0 million in January 2020, which was recorded in license revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020. We also recognized collaboration revenue for reimbursable third-party vendor, out-of-pocket and personnel costs pertaining to the Biogen Agreement of $5.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. There can be no assurance when any future milestone or royalty payments under the Biogen agreement may occur, if at all.
We have not generated any revenue from the sale of any drugs, and we do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of drugs until we obtain regulatory approval of and commercialize our product candidates.
Cost of License and Collaboration Revenue
Cost of license and collaboration revenue consists of sublicense fees and fees for research and development services payable to Mosaic, fees for research and development services payable to third-party vendors, and personnel costs, corresponding to the recognition of license and collaboration revenue from Biogen. Cost of license and collaboration revenue does not include any allocated overhead costs. In connection with the license revenue recognized from Biogen as discussed above, we paid Mosaic a $3.0 million sublicense fee and recorded such payment as cost of license. We recognized third-party vendor, out-of-pocket and personnel costs, most of which were reimbursable, pertaining to the Biogen Agreement of $6.1 million and recorded such costs as cost of collaboration revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses represent costs incurred to conduct research, such as the discovery and development of our product candidates. We recognize all research and development costs as they are incurred.
Research and development expenses consist primarily of the following:
•
employee-related expenses, which include salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation;
•
laboratory and vendor expenses, including payments to consultants and third parties, related to the execution of preclinical, non-clinical, and clinical studies;
•
the cost of acquiring and manufacturing preclinical and clinical materials and developing manufacturing processes;
•
clinical trial expenses, including costs of third-party clinical research organizations;
•
performing toxicity and other preclinical studies; and
•
facilities and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, depreciation and amortization expense and other supplies.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the periods presented (in thousands):
The largest component of our total operating expenses has historically been our investment in research and development activities, including the clinical and manufacturing development of our product candidates. We are currently focusing substantially all our resources and development efforts on MarzAA, our complement program and DalcA. Our internal resources, employees and infrastructure are not directly tied to individual product candidates or development programs. As such, we do not maintain information regarding these costs incurred for these research and development programs on a project-specific basis.
We expect our aggregate research and development expenses will increase during the next year as we advance the clinical and manufacturing development of our programs. The global coronavirus pandemic may also delay and increase costs of our current development plans.
On May 20, 2016, we signed a development and manufacturing services agreement with AGC, formerly known as CMC ICOS Biologics, Inc., pursuant to which AGC will conduct manufacturing development of agreed upon product candidates. We will own all intellectual property developed in such manufacturing development activities that are specifically related to our product candidates and will have a royalty-free and perpetual license to use AGC’s intellectual property to the extent reasonably necessary to make these product candidates, including commercial manufacturing. In 2016 we commenced manufacturing activities for MarzAA and as of December 31, 2020, six GMP batches have been manufactured at AGC in addition to an engineering batch to support the planned clinical trials.
The initial term of the agreement is ten years or, if later, until all stages under outstanding statements of work have been completed. Either party may terminate the agreement in its entirety upon written notice of a material uncured breach or upon the other party’s bankruptcy, and we may terminate the agreement upon prior notice for any reason. In addition, each party may terminate the agreement in the event that the manufacturing development activities cannot be completed for technical or scientific reasons. We have firm work orders with AGC to manufacture MarzAA and DalcA to support clinical trials totaling $11.2 million. The payment obligations remaining for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $2.3 million.
On October 9, 2019, we signed a clinical supply services agreement with Catalent, effective Oct 4, 2019, pursuant to which Catalent will conduct drug product development of agreed upon product candidates. We will own, and Catalent assigns to us, the intellectual property that is specifically related to our products including the products’ composition and use, and Catalent will own, and we assign to Catalent, the intellectual property that result from Catalent’s performance of its services under the clinical supply agreement.
The initial term of the clinical supply agreement is three years, although the term may be extended for successive twelve-month periods, unless either party gives the other party written notice of its intent not to extend the term at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the initial term or the then-current extension. Either party may terminate the clinical supply agreement in its entirety upon written notice of a material uncured breach or upon the other party’s bankruptcy, and we may terminate the clinical supply agreement for its convenience upon thirty (30) days prior written notice. In addition, each party may terminate the clinical supply agreement in the event that the other party fails to perform its obligations under the agreement for reasons beyond the reasonable control of such party, such as technical or scientific reasons. If we cancel or reschedule a project plan or purchase order outside the parameters set in the clinical supply agreement, we would be obligated to pay for a portion of Catalent’s costs less certain fees that Catalent is able to mitigate. We have committed to a total of $0.5 million in payments to Catalent pursuant to the statements of work for DalcA and zero of those payments are outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
The process of conducting clinical trials necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming. We may never succeed in achieving marketing approval for our product candidates. The probability of success of each product candidate may be affected by numerous factors, including clinical data, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. As a result, we are unable to determine the duration of and costs to complete our research and development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates.
Successful development of current and future product candidates is highly uncertain. Completion dates and costs for our research programs can vary significantly for each current and future product candidate and are difficult to predict. Thus, we cannot estimate with any degree of certainty the costs we will incur in the development of our product candidates. We anticipate we will make determinations as to which programs and product candidates to pursue and how much funding to direct to each program and product candidate on an ongoing basis in response to the scientific success of early research programs, results of ongoing and future clinical trials, our ability to enter into collaborative agreements with respect to programs or potential product candidates, as well as ongoing assessments as to each current or future product candidate’s commercial potential.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel costs, allocated expenses and other expenses for outside professional services, including legal, human resources, audit and accounting services. Personnel costs consist of salaries, bonus, benefits and stock-based compensation. We incur expenses associated with operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and Nasdaq Stock Market LLC (“Nasdaq”), insurance expenses, audit expenses, investor relations activities, Sarbanes-Oxley compliance expenses and other administrative expenses and professional services. We expect such expenses to increase as we advance our programs.
Interest and Other Income, Net
Interest and other income consist primarily of interest income on our investment portfolio and a payment received in the first quarter of 2020 under an agreement associated with neuronal nicotinic receptor assets sold in 2016.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations data for the periods presented (in thousands, except percentages):
*Not meaningful
License and Collaboration Revenue
License and collaboration revenue of $20.9 million generated in the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of a license payment of $15.0 million and reimbursable collaboration expenses of $5.8 million from our Biogen Agreement, which was entered into on December 18, 2019.
Cost of License and Collaboration Revenue
Cost of license and collaboration revenue were $9.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Cost of license revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily include the $3.0 million sublicense fee we paid to Mosaic in connection with the recognition of the license revenue from Biogen. Cost of collaboration revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily reimbursable third-party vendor, out-of-pocket and personnel related costs we incurred pertaining to the Biogen Agreement.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $53.0 million and $43.9 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of approximately $9.1 million, or 21%. The increase was due primarily to an increase of $2.3 million in personnel-related costs, an increase of $7.0 million in preclinical research and an increase of $0.5 million in facilities costs, partially offset by a decrease of $0.7 million in clinical manufacturing costs.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $16.2 million and $13.4 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of approximately $2.8 million, or 21%. The increase was due primarily to an increase of $2.8 million in professional services and an increase of $0.3 million in personnel-related costs, partially offset by a decrease of $0.3 million in indirect employee and facilities costs.
Interest and Other Income, Net
Interest and other income, net was $1.1 million and $2.1 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, a decrease of $1.0 million. The decrease was primarily due to a $1.6 million decrease in interest income on investments, partially offset by a $0.6 million increase in miscellaneous and other income.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included within Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recent accounting pronouncements adopted and not yet adopted for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $81.9 million of cash, cash equivalents and investments. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a $56.2 million net loss and $55.0 million cash used in operating activities. We have an accumulated deficit of $314.8 million as of December 31, 2020. Our primary uses of cash are to fund operating expenses, including research and development expenditures and general and administrative expenditures. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses.
We believe that our existing capital resources, including cash, cash equivalents and investments will be sufficient to meet our projected operating requirements for at least the next 12 months from the date of this filing. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. We plan to continue to fund losses from operations and capital funding needs through future equity and/or debt financings, as well as potential additional asset sales, licensing transactions, collaborations or strategic partnerships with other companies. At the year ended December 31, 2020, we had effective registration statements on Form S-3 that enable us to sell up to $170.0 million in securities. The sale of additional equity or
convertible debt could result in additional dilution to our stockholders. The incurrence of indebtedness would result in debt service obligations and could result in operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. Licensing transactions, collaborations or strategic partnerships may result in us relinquishing valuable rights. We can provide no assurance that financing will be available in the amounts we need or on terms acceptable to us, if at all. If we are not able to secure adequate additional funding we may be forced to delay, make reductions in spending, extend payment terms with suppliers, liquidate assets where possible, and/or suspend or curtail planned programs. Any of these actions could materially harm our business.
During the first quarter 2021, we sold additional equity receiving approximately $49.3 million in cash proceeds. See Note 16.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $55.0 million, due primarily to a net loss of $56.2 million and a net change in our operating assets and liabilities of $2.6 million, due primarily to a $11.7 million decrease in accounts receivable and a $1.7 million increase in accounts payable, partially offset by a $13.0 million decrease in deferred revenue related to the Biogen Agreement and a $3.0 million increase in prepaid and other assets. This is partially offset by non-cash charges of $3.8 million.
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $43.6 million, primarily due to a net loss of $55.2 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $3.4 million and a net change in our operating assets and liabilities of $8.2 million: primarily due to a $15.0 million increase in deferred revenue related to the upfront payment from Biogen, a $5.6 million increase in accrued compensation and other accrued liabilities, and a $3.0 million increase in accounts payable, partially offset by a $15.0 million increase in accounts receivable related to the upfront payment from Biogen, and a $0.5 million increase in prepaid and other assets.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $9.7 million, due primarily to $107.6 million in proceeds from maturities of investments, partially offset by $97.6 million in purchases of short-term and long-term investments.
Cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $27.4 million, primarily due to $157.4 million in proceeds from maturities of investments, partially offset by $130.0 million in purchases of investments.
Cash flows from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $60.4 million, due to $32.0 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock related to our public offering in February 2020, $28.0 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock related to our public offering in June 2020, and $0.4 million in proceeds from ESPP purchases of common stock and stock option exercises.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $0.3 million due to proceeds from the issuance of common stock from proceeds from ESPP purchases stock grants and stock option exercises.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Polices and Estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Our significant accounting policies and methods used in preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements are described in Note 3 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates, and such differences may be material.
Management believes the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates discussed below are critical to understanding its historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
License and Collaboration Arrangements
We may enter into collaboration arrangements that fall under the scope Collaborative Arrangements (Topic 808) (“ASC 808”). We analyze collaboration arrangements to assess whether they are within the scope of ASC 808 to determine whether such arrangements involve joint operating activities performed by parties that are both active participants in the activities and exposed to significant risks and rewards dependent on the commercial success of such activities. This assessment is performed throughout the life of the arrangement based on changes in the responsibilities of all parties in the arrangement. The accounting for some of the activities under collaboration arrangements may be analogized to ASC 606 for distinct units of accounting that are reflective of a vendor-customer relationship.
Under ASC 606, in determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under its agreements, we perform the following steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations based on estimated selling prices; and (v) recognition of revenue when we satisfy each performance obligation.
If a license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenues attributed to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we use our judgement to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time.
At the inception of each arrangement that contains development milestones, we evaluate whether the development milestones included are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our control or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not generally considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received.
At the end of each reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of any development milestones, and if necessary, adjust its estimate of the transaction price. Any such adjustments would be recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
For research and development services, the Company elected the practical expedient to recognize revenue as the research and development services are invoiced. As the Company has a right to consideration from the collaboration agreement with Biogen, in an amount that corresponds directly with the value of the Company’s performance completed to date for the research services, the Company recognized revenue related to the research services as invoiced, in line with the practical expedient in ASC 606-10-55-18.
The transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price (“SSP”) basis. We recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. As part of the accounting for these arrangements, we must develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the timing of recognition and the SSP for each performance obligation identified in the contract.
The SSP for licenses are calculated using the residual approach if we have not yet established a price for such license and the license has not previously been sold on a standalone basis. Otherwise, selling prices for licenses are determined using an income approach model and include key assumptions such as: development timeline, revenue forecast, commercialization expenses, discount rate and probabilities of technical and regulatory success. To estimate the SSP for research and development services, we use a cost-plus margin approach.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
We record accrued expenses for estimated costs of our research and development activities conducted by external service providers, which include the conduct of preclinical studies and clinical trials and contract manufacturing activities. We record the estimated costs of research and development activities based upon the estimated amount of services provided but not yet invoiced and includes these costs in other accrued liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet and within research and development expense in the consolidated statement of operations. These costs are a significant component of our research and development expenses. We record accrued expenses for these costs based on the estimated amount of work completed and in accordance with agreements established with these external service providers.
We estimate the amount of work completed through discussions with internal personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of the services and the agreed-upon fee to be paid for such services. We make significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrued balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust its accrued estimates.
Stock-based Compensation
We measure the cost of employee and director services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the fair value-based measurement of the award on the date of grant and recognize the related expense over the period during which an employee or director is required to provide service in exchange for the award on a straight-line basis.
Determining the fair value of stock-based awards at the grant date requires judgment. We use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to determine the fair value of stock options. The determination of the grant date fair value of options using an option-pricing model is affected by our assumptions regarding a number of variables including the fair value of our common stock, our expected common stock price volatility over the expected life of the options, expected term of the stock option, risk-free interest rates and expected dividends. We record stock-based compensation as a compensation expense, net of the forfeited awards. We elected to account for forfeitures when they occur. As such, we recognize stock-based compensation expense only for those stock-based awards that are expected to vest, over their requisite service period, based on the vesting provisions of the individual grants. See Note 10, to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.