Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
(Dollars in thousands, except per share data)
General
The following is management’s analysis of the Corporation’s financial condition and results of operations as of and for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020. This discussion is designed to provide a more comprehensive review of the operating results and financial position than could be obtained from an examination of the financial statements alone. This analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related footnotes and the selected financial data included elsewhere in this report.
Forward-Looking Statements
Certain statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which are not statements of historical fact, constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. The words “may,” “continue,” “estimate,” “intend,” “plan,” “seek,” “will,” “believe,” “project,” “expect,” “anticipate” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements may involve risks and uncertainties that are difficult to predict, may be beyond our control, and could cause actual results to differ materially from those described in such statements. Any such forward-looking statements are made only as of the date of this report or the respective dates of the relevant incorporated documents, as the case may be, and, except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update these forward-looking statements to reflect subsequent events or circumstances. The COVID-19 pandemic is affecting us, our customers, employees, and third-party service providers, and the ultimate extent of the impact on our business, financial position, results of operations, liquidity, and prospects is uncertain. Other risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results for future periods to differ materially from those anticipated or projected include, but are not limited to:
●
changes in local, regional and national economic conditions becoming less favorable than we expect, resulting in, among other things, high unemployment rates, a deterioration in credit quality of our assets or debtors being unable to meet their obligations;
●
sustained low market interest rates could result in a decline in the net interest margin and net interest income;
●
changes in the level of non-performing assets and charge-offs;
●
the effect of changes in laws and regulations (including laws and regulations concerning taxes, banking, securities, and insurance) with which we must comply;
●
declining asset values impacting the underlying value of collateral;
●
unanticipated changes in our liquidity position, including, but not limited to, changes in the cost of liquidity and our ability to find alternative funding sources;
●
the effects of, and changes in, trade, monetary and fiscal policies and laws, including interest rate policies of the Federal Reserve Board;
●
changes in consumer spending, borrowing and savings habits;
●
changes in accounting policies, rules and interpretations that may come as a result of COVID-19 or otherwise;
●
our ability to attract and retain qualified employees;
●
competitive pressures on product pricing and services;
●
breaches of security or failures of our technology systems due to technological or other factors and cybersecurity threats; and
●
changes in the reliability of our vendors, internal control systems or information systems.
The risks and uncertainties identified above are not the only risks we face. Additional risks and uncertainties not presently known to us or that we currently believe to be immaterial also may adversely affect us. Should any known or unknown risks and uncertainties develop into actual events, those developments could have material adverse effects on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Overview
Consumers Bancorp, Inc., a bank holding company incorporated under the laws of the State of Ohio, owns all the issued and outstanding capital stock of Consumers National Bank, a bank chartered under the laws of the United States of America. The Corporation’s activities have been limited primarily to holding the common stock of the Bank. The Bank’s business involves attracting deposits from businesses and individual customers and using such deposits to originate commercial, mortgage and consumer loans in its market area, consisting primarily of Carroll, Columbiana, Jefferson, Stark, Summit, Wayne, and contiguous counties in Ohio, Pennsylvania, and West Virginia. The Bank also invests in securities consisting primarily of U.S. government-sponsored entities, municipal obligations, mortgage-backed and collateralized mortgage obligations issued by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and Ginnie Mae.
On January 1, 2020, the Corporation completed the acquisition by merger of Peoples in a stock and cash transaction for an aggregate consideration of approximately $10,405. As a result of the acquisition, the Corporation received loans with an estimated fair value of $55,320, as of the date of the acquisition, and deposits at three banking centers located in Mt. Pleasant, Adena, and Dillonvale, Ohio with an estimated fair value of $60,851, as of the date of the acquisition. In connection with the acquisition, the Corporation issued 269,920 shares of common stock and paid $5,128 in cash to the former shareholders of Peoples. The financial position and results of operations of Peoples prior to its acquisition date are not included in the Corporations’ financial results for periods prior to the acquisition date.
COVID-19 Pandemic
In response to COVID-19, management is actively pursuing multiple avenues to assist customers during these uncertain times. For commercial borrowers, the CARES Act includes key SBA initiatives to assist small businesses. The PPP loans were designed to provide a direct incentive for small businesses to keep their workers on the payroll, From the first round of assistance, the Bank originated a total of $68,788 of PPP loans and $6,107 remained outstanding as of June 30, 2021. Under the second round of the PPP program, a total of $44,579 of loans were funded and outstanding as of June 30, 2021.
Additionally, on March 22, 2020 the Corporation adopted a loan modification program to assist borrowers impacted by COVID-19. The program is available to most borrowers whose loan was not past due on March 22, 2020, the date this loan modification program was adopted. The program offers principal and interest payment deferrals for up to 90 days or interest only payments for up to 90 days. Interest will be deferred but will continue to accrue during the deferment period and the maturity date on amortizing loans will be extended by the number of months the payment was deferred. Consistent with issued regulatory guidance, modifications made under this program in response to COVID-19 will not be classified as troubled debt restructurings. As of June 30, 2021, eight borrowers with an outstanding balance of $198 are in payment deferral status under this loan modification program.
We have assisted and may continue to assist customers who are experiencing financial hardship due to COVID-19 by waiving late charges, refunding NSF and overdraft fees, and waiving CD prepayment penalties. The consumer reserve personal line of credit, an unsecured line of credit that is linked to a personal checking account, has been redesigned to provide easier access and a lower initial rate. Commercial customers have been encouraged to access available funds on their lines of credit, and we have been ready to provide emergency commercial lines of credit to qualified borrowers in order to assist in meeting payroll and other recurring fixed expenses. In response to COVID-19, we provided four emergency lines of credit; however, the lines of credit have since been closed as the borrowers did not need to access the funds.
Given the dynamic nature of the circumstances surrounding the pandemic, it is difficult to ascertain the full impact that the ongoing economic disruption will have on the Corporation. The Corporation has modified its business practices with a portion of employees working remotely from their homes to limit interruptions to operations as much as possible and to help reduce the risk of COVID-19 infecting entire departments. The branch lobbies were closed at various times throughout the pandemic but are now open for normal business. The Corporation is encouraging virtual meetings and conference calls in place of in-person meetings. Additionally, travel for business has been restricted. The Corporation is promoting social distancing, frequent hand washing and thorough disinfection of all surfaces. The Corporation will continue to closely monitor situations arising from the pandemic and adjust operations accordingly.
Comparison of Results of Operations for the Years Ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020
Net Income. Net income was $8,988 for fiscal year 2021 compared with $5,527 for fiscal year 2020. The following key factors summarize our results of operations for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared with the same prior year period:
●
net interest income increased by $5,099, or 23.7%, in fiscal year 2021, primarily as a result of a $151,376, or 25.7%, increase in average interest-earning assets, which was primarily due to organic loan growth and the addition of PPP loan receivables;
●
a $850 provision for loan loss expense was recorded during the 2021 fiscal year compared with $1,980 during the 2020 fiscal year. The higher provision recorded in the 2020 fiscal year was primarily the result of the decline in economic conditions triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic;
●
total other income decreased by $237, or 5.0%, in fiscal year 2021, primarily since the prior year period included $324 of income recognized as a result of proceeds received from a bank owned life insurance policy claim and a $355 gain on the sale of securities. These reductions were partially offset by a $316, or 20.1%, increase in debit card interchange income, and a $210, or 38.7%, increase on gains from the sale of mortgage loans; and
●
total other expenses increased by $1,593, or 9.0%, in fiscal year 2021 and includes a full year of expenses associated with the three new office locations and additional staff gained as a result of the merger with Peoples compared with only six months of these expense being included in the prior year period. In addition, incentive accruals and mortgage commissions also increased during the 2021 fiscal year.
Return on average equity and return on average assets were 13.36% and 1.16%, respectively, for the 2021 fiscal year-to-date period compared with 9.67% and 0.89%, respectively, for the same period last year.
Net Interest Income. Net interest income, the difference between interest income earned on interest-earning assets and interest expense incurred on interest-bearing liabilities, is the largest component of the Corporation’s earnings. Net interest income is affected by changes in the volumes, rates and composition of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. In addition, prevailing economic conditions, fiscal and monetary policies and the policies of various regulatory agencies all affect market rates of interest and the availability and cost of credit, which, in turn, can significantly affect net interest income. Since the Federal Open Market Committee establishing a near-zero target range for the federal funds rate, earnings could be negatively affected if the interest we receive on loans and securities falls more quickly than interest we pay on deposits and borrowings. Net interest margin is calculated by dividing net interest income on a fully tax equivalent basis (FTE) by total interest-earning assets. FTE income includes tax-exempt income, restated to a pre-tax equivalent, based on the statutory federal income tax rate of 21.0%. All average balances are daily average balances. Non-accruing loans are included in average loan balances.
FTE net interest income for the 2021 fiscal year was $27,002, an increase of $5,192 or 23.8%, from $21,810 in the 2020 fiscal year. The Corporation’s tax equivalent net interest margin was 3.67% for the year ended June 30, 2021 and was 3.72% for the fiscal year ended 2020. FTE interest income for the 2021 fiscal year was $28,902, an increase of $3,271, or 12.8%, from the 2020 fiscal year, such change primarily a result of a $151,376, or 25.7%, increase in average interest-earning assets from the 2020 fiscal year. The growth in average interest-earning assets was primarily a result of organic loan growth and the addition of PPP loans. Interest income was positively impacted by the accretion of origination fees from the PPP loans and from a change in the earning asset mix, with higher yielding loans increasing faster than lower yielding securities. PPP loans had an average balance of $63,761 for the twelve-month period ended June 30, 2021, with a total of $2,549 of interest and fee income recognized during the twelve-month period ended June 30, 2021. As of June 30, 2021, there was a total of $2,449 of unamortized net fees associated with the PPP loans which will be amortized into income over the life of the loans. A reduction in the accretion of origination fees from PPP loans as these loans are forgiven, combined with the significant decline in interest rates, will continue to impact the yield on interest-earning assets and could ultimately result in a decline in interest income. The Corporation’s yield on average interest-earning assets was 3.93% for the 2021 fiscal year compared with 4.37% for the same period last year.
Interest expense for the 2021 fiscal year was $1,900, a decrease of $1,921, or 50.3%, from the 2020 fiscal year. The Corporation’s cost of funds was 0.38% for the 2021 fiscal year compared with 0.91% for the same prior year period. The decline in short term market interest rates had an impact on the rates paid on all interest-bearing deposit products and Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) advances.
Average Balance Sheet and Net Interest Margin
(1) Calculated on a fully taxable equivalent basis utilizing a statutory federal income tax rate of 21.0%.
The following table presents the changes in the Corporation’s interest income and interest expense resulting from changes in interest rates and changes in the volume of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. Changes attributable to both rate and volume that cannot be segregated have been allocated in proportion to the changes due to rate and volume.
INTEREST RATES AND INTEREST DIFFERENTIAL
(1) Nontaxable income is adjusted to a fully tax equivalent basis utilizing a statutory federal income tax rate of 21.0%.
(2) Non-accrual loan balances are included for purposes of computing the rate and volume effects although interest on these balances has been excluded.
Provision for Loan Losses. The provision for loan losses represents the charge to income necessary to adjust the allowance for loan losses to an amount that represents management’s assessment of the estimated probable credit losses in the Corporation’s loan portfolio that have been incurred at each balance sheet date. Management considers historical loss experience, the present and prospective financial condition of borrowers, the current conditions within the markets where the Corporation originates loans, the status of nonperforming assets, the estimated underlying value of the collateral and other factors related to the ultimate collectability of the loan portfolio. In fiscal year 2021, a provision for loan loss expense of $850 was recorded compared with $1,980 in fiscal year 2020. The provision for loan loss expense was higher in fiscal year 2020 primarily due to the deterioration in the economic environment as a result of the impact of COVID-19 and higher loan balances from organic loan growth.
For the 2021 fiscal year, net charge offs of $57 were recorded compared with $90 for the same period last year. The allowance for loan losses as a percentage of loans was 1.14% at June 30, 2021 and 1.05% at June 30, 2020. The loans acquired from the Peoples acquisition were recorded at fair value without a related allowance for loan losses. As of June 30, 2020, the allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans, excluding the loans acquired in the Peoples acquisition, was 1.15%.
Non-performing loans were $1,771 as of June 30, 2021 and represented 0.31% of total loans. This compared with $1,226, or 0.23% of total loans at June 30, 2020. Non-performing loans have been considered in management’s analysis of the appropriateness of the allowance for loan losses. Management and the Board of Directors closely monitor these loans and believe the prospect for recovery of principal, less identified specific reserves, are favorable.
Other Income. Total other income decreased by $237, or 5.0%, to $4,466 for the 2021 fiscal year. Other income in the 2020 fiscal year includes $324 of income recognized as a result of proceeds received from a bank owned life insurance policy claim and net securities gains of $355 compared to net security gains of $14 in fiscal year 2021.
Debit card interchange income increased by $316, or 20.1%, in 2021 to $1,891 primarily as a result of increased debit card usage and an increase in the number of cards issued. Gain on sale of mortgage loans increased by $210, or 38.7%, in 2021 primarily as a result of an increase in volume due to refinances as mortgage rates declined. These increases were partially offset by a decline of $130, or 9.6%, in service charges on deposit accounts primarily due to a decline in overdraft charges as many eligible individuals have received Economic Impact Payments and consumer spending habits have changed during the pandemic, resulting in fewer overdrafts.
Other Expenses. Total other expenses were $19,361 for the year ended June 30, 2021; an increase of $1,593, or 9.0%, from $17,768 for the year ended June 30, 2020.
Salaries and employee benefit expenses increased by $1,270, or 13.3%, during the 2021 fiscal year primarily since the 2021 fiscal year includes a full year of expenses associated with the three new office locations and additional staff gained as a result of the merger with Peoples compared with only six months of these expense being included in the prior year period. In addition, incentive accruals and mortgage commissions also increased during the 2021 fiscal year.
Occupancy and equipment expenses increased by $122, or 4.9%, during the 2021 fiscal year from the same period last year primarily as a result of higher real estate taxes, custodial, building upkeep, maintenance, lease and utility expenses for the additional office locations acquired in the Peoples acquisition and the new leased Green, Ohio office location that opened during the 2021 fiscal year. This was partially offset by lower depreciation expense in the 2021 fiscal year for the Salem branch location since it was expected that this location would be replaced in the spring of 2021.
Data processing expenses decreased by $179, or 19.7% and professional and director fees decreased by $170, or 16.6%, during the 2021 fiscal year from the same period last year primarily since the 2020 fiscal year included system conversion and termination costs, investment banker, legal, accounting and auditing fees associated with the acquisition of Peoples.
FDIC assessments increased by $196, or 184.9%, for the 2021 fiscal year since the Small Bank Assessment Credits were applied to the FDIC insurance invoices during the 2020 fiscal year.
Debit card processing expenses increased by $140, or 17.3% primarily as a result of increased debit card usage. The increase in debit card usage is also reflected in debit card interchange income which increased by $316, or 20.1% from the prior year.
Income Tax Expense. Income tax expense totaled $1,850 and $912 and the effective tax rates were 17.1% and 14.2% for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Income tax expense was calculated utilizing a statutory federal income tax rate of 21.0% in the 2020 and 2021 fiscal years. The effective tax rate differs from the federal statutory rate as a result of tax-exempt income from obligations of states and political subdivisions, loans and bank owned life insurance earnings and death benefit.
Financial Condition
Total assets at June 30, 2021 were $833,804 compared with $740,820 at June 30, 2020, an increase of $92,984, or 12.6%. The growth in total assets is mainly attributable to an increase of $68,297, or 46.3%, in available-for-sale and held-to-maturity securities which was primarily funded by a $93,494, or 14.8%, increase in total deposits.
Securities. Total securities were $215,756 at June 30, 2021, of which $207,760 were classified as available-for-sale and $7,996 were classified as held-to-maturity. The securities portfolio is mainly comprised of mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations issued by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and Ginnie Mae, state and political subdivisions and government-sponsored enterprises.
The following tables summarize the amortized cost and fair value of available-for-sale securities at June 30, 2021 and 2020 and the corresponding amounts of gross unrealized gains and losses recognized in accumulated other comprehensive income or loss:
The following tables summarize the amortized cost and fair value of held-to-maturity securities at June 30, 2021 and 2020 and the corresponding gross unrecognized gains and losses:
The following tables summarize the amounts and distribution of the Corporation’s securities held and the weighted average yields as of June 30, 2021:
The weighted average interest rates are based on coupon rates for securities purchased at par value and on effective yields considering amortization or accretion if the securities were purchased at a premium or discount. The weighted average yield on tax-exempt obligations has been calculated on a tax equivalent basis. Average yields are based on amortized cost balances.
Loans. Loan receivables increased by $23,566 to $566,427 at June 30, 2021 compared to $542,861 at June 30, 2020. Commercial loans include PPP loans of $50,686 and $66,606 as of June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and a third-party residential mortgage warehouse line-of-credit had a zero balance as of June 30, 2021 compared with an outstanding balance of $32,869 as of June 30, 2020. Excluding the declines in the PPP loans and the residential mortgage warehouse line-of-credit, organic loan growth was $72,355, or 16.3%. The increase in the 1-4 family residential real estate portfolio was primarily due to a majority of the mortgage loans originated in the third quarter of fiscal year 2021 being kept within the portfolio rather than being sold to the secondary market. Consumer loans increased by $8,241, or 38.6%, primarily as a result of the expansion of indirect auto lending and an increase in direct auto loans as a result of successful marketing campaigns. Major classifications of loans, net of deferred loan fees and costs, were as follows as of June 30:
The following table shows the major classifications of loans, net of deferred fees and costs, which are based on the contractual terms for repayment of principal, that are due in the periods indicated as of June 30, 2021:
The following is a schedule of fixed and variable rate 1-4 family residential real estate construction, commercial and commercial real estate loans due after one year (variable rate loans are those loans with floating or adjustable interest rates) as of June 30, 2021:
Allowance for Loan Losses. The allowance for loan losses balance and the provision charged to expense are judgmentally determined by management based upon a periodic review of the loan portfolio for valuation purposes and to determine the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses. Management establishes allowances for estimated losses on loans based upon its evaluation of the pertinent factors underlying the types and quality of loans; historical loss experience based on volume and types of loans; trend in portfolio volume and composition; level and trend of nonperforming assets; detailed analysis of individual loans for which full collectability may not be assured; determination of the existence and realizable value of the collateral and guarantees securing such loans and the current economic conditions affecting the collectability of loans in the portfolio.
Failure to receive principal and interest payments when due on any loan results in efforts to restore such loan to a current status. Loans are classified as non-accrual when, in the opinion of management, full collection of principal and accrued interest is not expected. The loans must be brought and kept current for six sustained payments before being considered for removal from non-accrual status. Commercial and commercial real estate loans are classified as impaired if management determines that full collection of principal and interest, in accordance with the terms of the loan documents, is not probable. If a loan is impaired, a portion of the allowance is allocated so the loan is reported, net, at the present value of estimated future cash flows using the loan’s existing rate or at the fair value of collateral if repayment is expected from the collateral. Loans are evaluated for impairment when payments are delayed, typically 90 days or more, or when it is probable that not all principal and interest amounts will be collected according to the original terms of the loan. As of June 30, 2021, impaired loans totaled $1,954, of which $1,771 are included in non-accrual loans. Continued unsuccessful collection efforts generally lead to initiation of foreclosure or other legal proceedings.
The following table summarizes non-accrual loans, non-performing assets, impaired and restructured loans, and associated ratios for the years ended June 30:
The non-performing loans are either in the process of foreclosure or efforts are being made to work with the borrower to bring the loan current. Properties and vehicles acquired by the Corporation as a result of foreclosure or repossession, or by deed in lieu of foreclosure, are classified as “other real estate and repossessed assets owned” until they are sold or otherwise disposed of.
The following table summarizes the Corporation’s loan loss experience, and provides a breakdown of the charge-off, recovery and other activity for the years ended June 30:
The following schedule is a breakdown of the allowance for loan losses allocated by type of loan and related ratios:
While management’s periodic analysis of the adequacy of the allowance for loan loss may allocate portions of the allowance for specific problem loan situations, the entire allowance is available for any loan charge-off that may occur. While the Corporation has historically experienced strong trends in asset quality, as a result of the current situation regarding the COVID-19 pandemic, uncertainty remains regarding future levels of criticized and classified loans, nonperforming loans and charge-offs. Management will continue to closely monitor changes in the loan portfolio and adjust the provision accordingly.
Goodwill: Goodwill remained unchanged at $826 at June 30, 2021 and 2020. Goodwill represents the excess of the total purchase price paid for the acquisition over the fair value of the identifiable assets acquired, net of the fair value of the liabilities assumed. Goodwill is evaluated for impairment at least annually and more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. Management evaluated goodwill and concluded that no impairment existed during the year ended June 30, 2021.
Funding Sources. Total deposits increased by $93,494, or 14.8%, from $633,355 at June 30, 2020 to $726,849 at June 30, 2021. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, noninterest-bearing demand deposits increased by $38,868, or 20.4%, savings and money market deposits increased by $54,194, or 23.7%, and interest-bearing demand deposits increased by $28,274, or 28.5%, from the same prior year period. Certificates and other time deposits decreased by $27,843, or 24.1%, from the same prior year period as customers chose to move funds to savings and money market deposit products due to the low-rate environment.
The following is a schedule of average deposit amounts and average rates paid on each category for the periods included:
The following table summarizes time deposits issued in amounts of $100 or more as of June 30, 2021 by time remaining until maturity:
Short-term borrowings increased by $5,260, or 75.8%, to $12,203 at June 30, 2021 from $6,943 at June 30, 2020. This increase was primarily associated with the retention of PPP loan proceeds in commercial sweep repurchase agreement accounts. See Note 8-Short-Term Borrowings to the Consolidated Financial Statements, for information concerning short-term borrowings.
Capital Resources
Total shareholders’ equity increased by $6,660 from $63,240 at June 30, 2020 to $69,900 at June 30, 2021. The primary reason for the increase was net income of $8,988 for the current fiscal year which was partially offset by cash dividends paid of $1,785. For the 2021 fiscal year, the average equity to average total assets ratio was 8.71% and the dividend payout ratio was 19.9%. For the 2020 fiscal year, the average equity to average total assets ratio was 9.19% and the dividend payout ratio was 28.1%.
At June 30, 2021, management believes the Bank complied with all regulatory capital requirements. Based on the Bank’s computed regulatory capital ratios, the OCC has determined the Bank to be well capitalized under the Federal Deposit Insurance Act as of its latest exam date. The Bank’s actual and required capital amounts are disclosed in Note 13-Regulatory Matters to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Management is not aware of any matters occurring subsequent to that exam that would cause the Bank’s capital category to change.
Liquidity
Management considers the asset position of the Bank to be sufficiently liquid to meet normal operating needs and conditions. The Bank’s earning assets are divided primarily between loans and available-for-sale securities, with any excess funds placed in federal funds sold or interest-bearing deposit accounts with other financial institutions.
Net cash inflows from operating activities for the 2021 fiscal year were $14,013 and net cash inflows from financing activities were $83,858. Net cash outflows from investing activities were $89,001. The major sources of cash were a $93,494 net increase in deposits and a $42,820 increase from sales, maturities, or principal pay downs on available-for-sale securities. The major uses of cash were the $108,168 purchase of available-for-sale securities and a $23,471 net increase in loans. Total cash and cash equivalents were $18,529 as of June 30, 2021 compared to $9,659 at June 30, 2020.
The Bank groups its loan portfolio into four major categories: commercial loans; commercial real estate loans; 1-4 family residential real estate loans; and consumer loans. The Bank’s 1-4 family residential real estate loan portfolio primarily consists of fixed and variable rate mortgage loans for terms generally not longer than thirty years and variable rate home equity lines of credit. Commercial and commercial real estate loans are comprised of both variable rate notes subject to interest rate changes based on the prime rate or Treasury index, and fixed rate notes having maturities of generally not greater than twenty years. Consumer loans offered by the Bank are generally written for periods of up to seven years, based on the nature of the collateral. These may be either installment loans having regular monthly payments or demand type loans for short periods of time.
Funds not allocated to the Bank’s loan portfolio are invested in various securities having diverse maturity schedules. A majority of the Bank’s securities are held in obligations of U.S. Government-sponsored entities, mortgage-backed securities, and investments in tax-exempt municipal bonds.
The Bank offers several forms of deposit products to its customers. We believe the rates offered by the Bank and the fees charged for them are competitive with others currently available in the market area. While the Bank continues to be under competitive pressures in the Bank’s market area as financial institutions attempt to attract and keep new deposits, we believe many commercial and retail customers are turning to community banks. Compared to our peers, the Corporation’s core deposits consist of a larger percentage of noninterest-bearing demand deposits resulting in the cost of funds remaining at a relatively low level of 0.38%.
Jumbo time deposits (those with balances of $250 and over) were $18,488 and $36,747 at June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. These deposits are monitored closely by the Bank and typically priced on an individual basis. When these deposits are from a municipality, certain bank-owned securities are pledged to guarantee the safety of these public fund deposits as required by Ohio law. The Corporation has the option to use a fee paid broker to obtain deposits from outside its normal service area as an additional source of funding. However, these deposits are not relied upon as a primary source of funding and there were no brokered deposits as of June 30, 2021 or 2020.
Dividends from the Bank are the primary source of funds for payment of dividends to our shareholders. However, there are statutory limits on the amount of dividends the Bank can pay without regulatory approval. Under these regulations, the amount of dividends that may be paid in any calendar year is limited to the current year’s net profits, combined with the retained net profits of the preceding two years, subject to the capital requirements described above. Additionally, the Bank may not declare or pay any dividend if, after making the dividend, the Bank would be “undercapitalized,” as defined in the federal regulations. As of June 30, 2021, the Bank could, without prior approval, declare a dividend of approximately $8,741.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
The financial statements and related data presented herein have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, which require the measurement of financial position and results of operations primarily in terms of historical dollars without considering changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. Unlike most industrial companies, virtually all the assets and liabilities of the Corporation are monetary in nature. Therefore, as a financial institution, interest rates have a more significant impact on the Corporation’s performance than the effects of general levels of inflation. Interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or in the same magnitude as the prices of goods and services. The liquidity, maturity structure and quality of the Corporation’s assets and liabilities are critical to the maintenance of acceptable performance levels.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Significant Estimates
The financial condition and results of operations for the Corporation presented in the Consolidated Financial Statements, accompanying notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements and management’s discussion and analysis are, to a large degree, dependent upon the Corporation’s accounting policies. The selection and application of these accounting policies involve judgments, estimates and uncertainties that are susceptible to change. The most significant accounting policies followed by the Corporation are presented in Note 1-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements. These policies, along with the disclosures presented in the other financial statement notes, provide information on how significant assets and liabilities are valued in the financial statements and how those values are determined.
Management views critical accounting policies to be those which are highly dependent on subjective or complex judgments, estimates and assumptions, and where changes in those estimates and assumptions could have a significant impact on the financial statements. In the event different assumptions or conditions were to prevail, and depending upon the severity of such changes, the possibility of materially different financial condition or results of operations is a reasonable likelihood. Management has identified the following as critical accounting policies:
Allowance for Loan Losses. The determination of the allowance for loan losses involves considerable subjective judgment and estimation by management. The allowance for loan losses is a reserve established through a provision for loan losses charged to expense, which represents management’s best estimate of probable losses that have been incurred within the existing portfolio of loans. The balance in the allowance for loan losses is determined based on management’s review and evaluation of the loan portfolio in relation to past loss experience, the size and composition of the portfolio, current economic events and conditions and other pertinent factors, including management’s assumptions as to future delinquencies, recoveries and losses. All of these factors may be susceptible to significant change. Among the many factors affecting the allowance for loan losses, some are quantitative while others require qualitative judgment. Although management believes its process for determining the allowance adequately considers all of the potential factors that could potentially result in credit losses, the process includes subjective elements and may be susceptible to significant change. To the extent actual outcomes differ from management’s estimates, additional provisions for loan losses may be required that would adversely impact the Corporation’s financial condition or earnings in future periods.
Goodwill. The Company accounts for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting. Accordingly, the identifiable assets acquired and the liabilities assumed are recorded at their estimated fair values as of the date of acquisition with any excess of the cost of the acquisition over the fair value recorded as goodwill. The Company performs an evaluation of goodwill for impairment on an annual basis, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. The evaluation for impairment involves comparing the current estimated fair value of the Company to its carrying value. If the current estimated fair value exceeds the carrying value, no additional testing is required and an impairment loss is not recorded. If the estimated fair value is less than the carrying value, further valuation procedures are performed that could result in impairment of goodwill being recorded. As of April 30, 2021, the measurement date, a qualitative assessment was performed to determine whether there is a more likely than not (greater than 50% likelihood) that the fair value of the Corporation was less than its carrying amount. The impairment test of goodwill indicated no impairment existed as of the measurement date. However, it is impossible to know the future impact of the evolving economic conditions related to COVID-19. If for any future period it is determined that there has been impairment in the carrying value of our goodwill balances, the Corporation will record a charge to earnings, which could have a material adverse effect on net income, but not risk based capital ratios.
Contractual Obligations, Commitments and Contingent Liabilities
The following table presents, as of June 30, 2021, the Corporation’s significant fixed and determinable contractual obligations by payment date. The payment amounts represent those amounts contractually due to the recipient and do not include any unamortized premiums or discounts. Further discussion of the nature of each obligation is included in the referenced note to the consolidated financial statements.
Note 14-Commitments with Off-Balance Sheet Risk to the Consolidated Financial Statements discusses in greater detail other commitments and contingencies and the various obligations that exist under those agreements. These commitments and contingencies consist primarily of commitments to extend credit to borrowers under lines of credit.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At June 30, 2021, the Corporation had no unconsolidated, related special purpose entities, nor did the Corporation engage in derivatives and hedging contracts, such as interest rate swaps, which may expose the Corporation to liabilities greater than the amounts recorded on the consolidated balance sheet. The Corporation’s investment policy prohibits engaging in derivative contracts for speculative trading purposes; however, in the future, the Corporation may pursue certain contracts, such as interest rate swaps, to execute a sound and defensive interest rate risk management policy.