Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) primarily reviews the financial condition and results of operations of the Company for the past two years, although in some circumstances a period longer than two years is covered in order to comply with SEC disclosure requirements or to more fully explain long-term trends. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Selected Consolidated Financial Information beginning on page 31 and the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes that appear on pages 73 through 135. All references in the discussion to the financial condition and results of operations refer to the consolidated position and results of the Company and its subsidiaries taken as a whole.
Unless otherwise noted, all earnings per share (“EPS”) figures disclosed in the MD&A refer to diluted EPS; interest income, net interest income, and net interest margin are presented on a fully tax-equivalent (“FTE”) basis, which is a non-GAAP measure. The term “this year” and equivalent terms refer to results in calendar year 2020, “last year” and equivalent terms refer to calendar year 2019, and all references to income statement results correspond to full-year activity unless otherwise noted.
This MD&A contains certain forward-looking statements with respect to the financial condition, results of operations, and business of the Company. These forward-looking statements involve certain risks and uncertainties. Factors that may cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by such forward-looking statements are set herein under the caption “Forward-Looking Statements” on page 67.
Critical Accounting Policies
As a result of the complex and dynamic nature of the Company’s business, management must exercise judgment in selecting and applying the most appropriate accounting policies for its various areas of operations. The policy decision process not only ensures compliance with the current accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”), but also reflects management’s discretion with regard to choosing the most suitable methodology for reporting the Company’s financial performance. It is management’s opinion that the accounting estimates covering certain aspects of the business have more significance than others due to the relative importance of those areas to overall performance, or the level of subjectivity in the selection process. These estimates affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as well as disclosures of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could meaningfully differ from these estimates. Management believes that the critical accounting estimates include the allowance for credit losses, actuarial assumptions associated with the pension, post-retirement and other employee benefit plans, the provision for income taxes, investment valuation, the carrying value of goodwill and other intangible assets, and acquired loan valuations. A summary of the accounting policies used by management is disclosed in Note A, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”, starting on page 79.
Supplemental Reporting of Non-GAAP Results of Operations
The Company also provides supplemental reporting of its results on an “operating,” “adjusted” or “tangible” basis, from which it excludes the after-tax effect of amortization of core deposit and other intangible assets (and the related goodwill, core deposit intangible and other intangible asset balances, net of applicable deferred tax amounts), accretion on non-impaired purchased loans, expenses associated with acquisitions, acquisition-related provision for credit losses, the unrealized gain (loss) on equity securities, net gain on sale of investments, litigation accrual, the gain (loss) on debt extinguishment and the one-time benefit from the revaluation of net deferred tax liabilities. In addition, the Company provides supplemental reporting for “adjusted pre-tax, pre-provision net revenues,” which excludes the provision for credit losses, acquisition expenses, net gain on sale of investments, unrealized gain (loss) on equity securities, the gain (loss) on debt extinguishment and litigation accrual from income before income taxes. Although these items are non-GAAP measures, the Company’s management believes this information helps investors understand the effect of acquisitions and other non-recurring activity in its reported results. Diluted adjusted net earnings per share were $3.37 in 2020, down $0.07, or 2.0%, from 2019 and down $0.02, or 0.6%, from 2018. Adjusted pre-tax, pre-provision net revenue was $4.26 per share in 2020, up $0.03, or 0.7%, from 2019 and down $0.03, or 0.7%, from 2018. Reconciliations of GAAP amounts with corresponding non-GAAP amounts are presented in Table 20.
Executive Summary
The Company’s business philosophy is to operate as a diversified financial services enterprise providing a broad array of banking and other financial services to retail, commercial and municipal customers. The Company’s banking subsidiary is Community Bank, N.A. (the “Bank” or “CBNA”). The Company also provides employee benefit and trust related services via its Benefit Plans Administrative Services, Inc. (“BPAS”) subsidiary, and wealth management and insurance-related services.
The Company’s core operating objectives are: (i) optimize the branch network and digital banking delivery systems, primarily through disciplined acquisition strategies and divestitures/consolidations, (ii) build profitable loan and deposit volume using both organic and acquisition strategies, (iii) manage an investment securities portfolio to complement the Company’s loan and deposit strategies and optimize interest rate risk, yield and liquidity, (iv) increase the noninterest component of total revenues through development of banking-related fee income, growth in existing financial services business units, and the acquisition of additional financial services and banking businesses, and (v) utilize technology to deliver customer-responsive products and services and improve efficiencies.
Significant factors reviewed by management to evaluate achievement of the Company’s operating objectives and its operating results and financial condition include, but are not limited to: net income and earnings per share; return on assets and equity; components of net interest margin; noninterest revenues; noninterest expenses; asset quality; loan and deposit growth; capital management; performance of individual banking and financial services units; performance of specific product lines and customers; liquidity and interest rate sensitivity; enhancements to customer products and services and their underlying performance characteristics; technology advancements; market share; peer comparisons; and the performance of recently acquired businesses.
On June 12, 2020, the Company completed its merger with Steuben Trust Corporation (“Steuben”), parent company of Steuben Trust Company, a New York State chartered bank headquartered in Hornell, New York, for $98.6 million in Company stock and cash, comprised of $21.6 million in cash and the issuance of 1.36 million shares of common stock. The merger extended the Company’s footprint into two new counties in Western New York State, and enhanced the Company’s presence in four Western New York State counties in which it currently operates. In connection with the merger, the Company added 11 full-service offices to its branch service network and acquired $607.8 million of assets, including $339.0 million of loans and $180.5 million of investment securities, as well as $516.3 million of deposits. Goodwill of $20.2 million was recognized as a result of the merger.
On September 18, 2019, the Company, through its subsidiary, Community Investment Services, Inc. (“CISI”), completed its acquisition of certain assets of a practice engaged in the financial services business headquartered in Syracuse, New York. The Company paid $0.5 million in cash to acquire a customer list, and recorded a $0.5 million customer list intangible asset in conjunction with the acquisition.
On July 12, 2019, the Company completed its merger with Kinderhook Bank Corp. (“Kinderhook”), parent company of The National Union Bank of Kinderhook, headquartered in Kinderhook, New York, for $93.4 million in cash. The merger added 11 branch locations across a five county area in the Capital District of Upstate New York. The merger resulted in the acquisition of $642.8 million of assets, including $479.9 million of loans and $39.8 million of investment securities, as well as $568.2 million of deposits. Goodwill of $40.0 million was recognized as a result of the merger.
On January 2, 2019, the Company, through its subsidiary, CISI, completed its acquisition of certain assets of Wealth Resources Network, Inc. (“Wealth Resources”), a financial services business headquartered in Liverpool, New York. The Company paid $1.2 million in cash to acquire a customer list from Wealth Resources, and recorded a $1.2 million customer list intangible asset in conjunction with the acquisition.
The Company reported net income of $164.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 that was 2.6% below the prior year, while earnings per share of $3.08 for the year was 4.6% below the prior year. The decrease in net income and earnings per share was due in part to the increase in provision for credit losses which included $3.1 million of acquisition-related provision for credit losses associated with the acquisition of Steuben, with the remaining increase largely attributable to the impact that COVID-19 had on economic and business conditions. Other factors resulting in the decreases to net income and earnings per share were an increase in noninterest expenses, a decrease in gain on sales of investment securities, an increase in litigation accrual, higher income taxes and an increase in weighted average diluted shares outstanding attributable to shares issued in connection with the Steuben acquisition, administration of the Company’s 401(k) plan and employee stock plan. Partially offsetting these items were expanded business activities from the Steuben acquisition completed in the second quarter of 2020 and a full year of the expanded business activities from the Kinderhook acquisition completed in the third quarter of 2019, an increase in net interest income, a decrease in acquisition expenses, higher noninterest revenues and an increase in gain on debt extinguishment. Net income adjusted to exclude acquisition expenses, acquisition-related provision for credit losses, gain on sales of investment securities, unrealized gain and losses on equity securities, litigation accrual, gain on debt extinguishment, amortization of intangibles, and acquired non-impaired loan accretion (“Adjusted Net Income”), increased $0.2 million, or 0.1%, compared to the prior year. Earnings per share adjusted to exclude acquisition expenses, acquisition-related provision for credit losses, gain on sales of investment securities, unrealized gain and losses on equity securities, litigation accrual, gain on debt extinguishment, amortization of intangibles, and acquired non-impaired loan accretion (“Adjusted Earnings Per Share”), of $3.37 decreased $0.07, or 2.0%, compared to the prior year. See Table 20 for Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measures.
The Company experienced year-over-year growth in average interest-earning assets and average deposits, primarily reflective of large net inflows of funds from government stimulus programs, PPP loan originations and the acquisition of Steuben in the second quarter of 2020. Average external borrowings in 2020 decreased from 2019 reflective of a decrease in average subordinated debt held by unconsolidated subsidiary trusts, partially offset by increases in average subordinated notes payable, average securities sold under an agreement to repurchase ("customer repurchase agreements") as well as average Federal Home Loan Bank of New York (“FHLB”) borrowings. The decrease in average subordinated debt held by unconsolidated subsidiary trusts is due to the redemption of trust preferred debt held by MBVT Statutory Trust I ("MBVT I") and the Kinderhook Capital Trust ("KCT") during the third quarter of 2019, partially offset by a partial year of trust preferred debt assumed with the Steuben acquisition that was subsequently redeemed in the third quarter of 2020. Asset quality remained strong throughout much of 2020, with the COVID-19 pandemic contributing to the nonperforming and delinquency ratios rising above 2019 levels in the second half of the year, while the full year net charge-off ratio was favorable and improved from one year earlier.
COVID-19 Pandemic
In early January 2020, the World Health Organization issued an alert that a coronavirus outbreak was emanating from the Wuhan Province in China. Later in January, the first death related to the coronavirus, identified as COVID-19, occurred in the United States. Over the course of the next several weeks, the outbreak continued to spread to various regions of the World prompting the World Health Organization to declare COVID-19 a global pandemic on March 11, 2020. In the United States, the rapid spread of the COVID-19 virus invoked various Federal and State Authorities to make emergency declarations and issue executive orders to limit the spread of the disease. Measures included restrictions on international and domestic travel, limitations on public gatherings, implementation of social distancing protocols, school closings, orders to shelter in place and mandates to close all non-essential businesses to the public. Concerns about the spread of the disease and its anticipated negative impact on economic activity, severely disrupted both domestic and international financial markets prompting Central Banks around the World to inject significant amounts of monetary stimulus into their economies. In the United States, the Federal Reserve System’s Federal Open Market Committee, swiftly cut the target Federal Funds rate to a range of 0% to 0.25%, including a 50 basis point reduction in the target federal funds rate on March 3, 2020 and an additional 100 basis point reduction on March 15, 2020. In addition, the Federal Reserve rolled out various market support programs to ease the stress on financial markets. The estimated value of the pandemic-related monetary stimulus package provided through the Federal Reserve’s activities was estimated at $4 trillion. In addition, on March 27, 2020, the United States Congress passed the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), which was intended to provide approximately $2.5 trillion of direct support to U.S. citizens and businesses affected by the COVID-19 outbreak. On April 21, 2020 an additional $484 billion of CARES Act funding was appropriated by Congress to provide additional support to the national economy and financial markets. On December 11, 2020, the Food and Drug Administration authorized the United States’ first COVID-19 vaccine and a second COVID-19 vaccine was authorized on December 18, 2020. Distribution and administration of the vaccines have steadily progressed since those authorizations. On December 21, 2020, Congress amended the CARES Act with the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 (“CAA”) to provide an additional $900 billion of stimulus relief to mitigate the continued impacts of the pandemic.
As the COVID-19 events unfolded throughout 2020, the Company implemented various plans, strategies and protocols to protect its employees, maintain services for customers, assure the functional continuity of the Company’s operating systems, controls and processes, and mitigate financial risks posed by changing market conditions. In order to protect its employees and assure workforce continuity and operational redundancy, the Company imposed business travel restrictions, implemented quarantine and work from home protocols and physically separated, to the extent possible, the critical operations workforce that are unable to work remotely. To limit the risk of virus spread, the Company implemented drive-thru only and by appointment operating protocols for its extensive bank branch network in the first and fourth quarters of 2020. The Company also maintained active communications with its primary regulatory agencies and critical vendors to assure all mission-critical activities and functions are being performed in line with regulatory expectations and the Company’s service standards. Late in the second quarter, the Company implemented a return-to-work plan which was reversed in the fourth quarter as cases in our geography began to climb. In addition, it re-opened the majority of its customer service facilities to the public, although banking branch lobbies were again closed to walk-in customer traffic in the fourth quarter of 2020 and service offerings continue to be limited to scheduled appointments and drive-up and ATM-based transactions.
Although there remains uncertainty around the magnitude and duration of the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company’s management believes that its financial position, including high levels of capital and liquidity, will allow it to successfully endure the negative economic impacts of the crisis. The Company’s capital planning and management activities, coupled with its historically strong earnings performance, diversified streams of revenue and prudent dividend practices, have allowed it to build and maintain strong capital reserves. Shareholders’ equity of $2.10 billion at December 31, 2020 was $248.9 million, or 13.4%, higher than 2019. The increase in shareholders’ equity over the last year was primarily driven by earnings retention, as well as common shares issued in the Steuben acquisition and an increase in accumulated other comprehensive income due primarily to an increase in net unrealized gains on the Company’s available-for-sale investment securities portfolio. At December 31, 2020, all of the Company’s regulatory capital ratios significantly exceeded well-capitalized standards. More specifically, the Company’s Tier 1 Leverage Ratio, a common measure to evaluate a financial institutions capital strength, was 10.16% at December 31, 2020, which represents more than two times the regulatory well-capitalized standard of 5.0%. This compares to 10.80% at the end of 2019, with the modest declines in the ratio primarily being driven by stimulus-aided organic asset growth largely generated from the significant deposit inflows resulting from federal government stimulus programs associated with the pandemic. The Company’s net tangible equity to net tangible assets ratio was 9.92% at December 31, 2020, down from 10.01% at the end of 2019. The decrease in the net tangible equity to net tangible assets ratio during the year was due to the significant organic growth in total assets between the comparable periods as a result of the strong inflow of deposits noted above, as well as a modest increase in intangible assets.
The Company’s liquidity position remains strong. The Bank maintains a funding base largely comprised of core noninterest-bearing demand deposit accounts and low cost interest-bearing interest checking, savings and money market deposit accounts with customers that operate, reside or work within its branch footprint. At December 31, 2020, the Company’s cash and cash equivalents balances, net of float, were $1.57 billion. The Company also maintains an available-for-sale investment securities portfolio, comprised primarily of highly-liquid U.S. Treasury securities, highly-rated municipal securities and U.S. agency mortgage backed securities. At December 31, 2020, the Company’s available-for-sale investment securities portfolio totaled $3.55 billion, $1.78 billion of which was unpledged as collateral. Net unrealized gains on the portfolio at that time were $120.1 million. The Bank’s unused borrowing capacity at the FHLB at December 31, 2020 was $1.66 billion and it maintained $256.2 million of funding availability at the Federal Reserve Bank’s discount window. Furthermore, the Company has not experienced significant draws on available business and consumer lines of credit or observed any significant or unusual customer activity that portends unmanageable levels of stress on the Company’s liquidity profile since the inception of the pandemic.
The Company is participating in both phases of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”), a specialized low-interest loan program funded by the U.S. Treasury Department and administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”). The PPP provides borrower guarantees for lenders, as well as loan forgiveness incentives for borrowers that meet certain conditions. As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s business lending portfolio included 3,417 PPP loans with a total balance of $470.7 million. The Company experienced high levels of customer utilization of the PPP loan program, but also believes that its liquidity resources are more than sufficient to meet these and other funding requirements of its borrowers. The Company expects to recognize through interest income most of its remaining net deferred PPP fees totaling $9.0 million during 2021. In addition, the Company is participating in the 2021 second round of PPP lending, also known as the “Second Draw” program, but is uncertain at this time as to the amount of PPP loans it will originate in 2021.
From a credit risk and lending perspective, the Company has and continues to take actions to identify, assess and monitor its COVID-19 related credit exposures based on asset class and borrower type. No specific credit impairment has been identified within the Company’s investment securities portfolio, including the Company’s municipal securities portfolio since the onset of the pandemic. With respect to the Company’s lending activities, the Company implemented and continues to utilize a customer forbearance program to assist both consumer and business borrowers that were experiencing financial hardship due to COVID-19 related challenges. The Company processed more than 5,000 borrower forbearance requests granting approximately $950 million in deferrals during 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had 74 borrowers in forbearance due to COVID-19 related financial hardship, representing $66.5 million in outstanding loan balances, or 0.9% of total loans outstanding. These forbearances were comprised of 63 business borrowers representing $65.7 million in outstanding loan balances and 11 consumer borrowers representing approximately $0.8 million in outstanding loan balances. Business lending, consumer direct, and consumer indirect loans in deferment status continued to accrue interest on the deferred principal during the deferment period unless otherwise classified as nonaccrual. Consumer mortgage and home equity loans did not accrue interest on the deferred payments during the deferment period. Consistent with industry regulatory guidance, borrowers that were otherwise current on loan payments and granted COVID-19 related financial hardship payment deferrals, were reported as current loans throughout the first 180 days of the deferral period and were not classified as TDRs. Borrowers that were delinquent in their payments to the Bank prior to requesting a COVID-19 related financial hardship payment deferral were reviewed on a case-by-case basis for troubled debt restructure classification and nonperforming loan status. During the fourth quarter of 2020, several commercial borrowers, which primarily operate in the hospitality, travel and entertainment industries, requested extended loan repayment forbearance due to the continued pandemic-related financial hardship they were experiencing. Although the Company’s management granted these forbearance requests, it also reclassified the majority of these loan relationships from accruing to nonaccrual status, unless the borrower clearly demonstrated current repayment capacity or sufficient cash reserves to service their pre-forbearance payment obligations. The Company anticipates that the number and amount of COVID-19 financial hardship forbearance agreements will decrease during 2021, but also anticipates that delinquent and nonperforming loans may increase in future periods as borrowers that continue to experience COVID-19 related financial hardship may be unable to maintain or resume loan payments consistent with their contractual obligations. While the deferrals are still ongoing, it is difficult to assess whether a customer will be able to perform under the original terms of the loan once the deferral period expires. Once these deferrals expire, it may become apparent that more customers than expected are unable to fully meet their lending obligations, leading to higher levels of provisions for credit losses.
The COVID-19 crisis is expected to continue to impact the Company’s financial results, as well as demand for its services and products, likely for a significant portion of 2021. The CARES Act is expected to have an immaterial impact as it relates to income taxes and the Company will continue to assess impacts in future periods. The short and long-term implications of the COVID-19 crisis, and related government monetary and fiscal stimulus measures, on the Company’s future operations, revenues, earnings, allowance for credit losses, capital position, and liquidity continue to evolve and are difficult to assess and certain matters remain uncertain at this time.
Net Income and Profitability
Net income for 2020 was $164.7 million, a decrease of $4.4 million, or 2.6%, from 2019’s earnings. Earnings per share for 2020 was $3.08, down $0.15, or 4.6%, from 2019’s results. Net income and earnings per share for 2020 were impacted by $4.9 million of acquisition expenses primarily related to the Steuben acquisition, $3.1 million of acquisition-related provision for credit losses related to the Steuben acquisition and $3.0 million of litigation accrual expenses, while the Company incurred $8.6 million of acquisition expenses in 2019 primarily related to the Kinderhook acquisition and recorded $4.9 million in net gains on the sales of investment securities in 2019. Adjusted Net Income increased $0.2 million, or 0.1%, compared to the prior year. Adjusted Earnings per Share of $3.37 decreased $0.07, or 2.0%, compared to the prior year. See Table 20 for Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measures.
Net income for 2019 was $169.1 million, an increase of $0.4 million, or 0.3%, from 2018’s earnings. Earnings per share for 2019 was $3.23, down $0.01, or 0.3%, from 2018’s results. Net income and earnings per share for 2019 were impacted by $8.6 million of acquisition expenses primarily related to the Kinderhook acquisition offset in part by $4.9 million in net gains on the sales of investment securities, while the Company recovered $0.8 million of vendor contract termination charges in 2018 that were initially recorded as an acquisition expense in the second quarter of 2017. Adjusted Net Income increased $4.1 million, or 2.3%, compared to the prior year. Adjusted Earnings per Share of $3.44 increased $0.05, or 1.5%, compared to the prior year. See Table 20 for Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measures.
Table 1: Condensed Income Statements
The Company operates in three business segments: Banking, Employee Benefit Services and All Other. The Banking segment provides a wide array of lending and depository-related products and services to individuals, businesses and municipal enterprises. In addition to these general intermediation services, the Banking segment provides treasury management solutions and payment processing services. Employee Benefit Services, consisting of BPAS and its subsidiaries, provides the following on a national basis: employee benefit trust services; collective investment funds; fund administration; transfer agency; retirement plan and VEBA/HRA and health savings account plan administration services; actuarial services; and healthcare consulting services. BPAS services more than 3,800 benefit plans with approximately 450,000 plan participants and holds more than $107.0 billion in employee benefit trust assets. In addition, BPAS employs 367 professionals serving clients in every U.S. state plus the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and occupies 11 offices located in New York, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, New Jersey, Texas and Puerto Rico. The All Other segment is comprised of wealth management and insurance services. Wealth management activities include trust services provided by the personal trust unit of CBNA, investment products and services provided by CISI, The Carta Group, Inc. (“Carta Group”) and OneGroup Wealth Partners, Inc. (“Wealth Partners”), as well as asset management provided by Nottingham Advisors, Inc. (“Nottingham”). The insurance services activities include the offerings of personal and commercial lines of insurance and other risk management products and services provided by OneGroup NY, Inc. (“OneGroup”). For additional financial information on the Company’s segments, refer to Note U - Segment Information in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
The primary factors explaining 2020 earnings performance are discussed in the remaining sections of this document and are summarized by segment as follows:
BANKING
● Net interest income increased $8.9 million, or 2.5%. This was the result of a $1.69 billion increase in average interest-earning assets and a 13 basis point decrease in the average rate on interest-bearing liabilities, partially offset by a 57 basis point decrease in the average yield on earning assets and a $971.7 million increase in average interest-bearing liabilities. Average loans grew $722.4 million driven primarily by the origination of PPP loans and the Steuben acquisition, while the yield on loans decreased 39 basis points from the prior year. Also contributing to the growth in interest income was a $972.2 million increase in the average book value of investments, including cash equivalents. The increase in the average book balance of investments was the net result of investment purchases of $1.12 billion during the year and $180.5 million of investments acquired with the Steuben transaction, as well as a significant increase in cash equivalents primarily driven by large deposit inflows related to government stimulus programs, partially offset by $886.1 million in investment maturities, calls and principal payments. The average yield on investments, including cash equivalents, decreased 68 basis points from the prior year. Average interest-bearing deposits increased $974.9 million due primarily to the addition of deposits from the Steuben acquisition and the aforementioned net inflows of funds from government stimulus programs. Borrowing interest expense decreased year-over-year as a result of a blended rate that was 59 basis points lower than the prior year and a decrease in average balances of $3.2 million.
● The provision for credit losses of $14.2 million increased $5.8 million, or 68.6%, from the prior year level primarily due to the adverse impact COVID-19 had on economic and business conditions within the Company's markets. Net charge-offs of $5.0 million were $2.8 million less than 2019. This resulted in an annual net charge-off ratio (net charge-offs / total average loans) of 0.07%, which was five basis points lower than the prior year. Year-end nonperforming loans as a percentage of total loans increased 69 basis points and nonperforming assets as a percentage of loans and other real estate owned increased 68 basis points compared to December 31, 2019 levels. Additional information on trends and policy related to asset quality is provided in the asset quality section on pages 54 through 60.
● Banking noninterest revenue for 2020, excluding unrealized gains and losses on equity securities, net gain on sales of investments and gain on debt extinguishment, of $69.2 million decreased by $1.0 million from 2019’s level. The decrease in noninterest revenue was primarily related to a decrease in deposit service fees due to lower overdraft and other deposit revenues, partially offset by an increase in mortgage banking revenue due to higher levels of sales of secondary market eligible residential mortgage loans during 2020 and the increase in volume of deposit services fees related to deposit relationships acquired with the Kinderhook and Steuben transactions. The Company recognized $4.9 million in net gains on the sales of investment securities in 2019.
● Total banking noninterest expenses, including acquisition and litigation accrual expenses, increased $6.2 million, or 2.4%, in 2020 reflective of the $3.0 million in one-time litigation accrual expenses incurred in 2020, additional expenses associated with an expanded branch network from the Kinderhook and Steuben acquisitions, merit-related increases in employee wages, as well as an increase in expenses associated with the implementation of new customer-facing digital technologies and back office systems. Excluding acquisition and litigation accrual expenses, banking noninterest expenses increased $6.9 million, or 2.7%.
EMPLOYEE BENEFIT SERVICES
● Employee benefit services noninterest revenue for 2020 of $103.5 million increased $4.0 million, or 4.0%, from the prior year level, due to the organic growth in plan administration, recordkeeping and trustee fees.
● Employee benefit services noninterest expenses for 2020 totaled $66.4 million. This represented an increase from 2019 of $0.2 million, or 0.4%, and was primarily attributable to an increase in personnel costs associated with the continued buildout of resources to support an expanding revenue base, partially offset by a general decrease in the level of business activities as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
ALL OTHER (WEALTH MANAGEMENT AND INSURANCE SERVICES)
● Wealth management and insurance services noninterest revenue for 2020 was $61.6 million; an increase of $2.5 million, or 4.3%, from the prior year level. The increase was due to organic growth in both businesses.
● Wealth management and insurance services noninterest expenses of $49.9 million increased $1.3 million, or 2.7%, from 2019 primarily due to increased personnel and data processing costs associated with organic growth.
Selected Profitability and Other Measures
Return on average assets, return on average equity, dividend payout and equity to asset ratios for the years indicated are as follows:
Table 2: Selected Ratios
As displayed in Table 2, the 2020 return on average assets ratio decreased 25 basis points and the return on average equity ratio decreased 129 basis points as compared to 2019. The decrease in return on average assets was primarily the result of an increase in average assets, primarily related to large net inflows of funds from government stimulus programs, PPP loan originations and the acquisitions of Kinderhook in third quarter of 2019 and Steuben in the second quarter of 2020, and a decrease in net income that was impacted by a $5.8 million increase in provision for credit losses, a $4.9 million decrease in net gains on sales of investment securities and $3.0 million of litigation accrual expenses incurred in 2020. The return on average equity ratio decreased in 2020 as average equity increased, primarily related to shares issued in connection with the Steuben acquisition and increases in the market value of the Company’s available-for-sale investments, while net income decreased and was impacted by the aforementioned provision for credit losses, litigation accrual expenses and lower security gains. The return on average assets ratio in 2019 decreased five basis points, while the return on average equity ratio decreased 78 basis points as compared to 2018. The decrease in return on average assets was primarily the result of an increase in average assets, primarily related to the Kinderhook acquisition, which outpaced the increase in net income that was impacted by $8.6 million in acquisition expenses incurred in 2019. The return on average equity ratio decreased in 2019 as the increase in average equity, including higher after-tax unrealized gains on investment securities, outpaced net income that was impacted by the aforementioned acquisition expenses. The return on average assets adjusted to exclude acquisition expenses, acquisition-related provision for credit losses, gain on sales of investment securities, unrealized gains and losses on equity securities, gain or loss on debt extinguishment, amortization of intangibles, litigation accrual expenses and acquired non-impaired loan accretion decreased 23 basis points to 1.40% in 2020, as compared to 1.63% in 2019. The return on average equity adjusted to exclude acquisition expenses, acquisition-related provision for credit losses, gain on sales of investment securities, unrealized gains and losses on equity securities, gain on debt extinguishment, amortization of intangibles, litigation accrual expenses and acquired non-impaired loan accretion decreased 114 basis points to 8.89% in 2020, from 10.03% in 2019. See Table 20 for Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measures.
The dividend payout ratio for 2020 of 53.7% increased 5.3% from 2019 as there was an 8.2% increase in dividends declared from 2019 and a 2.6% decrease in net income. The increase in dividends declared in 2020 was a result of a 5.1% increase in the dividends declared per share and the issuance of shares in connection with the Steuben acquisition and administration of the Company’s 401(k) plan and employee stock plan. The dividend payout ratio for 2019 of 48.4% increased 4.6% from 2018 as the 10.7% increase in dividends declared from 2018 was higher than the 0.3% increase in net income. The increase in dividends declared in 2019 was a result of a 9.7% increase in the dividends declared per share and the issuance of shares in connection with the administration of the Company’s 401(k) plan and employee stock plan.
The average equity to average assets ratio decreased in 2020 as the growth in assets outpaced the growth in common shareholders’ equity. During 2020, average assets increased 16.8% while average equity increased at a rate of 12.9%. In 2019 the average equity to average assets ratio increased 75 basis points as average equity rose 8.5% and average assets grew 3.5% in comparison to 2018.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is the amount by which interest and fees on earning assets (loans, investments and cash equivalents) exceeds the cost of funds, which consists primarily of interest paid to the Company's depositors and interest on borrowings. Net interest margin is the difference between the yield on interest earning assets and the cost of interest-bearing liabilities as a percentage of earning assets.
As disclosed in Table 3, net interest income (with nontaxable income converted to a fully tax-equivalent basis) totaled $372.3 million in 2020, an increase of $9.2 million, or 2.5%, from the prior year. The increase is a result of a $1.69 billion, or 17.5%, increase in average interest-earning assets and a 13 basis point decrease in the average rate on interest-bearing liabilities, partially offset by a 57 basis point decrease in the average yield on interest-earning assets and a $971.7 million increase in average interest-bearing liabilities. As reflected in Table 4, the favorable impact of the increase in interest-earning assets ($63.0 million) and decrease in the rate on interest-bearing liabilities ($9.2 million) was partially offset by the unfavorable impact of the decrease in the average yield on interest-earning assets ($59.5 million) and the increase in interest-bearing liabilities ($3.5 million).
The 2020 net interest margin decreased 48 basis points to 3.28% from 3.76% reported in 2019. The decrease was attributable to a 57 basis point decrease in the earning-asset yield partially offset by a 13 basis point decrease in the cost of interest-bearing liabilities primarily due to the impact of lower market rates during 2020 resulting from the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. The 4.34% yield on loans in 2020 decreased 39 basis points as compared to 4.73% in 2019 primarily due to the impact of lower market rates during 2020 resulting from the aforementioned economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the impact of acquired loan accretion. The yield on investments, including cash equivalents, of 1.90% in 2020 was 68 basis points lower than 2019. The cost of interest-bearing liabilities was 0.27% during 2020 as compared to 0.40% for 2019. The decreased cost reflects the seven basis point decrease in the average rate paid on deposits and the 59 basis point lower average rate paid on borrowings in 2020.
The net interest margin in 2019 increased three basis points to 3.76% from 3.73% reported in 2018. The increase was attributable to an 11 basis point increase in the earning-asset yield, offset by a 13 basis point increase in the cost of interest-bearing liabilities. The 4.73% yield on loans increased 15 basis points in 2019 as compared to 4.58% in 2018, including the impact of acquired loan accretion associated with the Kinderhook acquisition. The yield on investments, including cash equivalents, of 2.58% in 2019 was consistent with 2018. The yield on investments was impacted by the sale of $590.2 million of available-for-sale Treasury securities in the second quarter of 2019 with subsequent reinvestment of the proceeds occurring primarily in the fourth quarter. The proceeds from the sale of securities in the second quarter were held in interest-earning cash until more attractive reinvestment options became available in the fourth quarter. The cost of interest-bearing liabilities was 0.40% during 2019 as compared to 0.27% for 2018. The increased cost reflects the 10 basis point increase in the average rate paid on deposits and the 14 basis point higher average rate paid on borrowings in 2019.
As shown in Table 3, total FTE-basis interest income increased by $3.5 million, or 0.9%, in 2020 in comparison to 2019. Table 4 indicates that a higher average earning-asset balance created $63.0 million of incremental interest income and a lower yield on earning assets had an unfavorable impact of $59.5 million on interest income. Average loans increased $722.4 million, or 11.0%, in 2020. This increase was primarily due to the origination of PPP loans and acquired growth from the Steuben acquisition. FTE-basis loan interest income and fees increased $6.4 million, or 2.1%, in 2020 as compared to 2019, attributable to the higher average balances partially offset by a 39 basis point decrease in the loan yield primarily due to impact of lower market rates during 2020.
Investment interest income (FTE basis) in 2020 was $2.9 million, or 3.6%, lower than the prior year as a result of a 68 basis point decrease in average investment yield partially offset by a $972.2 million increase in the average book basis balance of investments, including cash equivalents. The lower average investment yield in 2020 was reflective of cash flows from higher rate maturing instruments in the investment portfolio being reinvested at lower market interest rates or held in interest-earning cash. The higher average investment book balance is inclusive of the $179.7 million of available-for-sale securities and $0.8 million of equity and other securities acquired with the Steuben transaction.
Total FTE-basis interest income in 2019 increased $22.7 million, or 6.2%, from 2018’s level. As shown in table 4, the higher average earning-asset balance created $11.8 million of incremental interest income and a higher yield on earning assets had a favorable impact of $10.9 million on interest income. Average loans increased $278.9 million, or 4.5%, in 2019. This increase was primarily due to acquired growth from the Kinderhook acquisition, which accounted for $217.6 million of the growth. FTE-basis loan interest income and fees increased $22.1 million, or 7.7%, in 2019 as compared to 2018, attributable to the higher average balances and a 15 basis point increase in the loan yield. On a FTE basis, investment interest income, including interest on cash equivalents, totaled $80.6 million in 2019, $0.6 million, or 0.7%, higher than 2018 as a result of a $16.6 million increase in the average book basis balance of investments (including cash equivalents) and an average investment yield of 2.58% that was consistent with 2018. The higher average investment book balance is inclusive of the $37.7 million of available-for-sale securities and $2.1 million of equity and other securities acquired with the Kinderhook transaction.
Total interest expense decreased by $5.7 million, or 21.4%, to $20.9 million in 2020. As shown in Table 4, lower interest rates on interest-bearing liabilities resulted in a decrease in interest expense of $9.2 million, while higher deposit balances resulted in a $3.5 million increase in interest expense. Interest expense as a percentage of average earning assets for 2020 decreased nine basis points to 0.18%. The rate on interest-bearing deposits of 0.23% was nine basis points lower than 2019, primarily due to a decrease in certain product rates in response to changes in market interest rates during the year. The rate on borrowings decreased 59 basis points to 1.27% in 2020, primarily due to the decrease in the average variable rate paid on subordinated debt held by unconsolidated subsidiary trusts and customer repurchase agreements. Total average funding balances (deposits and borrowings) in 2020 increased $1.60 billion, or 17.6%. Average deposits increased $1.60 billion, driven by large net inflows of funds from government stimulus programs and acquired growth from the Steuben acquisition. Average non-time deposit balances increased $1.51 billion and accounted for 90.9% of total average deposits compared to 90.3% in 2019, due to the aforementioned net inflows of funds from government stimulus programs and the addition of $419.8 million in non-time deposit balances with the Steuben acquisition. Average time deposits increased by $92.8 million year-over-year, including $96.4 million in time deposits from the Steuben acquisition. Average time deposits represented 9.1% of total average deposits for 2020 compared to 9.7% in 2019. Average external borrowings decreased $3.2 million in 2020 as compared to 2019, due to a decrease in average subordinated debt held by unconsolidated subsidiary trusts of $14.4 million, partially offset by an increase in average subordinated notes payable of $6.0 million, an increase in average customer repurchase agreements of $4.0 million and an increase in average FHLB borrowings of $1.2 million. The decrease in average subordinated debt held by unconsolidated subsidiary trusts is due to the redemption of trust preferred debt held by MBVT I and KCT during the third quarter of 2019 for a total of $22.7 million, partially offset by a partial year of subordinated debt assumed with the Steuben acquisition. The Company assumed $6.0 million of FHLB borrowings and $2.1 million of subordinated notes held by unconsolidated subsidiary trusts from the Steuben acquisition. The subordinated notes held by unconsolidated subsidiary trusts assumed from the Steuben acquisition were redeemed in the third quarter of 2020 and $10.4 million of subordinated notes payable assumed from the Kinderhook acquisition were redeemed in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Total interest expense increased by $8.9 million, or 50.2%, to $26.6 million in 2019. As shown in Table 4, higher interest rates on interest-bearing liabilities resulted in an increase in interest expense of $8.6 million, while higher interest-bearing deposit balances resulted in a $0.3 million increase in interest expense. Interest expense as a percentage of average earning assets for 2019 increased eight basis points to 0.27%. The rate on interest-bearing deposits of 0.32% was 15 basis points higher than 2018, primarily due to an increase in certain product rates in response to changes in market interest rates during 2018 and 2019. The rate on borrowings increased 14 basis points to 1.86% in 2019, primarily due to the increase in the average variable rate paid on subordinated debt held by unconsolidated subsidiary trusts and overnight borrowings. Total average funding balances (deposits and borrowings) in 2019 increased $196.1 million, or 2.2%. Average deposits increased $277.1 million, with $260.0 million of the increase from the Kinderhook acquisition. Average non-time deposit balances increased $184.9 million and accounted for 90.3% of total average deposits compared to 91.1% in 2018, due to the addition of $185.9 million in non-time deposit balances with the Kinderhook acquisition, partially offset by a $1.0 million decrease in legacy deposits. Average time deposits increased by $92.2 million year-over-year, including $74.1 million in average time deposits from the Kinderhook acquisition. Average time deposits represented 9.7% of total average deposits for 2019 compared to 8.9% in 2018. Average external borrowings decreased $81.0 million in 2019 as compared to 2018, due to a decrease in average customer repurchase agreements of $42.6 million, a decrease in subordinated debt held by unconsolidated subsidiary trusts of $20.1 million and a decrease in FHLB borrowings, partially offset by an increase in average subordinated notes payable of $6.5 million associated with subordinated notes acquired in the Kinderhook transaction. The decrease in average subordinated debt held by unconsolidated subsidiary trusts was due to the redemption of trust preferred debt held by MBVT I and KCT during the third quarter of 2019 for a total of $22.7 million, partially offset by the addition of the subordinated debt acquired with the Kinderhook transaction in the second half of the year.
The following table sets forth information related to average interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and their associated yields and rates for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. Interest income and yields are on a fully tax-equivalent basis using marginal income tax rates of 24.0% in both 2020 and 2019 and 24.4% in 2018. Average balances are computed by totaling the daily ending balances in a period and dividing by the number of days in that period. Loan interest income and yields include loan fees and acquired loan accretion. Average loan balances include acquired loan purchase discounts and premiums, nonaccrual loans and loans held for sale.
Table 3: Average Balance Sheet
(1) Averages for investment securities are based on historical cost and the yields do not give effect to changes in fair value that is reflected as a component of noninterest-earning assets, shareholders’ equity and deferred taxes.
(2) Includes nonaccrual loans. The Company wrote off $1.5 million of accrued interest on nonaccrual loans by reversing interest income in 2020. The impact of interest and fees not recognized on nonaccrual loans in 2019 and 2018 was immaterial.
(3) The fully-tax equivalent adjustment represents taxes that would have been paid had nontaxable investment securities and loans been taxable. The adjustment attempts to enhance the comparability of the performance of assets that have different tax liabilities.
As discussed above, the change in net interest income (fully tax-equivalent basis) may be analyzed by segregating the volume and rate components of the changes in interest income and interest expense for each underlying category.
Table 4: Rate/Volume
(1) The change in interest due to both rate and volume has been allocated to volume and rate changes in proportion to the relationship of the absolute dollar amounts of such change in each component.
(2) Changes due to volume and rate are computed from the respective changes in average balances and rates of the totals; they are not a summation of the changes of the components.
Exclusive of the impact of PPP loans, the Company expects its 2021 net interest margin to remain below historical results due to the significant and precipitous drop in the overnight Federal Funds and Prime interest rates in the latter half of the first quarter of 2020 that are expected to remain in place throughout 2021. In the near term, expected decreases in average earning asset yields are unlikely to be fully offset by expected decreases in the average cost of funds. While the Company anticipates assisting the majority of the Company's first round PPP borrowers with forgiveness requests during 2021, the eligibility of the borrowers' forgiveness requests and the SBA's ability to provide loan forgiveness in a timely manner is uncertain at this time. For these reasons, although the stated interest rate on PPP loans is fixed at 1.0%, it is uncertain as to the timing for which the Company's remaining $9.0 million in net deferred PPP origination fees will be recognized as interest income and this may cause earnings asset yield volatility as loans are forgiven by the SBA. In addition, the Company is participating in the 2021 second round of PPP lending, also known as the "Second Draw" program, but is uncertain at this time as to the amount and timing of the PPP loans it will originate or the timing of their forgiveness in 2021.
Noninterest Revenues
The Company’s sources of noninterest revenues are of four primary types: 1) general banking services related to loans, including mortgage banking, deposits and other core customer activities typically provided through the branch network and digital banking channels (performed by CBNA); 2) employee benefit trust and benefit plan administration services (performed by BPAS and its subsidiaries); 3) wealth management services, comprised of personal trust services (performed by the trust unit within CBNA), investment products and services (performed by CISI, Wealth Partners and Carta Group) and asset management services (performed by Nottingham); and 4) insurance products and services (performed by OneGroup). Additionally, the Company has other transactions, including unrealized gains or losses on equity securities, realized gains or losses from the sale of investment securities and gains or losses on debt extinguishment.
Table 5: Noninterest Revenues
(1) For purposes of this ratio noninterest revenues excludes unrealized gain or loss on equity securities, gain or loss on debt extinguishment and net gain on sales of investment securities. Operating revenues, a non-GAAP measure, is defined as net interest income on a fully-tax equivalent basis, plus noninterest revenues, excluding unrealized gain or loss on equity securities, gain or loss on debt extinguishment, net gain on sales of investment securities and acquired non-impaired loan accretion. See Table 20 for Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP measures.
As displayed in Table 5, total noninterest revenues, excluding unrealized gain/loss on equity securities, gain on debt extinguishment and gain on the sales of investment securities, increased $2.3 million, or 1.0%, to $228.0 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. The increase was comprised of an increase in mortgage banking revenues, growth in revenue from the Company’s employee benefit services businesses, an increase in wealth management and insurance services revenue and an increase in debit interchange and ATM fees, partially offset by a decrease in deposit service charges and fees and other banking revenues. Noninterest revenues, excluding unrealized gain on equity securities, loss on debt extinguishment and gain on the sale of investment securities, increased by $2.0 million, or 0.9%, to $225.7 million in 2019 as compared to 2018. The increase was comprised of growth in revenue from the Company’s employee benefit services businesses, an increase in wealth management and insurance services revenue and an increase in other banking revenues, partially offset by a decrease in debit card-related revenue related to Durbin amendment mandated debit interchange price restrictions and a decrease in mortgage banking revenues.
Noninterest revenues as a percent of operating revenues (FTE basis) were 38.3% in 2020, down 0.4% from the prior year. The current year decrease was due to the 2.5% increase in adjusted net interest income (FTE basis) driven by significant earnings asset growth, while noninterest revenues increased by the 1.0% mentioned above. The 0.9% decrease in this ratio from 2018 to 2019 was driven by a 0.9% increase in noninterest revenues mentioned above, while adjusted net interest income (FTE basis) increased 3.9% with both earnings asset growth and modest net interest margin expansion.
A portion of the Company’s recurring noninterest revenue is comprised of the wide variety of fees earned from general banking services provided through the branch network, digital banking channels, mortgage banking and other banking revenues, which totaled $66.4 million in 2020, a decrease of $4.1 million, or 5.8%, from the prior year. The decrease was primarily driven by decreases in deposit services charges and fees and other banking revenues due to a precipitous drop in deposit transaction activity as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by an increase in mortgage banking revenues, reflective of the Company’s decision to sell certain secondary market eligible residential mortgage loans during 2020 and the benefit derived from interest rate movements. In addition, debit interchange and ATM fees increased, reflective of the addition of new deposit relationships from the Kinderhook and Steuben acquisitions. Fees from general banking services were $70.5 million in 2019, a decrease of $4.9 million, or 6.4%, from 2018. The decrease was primarily driven by a decrease in debit card-related revenue due to the impact of Durbin amendment mandated debit interchange price restrictions that were effective beginning in the third quarter of 2018, partially offset by the addition of new deposit relationships from the Kinderhook acquisition.
As disclosed in Table 5, noninterest revenue from financial services (revenues from employee benefit services, wealth management services and insurance services) increased $6.4 million, or 4.1%, in 2020 to $161.6 million. In 2020, financial services revenue accounted for 71% of total noninterest revenues, as compared to 67% in 2019. Employee benefit services generated revenue of $101.3 million in 2020 that reflected growth of $4.2 million, or 4.3%, primarily due to organic increases in plan administration, recordkeeping and trustee fees. Employee benefit services revenue in 2019 of $97.2 million reflected growth of $4.9 million, or 5.3%, primarily due to organic increases in the number of supported plans and related participant levels.
Wealth management and insurance services revenues increased $2.2 million, or 3.8%, in 2020 due to a $2.0 million increase in wealth management services revenues and a $0.2 million increase in insurance services revenues attributable to organic growth in both categories. Wealth management and insurance services revenue increased $2.0 million, or 3.5%, in 2019 due primarily to an increase in OneGroup revenue.
Employee benefit trust assets increased $17.7 billion to $107.0 billion for the employee benefit services segment in 2020 as compared to 2019 due primarily to organic growth in the collective investment trust business and market appreciation. Assets under management increased $1.1 billion to $7.7 billion for the wealth management businesses at year end 2020 as compared to one year earlier due to organic growth and market appreciation. Trust assets within the Company’s employee benefit services segment increased $14.9 billion to $89.3 billion at the end of 2019 as compared to 2018 due primarily to organic growth in the collective investment trust business. Assets under management within the Company’s wealth management services segment increased to $6.6 billion at the end of 2019, up $793.8 million from year-end 2018 due to organic growth.
As the economy continues the re-opening process during the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company anticipates that its deposit service charges and fees revenue and debit interchange and ATM fees revenue will increase slightly in 2021 as compared to 2020, barring another shut-down of nonessential businesses in the Company’s market footprint. The Company expects its mortgage banking revenues to decrease in 2021 as compared to 2020 as the Company reduced the amount of sales of secondary market eligible residential mortgage loans beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Noninterest Expenses
As shown in Table 6, noninterest expenses of $376.5 million in 2020 were $4.5 million, or 1.2%, higher than 2019, primarily reflective of an increase in salaries and employee benefits driven by merit-related increases in employee wages and a net increase in full-time equivalent employees between the periods, an increase in data processing and communications expenses associated with the implementation of new customer-facing digital technologies and back office systems, the additional expenses associated with operating an expanded branch network subsequent to the Kinderhook and Steuben transactions and the $3.0 million in one-time litigation accrual expenses incurred in 2020, partially offset by lower acquisition-related expenses and a decline in other expenses due to the general decrease in the level of business activities as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Noninterest expenses in 2019 increased $26.7 million, or 7.7%, from 2018 to $372.0 million, primarily reflective of the $8.6 million in one-time expenses incurred in 2019 related to the Kinderhook acquisition and the additional expenses associated with operating an expanded branch network subsequent to the Kinderhook transaction.
Operating expenses (excluding acquisition expenses, litigation accrual and amortization of intangible assets) as a percent of average assets for 2020 was 2.75%, a decrease of 40 basis points from 3.15% in 2019 and 32 basis points lower than the 3.07% in 2018. The decrease in this ratio for 2020 was due to a 2.0% increase in operating expenses (excluding acquisition expenses, litigation accrual and amortization of intangible assets), while average assets grew by 16.8% due primarily to large net inflows of funds related to government stimulus programs, PPP loan originations and the acquisition of Steuben. The increase in this ratio between 2018 and 2019 was due to a 6.0% increase in operating expenses (excluding acquisition expenses, litigation accrual and amortization of intangible assets) primarily a result of expanded operations from the Kinderhook acquisition, while average assets grew by a lesser 3.5% from net assets and intangibles added from the Kinderhook acquisition and modest organic growth.
The efficiency ratio, a performance measurement tool widely used by banks, is defined by the Company as operating expenses (excluding acquisition expenses, litigation accrual and amortization of intangible assets) divided by operating revenue (fully tax-equivalent net interest income plus noninterest revenue, excluding acquired non-impaired loan accretion, unrealized gains/losses on equity securities, realized gains/losses on investment securities and gains/losses on debt extinguishment). Lower ratios correlate to higher operating efficiency. The 2020 efficiency ratio of 59.6% was consistent with 2019 as the 2.1% increase in operating revenue, comprised of a 2.8% increase in adjusted net interest income and a 1.0% increase in adjusted noninterest revenue, grew at a slightly faster pace than the 2.0% increase in operating expenses, as defined above. The efficiency ratio for 2019 was 1.6% above 2018 as the 6.0% increase in operating expenses grew at a faster pace than the 3.1% increase in operating revenue, comprised of a 4.6% increase in adjusted net interest income and a 0.9% increase in adjusted noninterest revenue, as defined above, that was adversely impacted by being subject to a full year of Durbin amendment restrictions on debit card income versus six months for 2018. See Table 20 for Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measures.
Table 6: Noninterest Expenses
(1) Operating expenses are total noninterest expenses excluding acquisition expenses, litigation accrual, and amortization of intangible assets. See Table 20 for Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measures.
(2) Efficiency ratio, a non-GAAP measure, is calculated as operating expenses as defined in footnote (1) above divided by net interest income on a fully tax-equivalent basis excluding acquired non-impaired loan accretion plus noninterest revenues excluding unrealized gain or loss on equity securities, gain or loss on debt extinguishment and net gain on sales of investment securities. See Table 20 for Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measures.
Salaries and employee benefits increased $8.5 million, or 3.9%, in 2020, driven by merit-related increases in employee wages and a net increase in full-time equivalent employees between the periods, due to both the Kinderhook acquisition in early third quarter 2019 and the Steuben acquisition in the second quarter of 2020, but were partially offset by lower employee benefit expenses primarily associated with a decrease in employee medical expenses due to reduced provider utilization. Salaries and employee benefits increased $12.6 million, or 6.1%, in 2019, due to the impact of annual merit increases, a partial year of expanded operations associated with the Kinderhook acquisition, higher incentive compensation, and an increase in medical expenses. Total full-time equivalent staff at the end of 2020 was 2,829 compared to 2,763 at December 31, 2019 and 2,675 at the end of 2018. In 2020 and 2019, retirement plan expense also increased due to the increase in service cost associated with an increase in the number of employees participating in the plan combined with an increase in eligible compensation associated with merit increases. See Note K to the financial statements for further information about the pension plan.
Total non-personnel, noninterest expenses, excluding one-time acquisition and litigation accrual expenses, decreased $3.2 million, or 2.3%, in 2020, reflective of the general decrease in the level of business activities as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Decreases in other expenses, business development and marketing, and amortization of intangible assets were partially offset by increases in data processing and communications, occupancy and equipment and legal and professional fees. Other expenses and business development and marketing decreased due to the general decrease in the level of business activities as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, including travel and entertainment. The increase in data processing and communications expenses was due to the Steuben acquisition and the implementation of new customer-facing digital technologies and back office systems during 2020. Total non-personnel, noninterest expenses, excluding one-time acquisition expenses, increased $4.8 million, or 3.5%, in 2019, mostly reflective of a partial year of the additional costs associated with the acquired Kinderhook business activities. Increases in data processing and communications, legal and professional fees, business development and marketing and other expenses were partially offset by a decrease in occupancy and equipment and amortization of intangible assets.
Acquisition expenses for 2020 totaled $4.9 million, including $4.7 million associated with the Steuben acquisition and $0.2 million associated with the Kinderhook acquisition. Acquisition expenses for 2019 totaled $8.6 million, including $8.0 million associated with the Kinderhook acquisition and $0.6 million associated with the Steuben acquisition. During 2018, the Company recovered $0.8 million of vendor contract termination charges associated with the Merchants acquisition, which were recorded as an acquisition expense during the second quarter of 2017.
The Company recorded $3.0 million in litigation accrual in 2020 related to an anticipated settlement, following mediation, of a purported class action lawsuit regarding the Bank’s deposit account terms and overdraft disclosures and certain overdraft fees assessed pursuant to such terms and disclosures. The Company executed a settlement agreement with respect to the lawsuit in the fourth quarter of 2020 and does not anticipate that additional amounts will be accrued for this matter in future periods. The settlement, which is subject to documentation and Court approval, will provide for a release of all claims asserted by class members in the action.
While the Company remains focused on containing operating expenses, the Company expects operating expenses to increase modestly in 2021 as compared to 2020 due to the resumption of certain marketing and business and employee development endeavors that were suspended due to the COVID-19 pandemic, continued investment in the implementation of new customer-facing digital technologies and back office systems and the impact of a full year of the incremental expenses associated with operating an expanded branch network as a result of the Steuben acquisition.
Income Taxes
The Company estimates its income tax expense based on the amount it expects to owe the respective taxing authorities, plus the impact of deferred tax items. Taxes are discussed in more detail in Note I of the Consolidated Financial Statements beginning on page 110. Accrued taxes represent the net estimated amount due or to be received from taxing authorities. In estimating accrued taxes, management assesses the relative merits and risks of the appropriate tax treatment of transactions, taking into account statutory, judicial and regulatory guidance in the context of the Company’s tax position. If the final resolution of taxes payable differs from its estimates due to regulatory determination or legislative or judicial actions, adjustments to tax expense may be required.
On December 22, 2017, H.R.1, referred to as the “Tax Cuts and Jobs Act,” was signed into law. Among other things, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act lowered the corporate tax rate to 21% from a maximum rate of 35%, effective for tax years including or commencing January 1, 2018. ASC 740, Income Taxes, requires deferred tax assets and liabilities to be measured at the enacted tax rate expected to be applied when the temporary differences are to be realized or settled. Thus, as of the December 22, 2017 date of enactment, deferred taxes were re-measured based upon the new 21% tax rate. Prior to the change in tax rate in 2017, the Company had recorded net deferred tax liabilities based on a marginal tax rate of 37.70%. The change in tax rate resulted in a decrease in the marginal tax rate to 24.29% and a deferred tax benefit of $38.0 million from the write-down of the net deferred tax liabilities in the fourth quarter of 2017. The effect of this change in tax law was recorded as a component of the income tax provision including those deferred assets and liabilities that were established through a financial statement component other than continuing operations.
The effective tax rate for 2020 was 20.1%, compared to 19.2% in 2019 and 20.8% in 2018. The increase in the effective rate for 2020, compared to the effective tax rate for 2019, is primarily attributable to a decrease in tax benefits related to stock-based compensation activity and the impact of changes in state apportionment. The decline in the effective rate for 2019, compared to the effective tax rate for 2018, is primarily attributable to an increase in tax benefits related to stock-based compensation activity and a reduction in certain activity-based state income tax expenses.
Shareholders’ Equity
Shareholders’ equity ended 2020 at $2.10 billion, up $248.9 million, or 13.4%, from the end of 2019. This increase reflects net income of $164.7 million, $76.9 million from the issuance of shares as consideration for the Steuben acquisition, $15.8 million from the issuance of shares through the employee stock plans, $6.4 million from stock-based compensation, $1.1 million from the implementation of ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326), also referred to as CECL, on January 1, 2020, $0.1 million for treasury stock issued to the Company’s 401(k) plan and a $72.3 million increase in accumulated other comprehensive income. These increases were partially offset by common stock dividends declared of $88.5 million. The change in accumulated other comprehensive income was comprised of a $66.3 million increase due to changes in the unrealized gains and losses in the Company’s available-for-sale investment portfolio and a positive $6.0 million adjustment in the overfunded status of the Company’s employee retirement plans. Excluding accumulated other comprehensive income in both 2020 and 2019, shareholders’ equity increased by $176.6 million, or 9.5%. Shares outstanding increased by 1.8 million during the year due to the issuance of 1.4 million shares of common stock as consideration for the Steuben acquisition and share issuances under the employee stock plan, deferred compensation arrangements and to the Company’s 401(k) plan.
Shareholders’ equity ended 2019 at $1.86 billion, up $141.5 million, or 8.3%, from the end of 2018. This increase reflects net income of $169.1 million, $6.9 million from the issuance of shares through the employee stock plans, $6.9 million for treasury stock issued to the Company’s 401(k) plan, $5.3 million from stock-based compensation and a $35.1 million increase in accumulated other comprehensive income. These increases were partially offset by common stock dividends declared of $81.8 million. The change in accumulated other comprehensive income was comprised of a $37.1 million increase due to changes in the unrealized gains and losses in the Company’s available-for-sale investment portfolio, partially offset by a negative $2.0 million adjustment in the overfunded status of the Company’s employee retirement plans. Excluding accumulated other comprehensive income in both 2019 and 2018, shareholders’ equity increased by $106.4 million, or 6.0%. Shares outstanding increased by 0.5 million during the year due to share issuances under the employee stock plan, deferred compensation arrangements and to the Company’s 401(k) plan.
The Company’s ratio of ending tier 1 capital to adjusted quarterly average assets (or tier 1 leverage ratio), the primary measure for which regulators have established a 5% minimum for an institution to be considered “well-capitalized,” decreased 0.64% from the prior year to end the year at 10.16%. This was the result of an increase of 21.7% in average adjusted net assets (excludes investment market value adjustment and intangible assets net of related deferred tax liabilities) driven by significant deposit inflows related to government stimulus programs, while tier 1 capital increased by 14.5% from the prior year. For additional financial information on the Company’s regulatory capital, refer to Note P - Regulatory Matters in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The tangible equity-to-tangible assets ratio (a non-GAAP measure) was 9.92% at the end of 2020 versus 10.01% one year earlier (See Table 20 for Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measures). The decrease was due to tangible common shareholders’ equity increasing by 22.5% from the prior year, while tangible assets increased at a greater 23.6% from the prior year. The Company manages organic and acquired growth in a manner that enables it to continue to maintain and grow its capital base and maintain its ability to take advantage of future strategic growth opportunities.
Cash dividends declared on common stock in 2020 of $88.5 million represented an increase of 8.2% over the prior year. This growth was a result of the increase in outstanding shares as noted above and an $0.08 increase in dividends per share for the year. Dividends per share for 2020 of $1.66 represents a 5.1% increase from $1.58 in 2019, a result of quarterly dividends per share increasing from $0.38 to $0.41, or 7.9%, in the third quarter of 2019 and from $0.41 to $0.42, or 2.4%, in the third quarter of 2020. The 2020 increase in quarterly dividends marked the 28th consecutive year of dividend increases for the Company. The dividend payout ratio for this year was 53.7% compared to 48.4% in 2019, and 43.8% in 2018. The dividend payout ratio increased during 2020 because dividends declared increased 8.2% while net income decreased 2.6% from 2019. The dividend payout ratio increased during 2019 because dividends declared increased 10.7% while net income increased 0.3% from 2018.
Liquidity
Liquidity risk is a measure of the Company’s ability to raise cash when needed at a reasonable cost and minimize any loss. The Company maintains appropriate liquidity levels in both normal operating environments as well as stressed environments. The Company must be capable of meeting all obligations to its customers at any time and, therefore, the active management of its liquidity position remains an important management objective. The Bank has appointed the Asset Liability Committee (“ALCO”) to manage liquidity risk using policy guidelines and limits on indicators of potential liquidity risk. The indicators are monitored using a scorecard with three risk level limits. These risk indicators measure core liquidity and funding needs, capital at risk and change in available funding sources. The risk indicators are monitored using such statistics as the core basic surplus ratio, unencumbered securities to average assets, free loan collateral to average assets, loans to deposits, deposits to total funding and borrowings to total funding ratios.
Given the uncertain nature of the Company’s customers' demands, as well as the Company's desire to take advantage of earnings enhancement opportunities, the Company must have adequate sources of on and off-balance sheet funds available that can be utilized in time of need. Accordingly, in addition to the liquidity provided by balance sheet cash flows, liquidity must be supplemented with additional sources such as credit lines from correspondent banks and borrowings from the FHLB and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (“Federal Reserve”). Other funding alternatives may also be appropriate from time to time, including wholesale and retail repurchase agreements, large certificates of deposit and the brokered CD market. The primary source of non-deposit funds is FHLB overnight advances, of which there were no outstanding borrowings at December 31, 2020.
The Company’s primary sources of liquidity are its liquid assets, as well as unencumbered loans and securities that can be used to collateralize additional funding. At December 31, 2020, the Bank had $1.6 billion of cash and cash equivalents of which $1.5 billion are interest-earning deposits held at the Federal Reserve, FHLB and other correspondent banks. The Company also had $1.7 billion in unused FHLB borrowing capacity based on the Company’s quarter-end loan collateral levels and maintained $256.2 million of funding availability at the Federal Reserve Bank’s discount window. Additionally, the Company has $1.8 billion of unencumbered securities that could be pledged at the FHLB or Federal Reserve to obtain additional funding. There is $25.0 million available in unsecured lines of credit with other correspondent banks at quarter-end.
The Company’s primary approach to measuring short-term liquidity is known as the Basic Surplus/Deficit model. It is used to calculate liquidity over two time periods: first, the amount of cash that could be made available within 30 days (calculated as liquid assets less short-term liabilities as a percentage of average assets); and second, a projection of subsequent cash availability over an additional 60 days. As of December 31, 2020, this ratio was 20.6% for 30-days and 21.6% for 90-days, excluding the Company's capacity to borrow additional funds from the FHLB and other sources. This is considered to be a sufficient amount of liquidity based on the Company’s internal policy requirement of 7.5%.
A sources and uses statement is used by the Company to measure intermediate liquidity risk over the next twelve months. As of December 31, 2020, there is more than enough liquidity available during the next year to cover projected cash outflows. In addition, stress tests on the cash flows are performed in various scenarios ranging from high probability events with a low impact on the liquidity position to low probability events with a high impact on the liquidity position. The results of the stress tests as of December 31, 2020 indicate the Company has sufficient sources of funds for the next year in all simulated stressed scenarios.
To measure longer-term liquidity, a baseline projection of loan and deposit growth for five years is made to reflect how liquidity levels could change over time. This five-year measure reflects ample liquidity for loan and other asset growth over the next five years.
Though remote, the possibility of a funding crisis exists at all financial institutions. Accordingly, management has addressed this issue by formulating a Liquidity Contingency Plan, which has been reviewed and approved by both the Company’s Board of Directors (the “Board”) and the Company’s ALCO. The plan addresses the actions that the Company would take in response to both a short-term and long-term funding crisis.
A short-term funding crisis would most likely result from a shock to the financial system, either internal or external, which disrupts orderly short-term funding operations. Such a crisis would likely be temporary in nature and would not involve a change in credit ratings. A long-term funding crisis would most likely be the result of drastic credit deterioration at the Company. Management believes that both potential circumstances have been fully addressed through detailed action plans and the establishment of trigger points for monitoring such events.
Intangible Assets
The changes in intangible assets by reporting segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 are summarized as follows:
Table 7: Intangible Assets
Intangible assets at the end of 2020 totaled $846.6 million, an increase of $9.7 million from the prior year due to the addition of $19.9 million of goodwill, $2.9 million of core deposit intangibles and $1.2 million of other intangibles arising from acquisition activity, partially offset by $14.3 million of amortization during the year. The additional goodwill, core deposit intangibles and other intangibles recorded in 2020 resulted from the Steuben acquisition and a $0.3 million adjustment to goodwill from the Kinderhook acquisition that occurred in 2019. Goodwill represents the excess cost of an acquisition over the fair value of the net assets acquired. Goodwill at December 31, 2020 totaled $793.7 million, comprised of $690.1 million related to banking acquisitions and $103.6 million arising from the acquisition of financial services businesses. Goodwill is subject to periodic impairment analysis to determine whether the carrying value of the identified businesses exceeds their fair value, which would necessitate a write-down of goodwill. The Company completed its goodwill impairment analyses during the first quarter of 2019 and no adjustments were necessary for the banking or financial services businesses. The impairment analyses were based upon discounted cash flow modeling techniques that require management to make estimates regarding the amount and timing of expected future cash flows. It also requires the selection of discount rates that reflect the current return characteristics of the market in relation to present risk-free interest rates, estimated equity market premiums and company-specific performance and risk indicators. During 2020, the Company performed quarterly qualitative analyses of goodwill impairment and performed a quantitative assessment of its insurance subsidiary included in the All Other segment during the fourth quarter of 2020 and concluded no adjustments were necessary for the banking or financial services businesses. The qualitative analyses performed in 2020 included assessments of macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, overall financial performance, other relevant entity-specific events, events affecting a reporting unit and changes in share price. The Company will be conducting another round of qualitative and quantitative goodwill impairment analyses for all applicable business entities in the fourth quarter of 2021. Management believes that there is a low probability of future impairment with regard to the goodwill associated with its whole-bank, branch and financial services business acquisitions.
Core deposit intangibles represent the value of acquired non-time deposits in excess of funding that could have been obtained in the capital markets. Core deposit intangibles are amortized on either an accelerated or straight-line basis over periods ranging from seven to twenty years. The recognition of customer relationship intangibles was determined based on a methodology that calculates the present value of the projected future net income derived from the acquired customer base. These customer relationship intangibles are being amortized on an accelerated basis over periods ranging from eight to twelve years.
Loans
The Company’s loans outstanding, by type, as of December 31 are as follows:
Table 8: Loans Outstanding
As disclosed in Table 8 above, gross loans outstanding of $7.42 billion as of December 31, 2020 increased $525.4 million, or 7.6%, compared to December 31, 2019, reflecting growth in the business lending and home equity portfolios, partially offset by decreases in the consumer indirect, consumer direct, and consumer mortgage portfolios. The growth in the loan portfolio during 2020 was primarily attributable to the origination of PPP loans and the Steuben acquisition. Excluding loans acquired from Steuben, loans increased $185.7 million, or 2.7%. Gross loans outstanding of $6.89 billion as of December 31, 2019 increased $609.4 million, or 9.7%, compared to December 31, 2018, reflecting growth in the business lending, consumer mortgage, consumer indirect and consumer direct portfolios, partially offset by a slight decrease in the home equity portfolio. The growth in the loan portfolio during 2019 was primarily attributable to the Kinderhook acquisition combined with organic growth.
The compounded annual growth rate (“CAGR”) for the Company’s total loan portfolio between 2015 and 2020 was 9.1%. The greatest overall expansion occurred in business loans, which grew at an 18.1% CAGR driven mostly by acquisitions during the five year period and PPP loan originations in 2020. The consumer mortgage portfolio grew at a compounded annual growth rate of 6.3% from 2015 to 2020. The consumer installment segment, including indirect and direct loans, grew at a CAGR of 0.8%. The home equity lending segment declined at a compounded annual growth rate of 0.2% from 2015 to 2020, including the impact from acquisitions.
The weighting of the components of the Company’s loan portfolio enables it to be highly diversified. Approximately 54% of loans outstanding at the end of 2020 were made to consumers borrowing on an installment, line of credit or residential mortgage loan basis. The business lending portfolio is also broadly diversified by industry type as demonstrated by the following distributions at year-end 2020: commercial real estate (38%), restaurant & lodging (11%), general services (10%), healthcare (7%), retail trade (6%), manufacturing (6%), construction (5%), agriculture (4%), motor vehicle and parts dealers (4%) and wholesale trade (3%). A variety of other industries with less than a 3% share of the total portfolio comprise the remaining 6%.
The combined total of general-purpose business lending to commercial, industrial, non-profit and municipal customers, mortgages on commercial property and dealer floor plan financing is characterized as the Company’s business lending activity. The business lending portfolio increased $664.2 million, or 23.9%, in 2020 due to the origination of PPP loans and loans acquired in the Steuben transaction. As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s business lending portfolio included 3,417 PPP loans with a total balance of $470.7 million. Excluding loans from the Steuben acquisition, the portfolio increased $410.7 million, or 14.8%. The portfolio increased $378.9 million, or 15.8%, in 2019 due to loans acquired in the Kinderhook transaction and organic growth. Excluding loans from the Kinderhook acquisition, the portfolio increased $67.7 million, or 2.8%, in 2019. Highly competitive conditions for business lending continue to prevail in both the digital marketplace and geographic regions in which the Company operates. The Company strives to generate growth in its business portfolio in a manner that adheres to its goals of maintaining strong asset quality and producing profitable margins. The Company continues to invest in additional personnel, technology, and business development resources to further strengthen its capabilities in this important product category.
The following table shows the maturities and type of interest rates for business and construction loans as of December 31, 2020:
Table 9: Maturity Distribution of Business and Construction Loans (1)
(1) Scheduled repayments are reported in the maturity category in which the payment is due.
The consumer mortgage loans include no exposure to high-risk mortgage products and are comprised of fixed (99%) and adjustable rate (1%) residential lending. Consumer mortgages decreased $29.4 million, or 1.2%, in 2020, including $26.7 million of loans acquired with the Steuben acquisition and the impacts of selling $79.7 million of consumer mortgage production to the secondary market. In 2019, consumer mortgages increased $195.5 million, or 8.7%, from 2018, including $115.2 million of loans acquired with the Kinderhook acquisition. With the precipitous drop in mortgage interest rates during the latter half of the first quarter of 2020, coupled with currently strong housing prices in the Company’s primary markets, the Company experienced a large increase in mortgage refinance activity in 2020 and intense competition in the marketplace to capture this business. Interest rate levels, secondary market premiums, expected duration and ALCO strategies continue to be the most significant factors in determining whether the Company chooses to retain, versus sell and service, portions of its new mortgage production. Due to very low market interest rates and an increase in secondary market premiums for residential mortgage loans, the Company sold $79.7 million of its originations during 2020 as compared to $2.2 million of its originations during 2019. The Company is currently holding almost all of its new consumer mortgage production in portfolio due to current market conditions. Home equity loans increased $13.5 million, or 3.5%, from the end of 2019, including $39.6 million of home equity loans acquired with the Steuben transaction. The Company continues to experience paydowns in its home equity portfolio due in part to balances being rolled into re-financed first lien consumer mortgages that offer attractive attributes to customers.
Consumer installment loans, both those originated directly in the branches (referred to as “consumer direct”) and indirectly in automobile, marine, and recreational vehicle dealerships (referred to as “consumer indirect”), decreased $122.9 million, or 9.5%, from one year ago, including $19.9 million of consumer installment loans acquired with the Steuben transaction. Although the consumer indirect loan market is highly competitive, the Company is focused on maintaining a profitable, in-market and contiguous market indirect portfolio, while continuing to pursue the expansion of its dealer network. Consumer direct loans provide attractive returns, and the Company is committed to providing competitive market offerings to its customers in this important loan category. Despite the strong competition the Company faces from the financing subsidiaries of vehicle manufacturers and other financial intermediaries, the Company will continue to strive to grow these key portfolios through varying market conditions over the long term.
Due to the COVID-19 crisis’ impact on economic activity and the creation of government stimulus programs to attempt to counteract its effect, consumer liquidity has increased and demand for non-mortgage related consumer loans and credit decreased in 2020 as compared to 2019. The ultimate impact the COVID-19 pandemic will have on loan demand and the Company’s loan balances in 2021 is uncertain at this time. The Company’s business lending balances will be unfavorably impacted as first round PPP loans are forgiven by the SBA, but will benefit from the Company’s participation in the 2021 second round of PPP lending. The Company anticipates assisting the majority of the Company’s first round PPP borrowers with forgiveness requests during 2021. The longer-term implications that COVID-19 and the repayment of PPP loans will have on business lending loan demand are uncertain at this time. The amount of loans the Company will originate in conjunction with the second round of PPP lending, also known as the “Second Draw” program, is also uncertain at this time.
Asset Quality
The following table presents information regarding nonperforming assets as of December 31:
Table 10: Nonperforming Assets
The Company places a loan on nonaccrual status when the loan becomes 90 days past due, or sooner if management concludes collection of interest is doubtful, except when, in the opinion of management, it is well-collateralized and in the process of collection. As shown in Table 10 above, nonperforming loans, defined as nonaccruing loans and accruing loans 90 days or more past due, ended 2020 at $76.9 million. This represents an increase of $52.6 million from the $24.3 million in nonperforming loans at the end of 2019. During the fourth quarter of 2020, several commercial borrowers, which primarily operate in the hospitality, travel and entertainment industries, requested further extensions of existing loan repayment forbearance due to the continued pandemic-related financial hardship they were experiencing. Although the Company’s management granted these forbearance requests, it also reclassified the majority of these loan relationships from accruing to nonaccrual status, unless the borrower clearly demonstrated current repayment capacity or sufficient cash reserves to service their pre-forbearance payment obligations. Loans acquired in the Steuben acquisition attributed to $16.9 million of the increase in nonperforming loans. The ratio of nonperforming loans to total loans at December 31, 2020 increased 69 basis points from the prior year to 1.04%. The ratio of nonperforming assets (which includes other real estate owned, or “OREO”, in addition to nonperforming loans) to total loans plus OREO increased to 1.05% at year-end 2020, up 68 basis points from one year earlier. At December 31, 2020, OREO consisted of five residential properties with a total value of $0.3 million and one commercial real estate property with a total value of $0.6 million. This compares to 16 residential properties with a total value of $1.0 million and two commercial real estate properties with a total value of $0.3 million at December 31, 2019.
From a credit risk and lending perspective, the Company continues to take actions to assess and monitor its COVID-19 related credit exposures. No specific credit impairment has been identified within the Company’s investment securities portfolio, including the Company’s municipal securities portfolio since the onset of the pandemic. With respect to the Company’s lending activities, the Company continues to utilize a customer forbearance program to assist borrowers that may be experiencing financial hardship due to COVID-19 related challenges. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had 74 borrowers in forbearance due to COVID-19 related financial hardship, representing $66.5 million in outstanding loan balances, or 0.9% of total loans outstanding. This compares to 216 borrowers and $192.7 million in outstanding loan balances, or 2.6%, of total loans outstanding in forbearance at September 30, 2020 and 3,699 borrowers in forbearance at June 30, 2020, representing $704.1 million in outstanding loan balances, or 9.4% of total loans outstanding.
Consistent with industry regulatory guidance, borrowers that were otherwise current on loan payments and granted COVID-19 related financial hardship payment deferrals were reported as current loans throughout the first 180 days of the deferral period. Borrowers that were delinquent in their payments to the Bank prior to requesting a COVID-19 related financial hardship payment deferral were reviewed on a case-by-case basis for troubled debt restructure classification and nonperforming loan status.
Approximately 73% of the nonperforming loans at December 31, 2020 are related to the business lending portfolio, which is comprised of business loans broadly diversified by industry type. The level of nonperforming business loans increased from the prior year due to the continued pandemic-related financial hardship experienced by certain borrowers. During the quarter, several borrowers that operate in the hospitality, travel and entertainment industries requested extended forbearance agreements to mitigate the ongoing cash flow challenges of their businesses. Although the Company continued to accommodate reasonable forbearance requests for these borrowers, the Company determined that loans subject to a third forbearance would be classified as nonaccrual unless the borrower could demonstrate current cash flows or payment reserves to service their pre-forbearance payment obligations. Approximately 23% of nonperforming loans at December 31, 2020 are related to the consumer mortgage portfolio. Collateral values of residential properties within the Company’s market area have generally remained stable over the past several years. Additionally, strong economic conditions prior to COVID-19, including lower unemployment levels, positively impacted consumers and had resulted in more favorable nonperforming consumer mortgage ratios. Economic conditions impacted by COVID-19, including increased unemployment rates, travel restrictions, and state government shutdowns of business activities, as well as COVID-19 related delays in foreclosure processes have caused a modest increase in nonperforming loans in the consumer mortgage portfolio. The Company will continue to monitor the impact that weak economic conditions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic could have on its level of delinquent loans, nonperforming assets and ultimately credit-related losses. The remaining 4% percent of nonperforming loans relate to consumer installment and home equity loans, with home equity non-performing loan levels being driven by the same factors identified for consumer mortgages. The allowance for credit losses to nonperforming loans ratio, a general measure of coverage adequacy, was 79% at the end of 2020 compared to 206% at year-end 2019 and 197% at December 31, 2018. It is expected that this ratio will return to levels more in line with long-term historical results when remaining COVID-19 restrictions are eventually lifted and economic and business performance transition back to a state more consistent with pre-pandemic conditions.
The Company’s senior management, special asset officers and lenders review all delinquent and nonaccrual loans and OREO regularly in order to identify deteriorating situations, monitor known problem credits and discuss any needed changes to collection efforts, if warranted. Based on the group’s consensus, a relationship may be assigned a special assets officer or other senior lending officer to review the loan, meet with the borrowers, assess the collateral and recommend an action plan. This plan could include foreclosure, restructuring loans, issuing demand letters or other actions. The Company’s larger criticized credits are also reviewed on a quarterly basis by senior credit administration management, special assets officers and commercial lending management to monitor their status and discuss relationship management plans. Commercial lending management reviews the criticized business loan portfolio on a monthly basis.
Total delinquencies, defined as loans 30 days or more past due or in nonaccrual status, finished the current year at 1.50% of total loans outstanding, compared to 0.94% at the end of 2019, driven primarily by the aforementioned pandemic-related hardship experienced by certain loan customers. Consistent with industry regulatory guidance, borrowers that were otherwise current on loan payments and granted COVID-19 related financial hardship payment deferrals were reported as current loans throughout the first 180 days of the deferral period and this arrangement expired for most deferrals in the third quarter of 2020. As of year-end 2020, delinquency ratios for business lending, consumer installment loans, consumer mortgages and home equity loans were 1.76%, 1.24%, 1.30%, and 1.28%, respectively. These ratios compare to the year-end 2019 delinquency rates for business lending, consumer installment loans, consumer mortgages and home equity loans of 0.69%, 1.12%, 1.10%, and 1.21%, respectively. Delinquency levels, particularly in the 30 to 89 days category, tend to be somewhat volatile due to their measurement at a point in time, and therefore management believes that it is useful to evaluate this ratio over a longer time period. The average quarter-end delinquency ratio for total loans in 2020 was 1.03%, as compared to an average of 0.89% in 2019, and 0.96% in 2018, reflective of the adverse impact that COVID-19 had on certain customers in 2020. It is expected that the Company’s continued focus on maintaining strict underwriting standards and the effective utilization of its collection capabilities will enable the Company to bring delinquency levels back down to levels more consistent with pre-pandemic levels as economic conditions gradually improve. 
Loans are considered modified in a troubled debt restructuring (“TDR”) when, due to a borrower’s financial difficulties, the Company makes one or more concessions to the borrower that it would not otherwise consider. These modifications primarily include, among others, an extension of the term of the loan or granting a period with reduced or no principal and/or interest payments, which can be recaptured through payments made over the remaining term of the loan or at maturity. Historically, the Company has created very few TDRs. Regulatory guidance by the OCC requires certain loans that have been discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy to be reported as TDRs. In accordance with this guidance, loans that have been discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy but not reaffirmed by the borrower are classified as TDRs, irrespective of payment history or delinquency status, even if the repayment terms for the loan have not been otherwise modified and the Company’s lien position against the underlying collateral remains unchanged. Pursuant to that guidance, the Company records a charge-off equal to any portion of the carrying value that exceeds the assessed net realizable value of the collateral. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had 73 loans totaling $3.2 million considered to be nonaccruing TDRs and 174 loans totaling $3.8 million considered to be accruing TDRs. This compares to 80 loans totaling $3.6 million considered to be nonaccruing TDRs and 168 loans totaling $3.4 million considered to be accruing TDRs at December 31, 2019. Consistent with industry regulatory guidance, borrowers that were otherwise current on loan payments and granted COVID-19 related financial hardship payment deferrals were reported as current loans throughout the first 180 days of the deferral period and were not classified as TDRs. Borrowers that were delinquent in their payments to the Bank prior to requesting a COVID-19 related financial hardship payment deferral were reviewed on a case-by-case basis for TDR classification and nonperforming loan status.
While the Company will continue to adapt to changing economic and market conditions and remain very focused on asset quality, the Company expects that the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to negatively impact business activity and employment levels and continue to adversely affect certain borrower’s ability to service debt and may increase loan delinquency, nonaccrual and credit loss levels in 2021. Additionally, the Company anticipates that the number and amount of COVID-19 financial hardship forbearance agreements will decrease during 2021, which may increase loan delinquency and nonperforming loan levels as the status of some of the borrowers could change after deferment expires. The customers that were otherwise current on loan payments and were granted COVID-19 related financial hardship payment deferrals had been reported as current loans throughout the first two agreed upon deferral periods. Their credit classification will change after their second deferment period ends if they are not able to meet their contractual obligations.
The changes in the allowance for credit losses for the last five years are as follows:
Table 11: Allowance for Credit Losses Activity
As displayed in Table 11 above, total net charge-offs in 2020 were $5.0 million, $2.8 million less than the prior year due to a decrease in net charge-offs in all five of the Company’s portfolios. Net charge-offs in 2019 were $1.3 million less than 2018 due to a decrease in net charge-offs in the business lending, consumer indirect and home equity portfolios, partially offset by an increase in net charge-offs in the consumer mortgage and consumer direct portfolios.
Due to the significant increases in average loan balances over time as a result of acquisitions and organic growth, management believes that net charge-offs as a percent of average loans (“net charge-off ratio”) offers the most meaningful representation of charge-off trends. The total net charge-off ratio of 0.07% for 2020 was five basis points lower than the 0.12% ratio from 2019, and eight basis points lower than the 0.15% ratio from 2018. Gross charge-offs as a percentage of average loans was 0.15% in 2020, as compared to 0.21% in 2019, and 0.25% in 2018, evidence of management’s continued focus on maintaining strict underwriting standards. Recoveries were $5.7 million in 2020, representing 47% of average gross charge-offs for the latest two years, compared to 41% in 2019 and 39% in 2018, reflective of relatively strong price levels for real estate and automobiles in 2020 and the continued effectiveness of the Company’s repossession and disposition capabilities.
Business loan net charge-offs decreased in 2020, totaling $0.8 million, or 0.02% of average business loans outstanding, compared to $1.5 million, or 0.06% of the average outstanding balance in 2019. Consumer installment loan net charge-offs decreased to $3.3 million this year from $4.7 million in 2019, with a net charge-off ratio of 0.27% in 2020 and 0.37% in 2019. The dollar amount of consumer mortgage net charge-offs decreased to $0.7 million in 2020 compared to $1.3 million in 2019, with a net charge-off ratio of 0.03% in 2020 compared to 0.06% in 2019. Home equity net charge-offs of $0.2 million decreased $0.1 million in 2020 and the net charge-off ratio decreased four basis points to 0.04%.
Management continually evaluates the credit quality of the Company’s loan portfolio and conducts a formal review of the adequacy of the allowance for credit losses on a quarterly basis. The two primary components of the loan review process that are used to determine proper allowance levels are specific and general loan loss allocations. Measurement of specific loan loss allocations is typically based on expected future cash flows, collateral values and other factors that may impact the borrower’s ability to repay. Impaired loans with outstanding balances that are greater than $0.5 million are evaluated for specific loan loss allocations. Consumer mortgages, consumer installment and home equity loans are considered smaller balance homogeneous loans and are evaluated collectively. The Company considers a loan to be impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that the Company will be unable to collect all principal and interest according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement or the loan is delinquent 90 days or more.
The second component of the allowance establishment process, general loan loss allocations, is estimated using relevant available information, from internal and external sources, relating to past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. Historical credit loss experience provides the basis for the estimation of expected credit losses. Adjustments are made for differences in current loan-specific risk characteristics such as differences in underwriting standards, portfolio mix, acquired loans, delinquency levels, risk ratings or term of loans as well as changes in macroeconomic conditions, such as recent and projected unemployment rates and other relevant factors. The segments of the Company’s loan portfolio are disaggregated into classes that allow management to monitor risk and performance. The allowance for credit losses is measured on a collective (pool) basis when similar risk characteristics exist, including customer channel, collateral type, credit ratings/scores, origination vintage and payment structure. In addition to these risk characteristics, the Company considers the portion of acquired loans to the overall segment balance, the change in the volume and terms of originations, differences between the losses incurred in the period used for quantitative modeling and a longer timeframe that includes the previous recession, as well as recent delinquency, charge-off and risk rating trends compared to historical time periods. The Company measures the allowance for credit losses using either the cumulative loss rate method, the line loss method, or the vintage loss rate method, dependent on the loan portfolio class. The allowance levels computed from the specific and general loan loss allocation methods are combined with unallocated allowances, if any, to derive the required allowance for credit losses to be reflected on the Consolidated Statement of Condition.
The provision for credit losses is calculated by subtracting the previous period allowance for credit losses, net of the interim period net charge-offs, from the current required allowance level. This provision is then recorded in the income statement for that period. Members of senior management and the Audit and Compliance Committee of the Board of Directors (“Audit Committee”) review the adequacy of the allowance for credit losses quarterly. Management is committed to continually improving the credit assessment and risk management capabilities of the Company and has dedicated the resources necessary to ensure advancement in this critical area of operations.
Acquired loans are reviewed at their acquisition date to determine whether they have experienced a more-than-insignificant credit deterioration since origination. Loans that meet that definition according to the Company’s policy are referred to as purchased credit deteriorated (“PCD”) loans. PCD loans are initially recorded at the amount paid. An allowance for credit losses is determined using the same methodology as other loans. The initial allowance for credit losses determined on a collective basis is allocated to individual loans. The sum of the loan’s purchase price and allowance for credit losses becomes its initial amortized cost basis. The difference between the initial amortized cost basis and the par value of the loan is a noncredit discount or premium, which is amortized into interest income over the life of the loan. Subsequent changes to the allowance for credit losses are recorded as provision for (or reversal of) credit losses. During 2020, the Company recorded $0.7 million of initial allowance for credit losses on PCD loans from the Steuben acquisition.
For acquired loans that are not deemed PCD at acquisition (non-PCD), a fair value adjustment is recorded that includes both credit and interest rate considerations. A provision for credit losses is also recorded at acquisition for the credit considerations on non-PCD loans. Subsequent to the purchase date, the methods utilized to estimate the required allowance for credit losses for these loans are the same as originated loans and subsequent changes to the allowance for credit losses are recorded as provision for (or reversal of) credit losses. During 2020, the Company recorded $3.0 million of initial acquisition-related provision for credit losses related to loans from the Steuben acquisition.
As of December 31, 2020, the net purchase discount related to the $1.37 billion of remaining non-PCD loan balances acquired from Steuben Trust Company in 2020, The National Union Bank of Kinderhook in 2019, Merchants Bank in 2017, Oneida Savings Bank in 2015, HSBC Bank USA, N.A. in 2012, First Niagara Bank, N.A. in 2012, and Wilber National Bank in 2011 was approximately $12.0 million, or 0.87% of that portfolio.
The allowance for credit losses increased to $60.9 million at the end of 2020 from $49.9 million as of year-end 2019. The $11.0 million increase was driven by a $10.9 million non-acquisition-related provision for credit losses related to loans, $2.5 million higher than the prior year, primarily due to the deterioration of economic conditions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, including increased unemployment rates and their potential impact on future credit losses, $3.0 million of acquisition-related provision for credit losses related to loans from the Steuben acquisition, a $1.4 million increase due to the implementation of CECL, a $0.7 million increase due to allowance for credit losses recorded on PCD loans acquired in the Steuben acquisition, partially offset by $5.0 million of net charge-offs.
During the first two quarters of 2020, financial conditions deteriorated rapidly as state and local governments shut down a substantial portion of business activities in the Company’s markets and unemployment levels spiked. These conditions drove the Company to build its allowance for credit losses during the first two quarters of 2020 to account for expected life of loan losses in the loan portfolio. During the third quarter, the economic outlook remained unclear as markets were uncertain as to the efficacy, approval and roll-out of a COVID-19 vaccine and the Company continued to build its allowance for credit losses. During the fourth quarter, with a greater than anticipated decline in actual unemployment levels, as well as the Federal Government’s approval of a COVID-19 vaccine and Congress’ approval of additional federal stimulus funding, the near-term economic forecast improved significantly driving an improvement in the economic outlook and as a result, a reduction in the Company’s allowance for credit losses during the fourth quarter. During the fourth quarter, the Company recorded a net benefit in the provision for credit losses driven by several factors, including a $2.0 million reversal of a previously recorded allowance for credit loss on a purchased credit deteriorated loan, a significant improvement in the economic outlook and a substantial decrease in loans under COVID-19 related forbearance agreements, offset, in part, by a substantial, but anticipated, increase in nonperforming assets and the related specific impairment reserves on a portion of those nonperforming assets.
The ratio of the allowance for credit losses to total loans of 0.82% for year-end 2020 increased 10 basis points from the 0.72% ratio for 2019 and was up four basis points from the 0.78% ratio for 2018, due in part to the aforementioned deterioration of economic conditions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, and related increases in non-performing loan levels and the downgrade of the risk ratings on certain business loans, as well as acquired growth in the loan portfolio and the impacts of changes to the allowance methodology due to the adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020. Management believes the year-end 2020 allowance for credit losses to be adequate. The provision for credit losses as a percentage of average loans was 0.20% in 2020 as compared to 0.13% in 2019 and 0.17% in 2018. The provision for credit losses was 286% of net charge-offs this year versus 108% in 2019 and 119% in 2018.
The following table sets forth the allocation of the allowance for credit losses by loan category as of the end of the years indicated, as well as the proportional share of each category’s loan balance to total loans. This allocation is based on management’s assessment, as of a given point in time, of the risk characteristics of each of the component parts of the total loan portfolio and is subject to changes when the risk factors of each component part change. The allocation is not indicative of either the specific amounts of the loan categories in which future charge-offs may be taken, nor should it be taken as an indicator of future loss trends. The allocation of the allowance to each category does not restrict the use of the allowance to absorb losses in any category.
Table 12: Allowance for Credit Losses by Loan Type
As demonstrated in Table 12 above and discussed previously, business lending and consumer installment by their nature carry higher credit risk than residential real estate, and as a result these loans carry allowance for credit losses that cover a higher percentage of their total portfolio balances. The unallocated allowance is maintained for potential inherent losses in the specific portfolios that are not captured due to model imprecision. The unallocated allowance of $1.0 million at year-end 2020 was consistent with December 31, 2019. The changes in year-over-year allowance allocations reflect management’s continued refinement of its loss estimation techniques and changes due to the implementation of CECL. However, given the inherent imprecision in the many estimates used in the determination of the allocated portion of the allowance, management remained conservative in the approaches used to establish the overall allowance for credit losses. Management considers the allocated and unallocated portions of the allowance for credit losses to be prudent and reasonable. Furthermore, the Company’s allowance for credit losses is general in nature and is available to absorb losses from any loan category.
Since the ultimate effect the COVID-19 pandemic will have on the Company’s credit losses remains uncertain, the provision for credit losses during 2020 should not be interpreted as a trend or utilized to forecast the provision for, or reversal of, credit losses in future periods. Any improvements in the economic forecast may be offset by increases in delinquent and nonperforming loan balances and downward shifts of business risk ratings in future periods as COVID-affected borrowers may not resume full payment of contractual amounts upon expiration of their forbearance agreements.
Funding Sources
The Company utilizes a variety of funding sources to support the earning-asset base as well as to achieve targeted growth objectives. Overall funding is comprised of three primary sources that possess a variety of maturity, stability, and price characteristics; deposits of individuals, partnerships and corporations (nonpublic deposits), municipal deposits that are collateralized for amounts not covered by FDIC insurance (public funds), and external borrowings. The average daily amount of deposits and the average rate paid on each of the following deposit categories are summarized below for the years indicated:
Table 13: Average Deposits
As displayed in Table 13, average total deposits in 2020 increased $1.60 billion, or 18.3%, from the prior year comprised of a $1.51 billion, or 19.1%, increase in non-time deposits, and a $92.8 million, or 11.0%, increase in time deposits. The increase in average deposits was primarily due to large net inflows of funds from government stimulus programs and the acquisition of Steuben. The Company acquired $516.3 million of deposits from the Steuben acquisition, including $96.5 million of time deposits and $419.8 million of non-time deposits. The cost of deposits, including the impact of non-interest checking deposits, decreased seven basis points from 0.23% in 2019 to 0.16% in 2020.
Total average deposits for 2019 increased $277.1 million, or 3.3%, from 2018 comprised of a $184.9 million, or 2.4%, increase in non-time deposits, and a $92.2 million, or 12.3%, increase in time deposits. Excluding the impact of the Kinderhook acquisition, average total deposits increased $17.1 million, or 0.2%, as compared to 2018. Average non-time deposit balances, excluding deposits acquired in the Kinderhook acquisition, decreased $1.0 million as compared to 2018, and time deposits, excluding the impact of Kinderhook acquired balances, increased $18.1 million, or 2.4%. The cost of deposits, including the impact of non-interest checking deposits, increased 10 basis points from 0.13% in 2018 to 0.23% in 2019.
Nonpublic, non-time deposits are frequently considered to be a bank’s most attractive source of funding because they are generally stable, do not need to be collateralized, carry a relatively low rate, generate solid fee income, and provide a strong customer base for which a variety of loan, deposit and other financial service-related products can be cross-sold. The Company’s funding composition continues to benefit from a high level of nonpublic deposits, which reached an all-time high in 2020 with an average balance of $9.16 billion, an increase of $1.42 billion, or 18.4%, over the comparable 2019 period.
Full-year average public fund deposits increased $173.9 million, or 17.5%, during 2020 to $1.17 billion. Public fund deposit balances tend to be more volatile than nonpublic deposits because they are heavily impacted by the seasonality of tax collection and fiscal spending patterns, as well as the longer-term financial position of the local government entities, which can change from year to year. However, the Company has many strong, long-standing relationships with municipal entities throughout its markets and the diversified non-time deposits held by these customers have provided an attractive and comparatively stable funding source over an extended time period. The Company is required to collateralize local government deposits in excess of FDIC coverage with marketable securities from its investment portfolio. Due to this stipulation, as well as the competitive bidding nature of municipal time deposits, management considers this funding source to share some of the same attributes as borrowings.
The mix of average deposits is largely consistent with the prior year. Non-time deposits (noninterest checking, interest checking, savings and money markets) represent approximately 91% of the Company’s average deposit funding base, while time deposits represent approximately 9% of total average deposits. The cost of interest-bearing deposits of 0.23% in 2020 was nine basis points lower than the 0.32% cost of interest-bearing deposits in 2019. The total cost of deposit funding, which includes noninterest-bearing deposits, was 0.16% in 2020, a seven basis point decrease from the prior year.
The Company is uncertain as to whether the relatively high levels of deposits in recent periods will be maintained, spent down, or increased further by additional inflows of funds associated with COVID-19 related government stimulus funds.
The remaining maturities of time deposits in amounts of $250,000 or more outstanding as of December 31 are as follows:
Table 14: Maturity of Time Deposits $250,000 or More
Borrowing sources for the Company include the FHLB, Federal Reserve, and other correspondent banks, as well as access to the brokered CD and repurchase markets through established relationships with primary market security dealers. The Company also had $77.3 million in floating-rate subordinated debt that is held by an unconsolidated subsidiary trust and $3.3 million in fixed-rate subordinated notes acquired with the Kinderhook acquisition outstanding at the end of 2020.
As shown in Table 15, year-end 2020 borrowings totaled $371.3 million, an increase of $26.4 million from the $344.9 million outstanding at the end of 2019 primarily due to an increase in securities sold under an agreement to repurchase (“customer repurchase agreements”) and an increase in other FHLB borrowings acquired in the Steuben transaction, partially offset by the redemption of subordinated notes payable acquired in the Kinderhook transaction and a decrease in FHLB overnight borrowings. Borrowings averaged $323.9 million, or 3.0% of total funding sources for 2020, as compared to $327.1 million, or 3.6% of total funding sources for 2019. As shown in Table 16, at the end of 2020 the Company had $299.1 million, or 69% of contractual obligations, that had remaining terms of one year or less as compared to 60% of contractual obligations maturing within one year at December 31, 2019.
As displayed in Table 3 on page 43, the percentage of funding from deposits in 2020 was slightly higher than the level in 2019 primarily due to the large net inflows of funds from government stimulus programs and the acquisition of Steuben. The percentage of average funding derived from deposits was 97.0% in 2020 as compared to 96.4% in 2019 and 95.4% in 2018. During 2020, average deposits increased 18.3%, while average borrowings decreased 1.0%.
The following table summarizes the outstanding balance of borrowings of the Company as of December 31:
Table 15: Borrowings
(1) Subordinated notes payable for 2020 includes $3.0 million in principal and $0.3 million related to a purchase accounting fair value adjustment and 2019 includes $13.0 million in principal and $0.8 million related to a purchase accounting fair value adjustment.
The following table shows the contractual maturities of various obligations as of December 31, 2020:
Table 16: Maturities of Contractual Obligations
Financial Instruments with Off-Balance Sheet Risk
The Company is a party to financial instruments with off-balance-sheet risk in the normal course of business to meet the financing needs of its customers. These financial instruments consist primarily of commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit. Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to customers, generally having fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses that may require payment of a fee. These commitments consist principally of unused commercial and consumer credit lines. Standby letters of credit generally are contingent upon the failure of the customer to perform according to the terms of an underlying contract with a third party. The credit risks associated with commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit are essentially the same as that involved with extending loans to customers and are subject to normal credit policies. Collateral may be required based on management’s assessment of the customer’s creditworthiness. The fair value of the standby letters of credit is considered immaterial for disclosure purposes.
The contractual amounts of these off-balance sheet financial instruments as of December 31 were as follows:
Table 17: Off-Balance Sheet Financial Instruments
Investments
The objective of the Company’s investment portfolio is to hold low-risk, high-quality earning assets that provide favorable returns and provide another effective tool to actively manage its earning asset/funding liability position in order to maximize future net interest income opportunities. This must be accomplished within the following constraints: (a) implementing certain interest rate risk management strategies which achieve a relatively stable level of net interest income; (b) providing both the regulatory and operational liquidity necessary to conduct day-to-day business activities; (c) considering investment risk-weights as determined by the regulatory risk-based capital guidelines; and (d) generating a favorable return without undue compromise of the other requirements.
The carrying value of the Company’s investment portfolio ended 2020 at $3.60 billion, an increase of $507.0 million, or 16.4%, from the end of 2019. The book value (excluding unrealized gains and losses) of the portfolio increased $419.8 million from December 31, 2019. The unrealized gain on the portfolio was $121.1 million as of December 31, 2020. During 2020, the Company purchased $984.2 million of U.S. Treasury and agency securities with an average yield of 1.38%, $116.3 million of government agency mortgage-backed securities with an average yield of 1.97%, $11.3 million of obligations of state and political subdivisions with an average yield of 3.37% and $3.0 million of corporate debt securities with an average yield of 5.38%. The Company also acquired $179.7 million of available-for-sale securities and $0.8 million of equity and other securities as part of the Steuben transaction. These additions were offset by $886.1 million of investment maturities, calls, and principal payments in 2020. The effective duration of the securities portfolio was 7.7 years at the end of 2020, as compared to 4.3 years at year end 2019.
The carrying value of the Company’s investment portfolio increased $106.7 million during 2019 to end the year at $3.09 billion. The book value of the portfolio increased $57.6 million from December 31, 2018. The unrealized gain on the portfolio was $33.8 million as of December 31, 2019. During 2019, the Company purchased $98.6 million of government agency mortgage-backed securities with an average yield of 2.93%, $111.3 million of obligations of state and political subdivisions with an average fully tax-equivalent yield of 3.31%, $542.2 million in U.S. Treasury securities with an average yield of 1.98% and $58.0 million in U.S. agency securities with an average yield of 2.40%. The Company also acquired $37.7 million of available-for-sale securities and $2.1 million of equity and other securities as part of the Kinderhook transaction. These additions were offset by $209.9 million of investment maturities, calls, and principal payments in 2019, and the sale of $590.2 million of available-for-sale Treasury securities with a remaining maturity of less than five years and a 2.09% yield to maturity. The sale of investment securities in the second quarter of 2019 resulted in a $4.9 million net realized gain.
The investment portfolio has limited credit risk due to the composition continuing to heavily favor U.S. Treasury debentures, U.S. Agency mortgage-backed pass-throughs (MBS), U.S. Agency collateralized mortgage obligations (CMOs) and municipal bonds. The U.S. Treasury debentures, U.S. Agency mortgage-backed pass-throughs and U.S. Agency CMOs are all rated AAA (highest possible rating) by Moody’s and AA+ by Standard and Poor’s. The majority of the municipal bonds are rated A or higher. The portfolio does not include any private label MBS or private label CMOs. The overall mix of securities within the portfolio over the last year has changed modestly, with an increase in the proportion of U.S. Treasury and agency securities, government agency MBS, corporate debt and equity securities, while the proportion of obligations of state and political subdivisions and government agency CMOs decreased.
The net unrealized market value gain on the investment portfolio as of December 31, 2020 was $121.1 million, as compared to an unrealized gain of $33.8 million one year earlier. This increase is indicative of interest rate movements over the period and modest changes in the composition of the portfolio.
The following table sets forth the amortized cost and market value for the Company's investment securities portfolio:
Table 18: Investment Securities
The following table sets forth as of December 31, 2020, the maturities of investment debt securities and the weighted-average yields of such securities, which have been calculated on the cost basis, weighted for scheduled maturity of each security:
Table 19: Maturities of Investment Debt Securities
(1) Weighted-average yields are an arithmetic computation of income (not fully tax-equivalent adjusted) divided by book balance; they may differ from the yield to maturity, which considers the time value of money.
(2) Mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations are listed based on the contractual maturity. Actual maturities will differ from contractual maturities because borrowers may have the right to call or prepay certain obligations with or without penalties.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
The Company’s financial statements have been prepared in terms of historical dollars, without considering changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. Unlike most industrial companies, virtually all of the assets and liabilities of a financial institution are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates have a more significant impact on a financial institution's performance than the effect of general levels of inflation. Interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or in the same magnitude as the prices of goods and services. Notwithstanding this, inflation can directly affect the value of loan collateral, real estate in particular.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See “New Accounting Pronouncements” Section of Note A of the notes to the consolidated financial statements on page 91 for recently issued accounting pronouncements applicable to the Company that have not yet been adopted.
Forward-Looking Statements
This report contains comments or information that constitute forward-looking statements (within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995), which involve significant risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements often use words such as “anticipate,” “could,” “target,” “expect,” “estimate,” “intend,” “plan,” “goal,” “forecast,” “believe,” or other words of similar meaning. These statements are based on the current beliefs and expectations of the Company’s management and are subject to significant risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Moreover, the Company’s plans, objectives and intentions are subject to change based on various factors (some of which are beyond the Company’s control). Factors that could cause actual results to differ from those discussed in the forward-looking statements include: (1) the macroeconomic and other challenges and uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic and related vaccine rollout and efficacy, including the negative impacts and disruptions on public health, the Company’s corporate and consumer customers, the communities the Company serves, and the domestic and global economy, which may have an adverse effect on the Company’s business; (2) current and future economic and market conditions, including the effects of declines in housing prices, high unemployment rates, U.S. fiscal debt, budget and tax matters, geopolitical matters, and any slowdown in global economic growth; (3) changes to the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”) Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”), including to the rules under which the PPP is administered, with respect to the origination, servicing, or forgiveness of PPP loans, whether now existing or originated in the future, or the terms and conditions of any guaranteed payments due to the Company from the SBA with respect to PPP loans; (4) the effect of, and changes in, monetary and fiscal policies and laws, including interest rate and other policy actions of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; (5) the effect of changes in the level of checking or savings account deposits on the Company’s funding costs and net interest margin; (6) future provisions for credit losses on loans and debt securities; (7) changes in nonperforming assets; (8) the effect of a fall in stock market prices on the Company’s fee income businesses, including its employee benefit services, wealth management, and insurance businesses; (9) risks related to credit quality; (10) inflation, interest rate, liquidity, market and monetary fluctuations; (11) the strength of the U.S. economy in general and the strength of the local economies where the Company conducts its business; (12) the timely development of new products and services and customer perception of the overall value thereof (including features, pricing and quality) compared to competing products and services; (13) changes in consumer spending, borrowing and savings habits; (14) technological changes and implementation and financial risks associated with transitioning to new technology-based systems involving large multi-year contracts; (15) the ability of the Company to maintain the security of its financial, accounting, technology, data processing and other operating systems and facilities including the recent SolarWinds cyberattack; (16) effectiveness of the Company’s risk management processes and procedures, reliance on models which may be inaccurate or misinterpreted, the Company’s ability to manage its credit or interest rate risk, the sufficiency of its allowance for credit losses and the accuracy of the assumptions or estimates used in preparing the Company’s financial statements and disclosures; (17) failure of third parties to provide various services that are important to the Company’s operations; (18) any acquisitions or mergers that might be considered or consummated by the Company and the costs and factors associated therewith, including differences in the actual financial results of the acquisition or merger compared to expectations and the realization of anticipated cost savings and revenue enhancements; (19) the ability to maintain and increase market share and control expenses; (20) the nature, timing and effect of changes in banking regulations or other regulatory or legislative requirements affecting the respective businesses of the Company and its subsidiaries, including changes in laws and regulations concerning taxes, accounting, banking, risk management, securities and other aspects of the financial services industry, specifically the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 or those emanating from COVID-19; (21) changes in the Company’s organization, compensation and benefit plans and in the availability of, and compensation levels for, employees in its geographic markets; (22) the outcome of pending or future litigation and government proceedings; (23) other risk factors outlined in the Company’s filings with the SEC from time to time; and (24) the success of the Company at managing the risks of the foregoing.
The foregoing list of important factors is not all-inclusive. For more information about factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the Company’s expectations, refer to “Item 1A Risk Factors” above. Any forward-looking statements speak only as of the date on which they are made and the Company does not undertake any obligation to update any forward-looking statement, whether written or oral, to reflect events or circumstances after the date on which such statement is made. If the Company does update or correct one or more forward-looking statements, investors and others should not conclude that the Company will make additional updates or corrections with respect thereto or with respect to other forward-looking statements.
Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measures
Table 20: GAAP to Non-GAAP Reconciliations