ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on July 3, 2020 as a Cayman Islands exempted company for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. We intend to effectuate our initial Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of our Initial Public Offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, equity and debt.
For the period from July 3, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020 we incurred approximately $514,000 in the pursuit of our acquisition plans and approximately $528,000 of other operating and formation expenses. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On January 19, 2021, we entered into a convertible promissory note with the sponsor pursuant to which the sponsor agreed to loan us up to an aggregate principal amount of $2,000,000 (the “Convertible Promissory Note”). The Convertible Promissory Note is non-interest bearing and due on the date on which we consummate a Business Combination. If we do not consummate a Business Combination, we may use a portion of any funds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Convertible Promissory Note; however, no proceeds from the Trust Account may be used for such repayment. If such funds are insufficient to repay the Promissory Note, the unpaid amounts would be forgiven. Up to $2,000,000 of the Convertible Promissory Note may be converted into warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the sponsor. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
Merger Agreement
On February 2, 2021, the Company, Chariot Merger Sub, and CCC entered into the Business Combination Agreement, pursuant to which on the closing date, among other things and subject to the terms and conditions contained therein:
(i) the Domestication will occur, and, in connection with the Domestication, (A) the Company’s name will be changed as determined by CCC in its sole discretion, (B) each outstanding Class A ordinary share of Dragoneer and each outstanding Class B ordinary share of the Company will become one share of Dragoneer Common Stock, and (C) each outstanding warrant of Dragoneer will become one warrant to purchase one share of Dragoneer Common Stock; and
(ii) the Merger.
In accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions of the Business Combination Agreement, all outstanding shares, together with all outstanding equity awards, of CCC will be exchanged for shares of Dragoneer Common Stock or comparable equity awards that are settled or are exercisable for shares of Dragoneer Common Stock, as applicable, based on an implied CCC equity value of $5,740,750,000, subject to adjustment in accordance with the Business Combination Agreement. Additionally, the current CCC equityholders and the sponsor each have an earn out tied to the trading price of shares of the combined company after the closing of the Merger.
Under the Business Combination Agreement, the obligations of the parties to consummate the transactions contemplated thereby are subject to a number of closing conditions, including, but not limited to, (i) the expiration or termination of the applicable waiting period under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976, as amended, (ii) the approval of the Company’s shareholders, (iii) the approval of CCC’s shareholders and (iv) the Company having at least $5,000,001 of net tangible assets (as determined in accordance with Rule 3a51-1(g)(1) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended) remaining after the closing of the Proposed Business Combination.
In addition, the obligation of CCC to consummate the Proposed Business Combination is subject to the fulfillment of other closing conditions, including, but not limited to, (i) the aggregate cash proceeds from the Company’s trust account equaling no less than $207,000,000 (after deducting any amounts paid to the Company’s shareholders that exercise their redemption rights in connection with the Proposed Business Combination and net of the Company’s unpaid transaction expenses and the Company’s unpaid liabilities), (ii) the approval by the NYSE of the Company’s initial listing application in connection with the Proposed Business Combination, (iii) the aggregate cash proceeds from the Company’s forward purchase agreements equaling no less than $175,000,000, at least $150,000,000 of which shall be provided by the sponsor, (iv) the consummation of the Domestication and (v) the Company having made all necessary arrangements to cause the trustee to release the funds from the Company’s trust account available to the Company.
The Business Combination Agreement may be terminated at any time prior to the closing of the Proposed Business Combination by mutual written consent of the Company and CCC and, among other things, if the Proposed Business Combination is not consummated by August 2, 2021. As such, the closing of the Proposed Business Combination cannot be assured.
Concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, the Company entered into the following agreements:
•
Transaction Support Agreements, pursuant to which the CCC shareholders agreed to, among other things, vote in favor of the Business Combination Agreement and the Proposed Business Combination and to be bound by certain other covenants and agreements related to the Proposed Business Combination;
•
An Amended and Restated Registration and Shareholder Rights Agreement, pursuant to which certain shareholders of CCC and our sponsor were provided with certain governance and board nomination rights;
•
Subscription Agreements with the Investors, pursuant to which, among other things, the Investors agreed to the Pipe Financing; and
•
A Sponsor Letter Agreement with the holders of the Company’s Class B ordinary shares, including our sponsor, pursuant to which such holders agreed to, among other things, (i) vote in favor of the Business Combination Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby (including the Merger), (ii) waive any adjustment to the conversion ratio set forth in the governing documents of the Company or any other anti-dilution or similar protection with respect to the Class B ordinary shares (whether resulting from the transactions contemplated by the Subscription Agreements or otherwise), (iii) be bound by certain other covenants and agreements related to the Proposed Business Combination and (iv) be bound by certain transfer restrictions with respect to their shares in the Company prior to the closing of the Proposed Business Combination, in each case, on the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the Sponsor Letter Agreement. Additionally, pursuant to the Sponsor Letter Agreement, the holders of Class B common stock have agreed that, if the earn out conditions have not been satisfied before the tenth anniversary of the Closing (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement), the portion of the Company’s shares subject to such earn out, and any dividends that have been paid in respect thereof (which will be retained by the Company and be paid to the holders of Class B common stock only if and when the earn out conditions are satisfied), will automatically be forfeited to the Company on the tenth anniversary of the Closing (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement).
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception to December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a Business Combination and activities in connection with the proposed acquisition of CCC. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We may generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing a Business Combination.
For the period from July 3, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,042,637, which consisted of approximately $514,000 of expenses associated with our acquisition plans and approximately $528,000 of other operating and formation expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On August 18, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 69,000,000 Units, which included the full exercise by the underwriters of the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 9,000,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $690,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of an aggregate of 15,800,000 Private Placement Warrants to our sponsor at a price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $15,800,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $690,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $38,924,273 in transaction costs, including $13,800,000 of underwriting fees, $24,150,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $974,273 of other offering costs in connection with the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants.
For the period from July 3, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $11,800. The net loss of $1,042,637 was impacted by the payment of formation costs through the issuance of Class B ordinary shares to the sponsor in the amount of $5,000 and operating expenses in the amount of $32,075 paid through advances from an affiliate of our sponsor. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $993,762 of cash from operating activities.
At December 31, 2020, we had cash held in the Trust Account of $690,000,000. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less taxes payable (if applicable) and deferred underwriting commissions) and the proceeds from the sale of the forward purchase units to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our shares or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the post-Business Combination entity, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
At December 31, 2020, we had cash of $605,009 held outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, properties or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $2,000,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender.
On January 19, 2021, we entered into a Convertible Promissory Note with the Sponsor pursuant to which the Sponsor agreed to loan us up to an aggregate principal amount of $2,000,000.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating and consummating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than as described below.
We have an agreement to pay the underwriters a deferred fee of $24,150,000 in the aggregate, which will become payable to them from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
We entered into a forward purchase agreements which provides for the purchase by each of Dragoneer Funding LLC (“Dragoneer Funding”) and entities managed by or associated with Willett Advisors LLC (the “Willett Purchasers”) of up to an aggregate of 17,500,000 units (the “forward purchase units”), with each unit consisting of one Class A ordinary share and one-fifth of one warrant to purchase one Class A ordinary share for $10.00 per unit, or $175,000,000 in the aggregate, in a private placement to close substantially concurrently with the closing of our initial Business Combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income per ordinary share, basic and diluted for Class A redeemable ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account by the weighted average number of Class A redeemable ordinary shares outstanding since original issuance. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for Class B non-redeemable ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the net income (loss), less income attributable to Class A redeemable ordinary shares, by the weighted average number of Class B non-redeemable ordinary shares outstanding for the periods presented.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.