ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations of the Company for the two years ended November 30, 2020, should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes as well as other information contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This section of the Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements that involve substantial risks and uncertainties, such as statements about our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. We use words such as “expect”, “anticipate”, “plan”, “believe”, “seek”, “estimate”, “intend”, “future” and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements for many reasons. You are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date of this Form 10-K.
Overview
The Company is engaged in cellular processing and cryogenic storage, with a current focus on the collection and preservation of umbilical cord blood stem cells for family use. The Company’s principal sources of revenues are service fees for cord blood processing and preservation for new customers and recurring annual storage fees. Effective April 2016, the Company offers two pricing models, a standard plan and premium plan. The Company charges fees of $1,675 for the standard plan and $2,025 for the premium plan to new clients for the collection kit, processing, testing and return medical courier service, with discounts in the case of multiple children from the same family and in other circumstances. The Company charges an annual storage fee of $175 for new clients that enroll in the standard and premium plans; storage fees for existing customers depend on the contracts with such customers. The Company continues to offer a one-time payment plan for 18 years of storage and a lifetime payment plan, pursuant to which the client is charged $4,650 for the standard plan and $5,000 for the premium plan and approximately $5,800 for the standard plan and approximately $6,100 for the premium plan, respectively, less discounts in the case of multiple children from the same family and in other circumstances. The one-time plan includes the collection kit, processing and testing, return medical courier service and 18 years of prepaid storage fees. The lifetime plan includes the collection kit, processing and testing, return medical courier service and prepaid storage fees for the life of the client. The Company also receives other income from licensing fees and royalties from global affiliates.
On June 11, 2018, Cryo-Cell completed its acquisition of substantially all of the assets (the “Cord Purchase”) of Cord:Use Cord Blood Bank, Inc., a Florida corporation (“Cord:Use”), in accordance with the definitive Asset Purchase Agreement between Cryo-Cell and Cord:Use (the “Purchase Agreement”), including without limitation Cord:Use’s inventory of public cord blood units existing as of the closing date (the “Public Cord Blood Inventory”) and Cord:Use’s shares of common stock of Tianhe Stem Cell Biotechnologies, Inc., an Illinois corporation (the “Tianhe Capital Stock”). Cord:Use was in the business of public and private cord blood and tissue, collection, processing, storage and banking. The aggregate consideration payable at closing under the Purchase Agreement was $14,000,000, with $10,500,000 paid in cash and the balance paid through the delivery to Seller of 465,426 shares of Cryo-Cell’s common stock, par value $0.01 per share (“Common Stock”), at $7.52 per share. In addition, Cryo-Cell assumed certain limited liabilities incurred by Cord:Use in connection with its business that were unpaid as of the closing date and that directly relate to the services to be provided after closing by Cryo-Cell. Cryo-Cell also assumed certain of Cord:Use’s contracts and the obligations arising therefrom after the closing. Additionally, Cord:Use is entitled to an earnout from Cryo-Cell’s sale of the Public Cord Blood Inventory from and after closing. Each calendar year after the closing, Cryo-Cell is required to pay to Cord:Use 75% of all gross revenues, net of any returns, received from the sale of public cord blood inventory in excess of $500,000. Such payments are to be made quarterly, within 30 days of the end of the last month of each calendar quarter, until the public cord blood inventory is exhausted. In addition, each calendar year after closing, until the public cord blood inventory is exhausted, for every $500,000 of retained gross revenues, net of any returns, received and retained by Cryo-Cell in excess of the initial $500,000 retained by Cryo-Cell during such year,
Cryo-Cell is to deliver $200,000 worth of Cryo-Cell Common stock to Cord:Use, up to an aggregate value of $5,000,000. Cord:Use is also entitled to a portion of the gross profits generated, or deemed to have been generated, by Cryo-Cell from its ownership of the Tianhe Capital Stock.
During the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020, the Company’s total revenue decreased 2% as compared to fiscal 2019. The Company reported net income of approximately $3,625,000, or $0.48 per basic common share and $0.45 per diluted share for fiscal 2020 compared to net income of approximately $2,291,000, or $0.29 per basic and $0.27 per diluted common share for fiscal 2019. Net income for the twelve months ended November 30, 2020 principally resulted from 4% decrease in cost of sales, a 4% decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses, a 161% decrease in the Contingent Consideration (described below) and by a 2% decrease in revenue. Also included in the net income for the twelve months ended November 30, 2020 and November 30, 2019 was an impairment charge of $1,284,238 and $2,332,763, respectively. Due to changes in sales trends and estimated recoverability of cost capitalized into inventory, an impairment charge was recognized during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 and the second quarter of fiscal 2019, respectively, to reduce inventory from cost to net realizable value.
As of November 30, 2020, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $10,361,125. The Company’s cash increased by approximately $3,800,000 during fiscal 2020. Cash provided by operations was approximately $8,467,000 and cash provided due to the liquidation of marketable securities was $807,447 (see Note 1), which were offset by approximately $100,000 used for the purchase of property and equipment, $350,000 paid to Duke as part of the Patent Option Agreement (see Note 19), $1,900,000 toward the termination of a revenue sharing agreement (see Note 14) and approximately $3,100,000 used to repay the note payable with Texas Capital Bank (see Note 4).
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared a pandemic related to the rapidly spreading coronavirus (“COVID-19”) outbreak. The Company faces various risks related to health epidemics, pandemics and similar outbreaks, including the global outbreak of COVID-19. The Company believes it has taken appropriate steps to minimize the risk to our employees and to maintain normal business operations and continues to actively monitor the global outbreak and spread of COVID-19 and continues to take steps to mitigate the potential risks to us posed by its spread and related circumstances and impacts. Due to the change in consumer buying patterns as a result of COVID-19, the Company has experienced a decline in new client sales resulting in a decrease in revenues in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. While the ultimate health and economic impact of COVID-19 remains highly uncertain, we expect that our business operations and results of operations, including our net sales, earnings and cash flows, may continue to be impacted by decreases in new client sales. We cannot predict the timing and speed of the recovery, and any delay in the recovery could significantly impact our future results.
Consistent with its fiduciary duties, the board of directors and management has reviewed and will continue to review strategic options and opportunities for the Company, in order to maximize shareholder value. These options may include, but are not limited to, strategic mergers or acquisitions, investments in other public and/or private companies, repurchases of RSA interests, a deregistration of the Company's common stock under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 or a going-private transaction. These options may or may not be related to the Company’s current business. In order to undertake any of the aforementioned activities, the Company may take on substantial debt or equity capital which could increase the risk of investment in the Company.
Results of Operations
Revenue. For the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020, the Company had revenue of $31,147,593 compared to $31,816,571 for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2019. The 2% decrease in revenue was primarily attributable to a 1% decrease in processing and storage fees and a 37% decrease in licensee income.
Processing and Storage Fees. For the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020, processing and storage fees were $29,547,150 compared to $29,991,972 for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2019. Processing and storage fee revenue is attributable to an 8% increase in recurring annual storage fee revenue offset by a 10% decrease in the number of new domestic cord blood specimens processed in fiscal 2020 versus fiscal 2019.
Product Revenue. For the twelve months ended November 30, 2020, revenue from the product sales was $244,187 compared to $172,395 for the twelve months ended November 30, 2019.
Public Cord Blood Banking Revenue. For the twelve months ended November 30, 2020, revenue from the public cord blood banking sales was $726,554 compared to $652,204 for the twelve months ended November 30, 2019.
Licensee Income. For the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020, licensee income was $629,702 as compared to $1,000,000 for fiscal 2019. Licensee income for the twelve months ended November 30, 2020 and November 30, 2019 consists of royalty income earned on the processing and storage of cord blood stem cell specimens in India where the Company has a definitive License and Royalty Agreement.
Per the License and Royalty Agreement with LifeCell, there is a $1,000,000 cap on the amount of royalties due to the Company per year and a $10,000,000 cap on the amount of royalties due to the Company for the term of the License and Royalty Agreement. The cap(s) are calculated based on LifeCell’s fiscal year end, March 31st. As of the end of the Company’s fiscal year ended November 30, 2020, the Company had reached the $10,000,000 cap and recorded the remaining $629,702 due. As of the end of the Company’s fiscal year ended November 30, 2019, LifeCell had reached the $1,000,000 cap. Since inception of the License and Royalty Agreement, the Company has recorded $10,000,000 in royalty income due under the terms of the License and Royalty Agreement, of which, LifeCell has paid the Company $8,900,000 as of November 30, 2020. The balance of $1,100,000 is reflected as Accounts Receivable on the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
Cost of Sales. For the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020, cost of sales was $9,657,442, as compared to $10,036,175 for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2019, representing a 4% decrease. Cost of sales includes wages and supplies associated with process enhancements to the existing production procedures and quality systems in the processing of cord blood specimens at the Company’s facility in Oldsmar, Florida and depreciation expense of $205,893 for the year ended November 30, 2020 compared to $195,073 for the 2019 period. Also, included in Cost of Sales is $156,110 and $249,847 related to the costs associated with production of the PrepaCyte CB processing and storage system for the twelve months ended November 30, 2020 and November 30, 2019, respectively. Also included in Cost of Sales is $1,811,723 and $1,295,864 for the twelve months ended November 30, 2020 and November 30, 2019, respectively, related to the public banking due to the Purchase Agreement with Cord:Use. The decrease in cost of sales for the twelve months ended November 30, 2020 versus November 30, 2019 is due to the decrease in the number of new domestic cord blood specimens processed during the twelve months ended November 30, 2020 versus November 30, 2019 which is offset by the increase in costs due to the public cord blood bank.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses during the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020 were $14,294,233 as compared to $14,891,462 for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2019 representing a 4% decrease. These expenses are primarily comprised of selling and marketing expenses, salaries and wages for personnel and professional fees.
Research, Development and Related Engineering Expenses. Research, development and related engineering expenses for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020, were $23,851 as compared to $30,145 in 2019.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization (not included in Cost of Sales) for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020 was $166,437 compared to $206,238 for fiscal 2019.
Change in the Fair Value of Contingent Consideration. Change in the fair value of the contingent consideration for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020 was $1,940,205 compared to $742,918 for fiscal 2019. The contingent consideration is the earnout that Cord:Use is entitled to from the Company’s sale of the public cord blood inventory from and after closing, described above. The contingent consideration was remeasured to fair value as of November 30, 2020. The estimated fair value of the contingent earnout was determined using a Monte Carlo analysis examining the frequency and mean value of the resulting earnout payments. The resulting value captures the risk associated with the form of the payout structure. The risk-neutral method is applied, resulting in a value that captures the risk associated with the form of the payout structure and the projection risk. The carrying amount of the liability may fluctuate significantly and actual amounts paid may be materially different from the estimated value of the liability.
Impairment of Public Inventory. The impairment of public inventory for the twelve months ended November 30, 2020 was $1,284,238 compared to $2,332,763 for the 2019 period. Due to changes in sales trends and estimated recoverability of cost capitalized into inventory, an impairment charge of $1,284,238 and $2,332,763 was recognized during the twelve months ended November 30, 2020 and November 30, 2019, respectively, to reduce inventory from cost to net realizable value.
Interest Expense. Interest expense during the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020 was $1,544,017 compared to $1,703,446 in fiscal 2019, of which $395,426 and $759,386, respectively, related to the credit and subordination agreements with Texas Capital Bank, National Association as described in Note 4. The remaining interest expense is comprised of amounts due to the parties to the Company’s revenue sharing agreements based on the Company’s storage revenue collected.
Extinguishment of Revenue Sharing Agreement. On August 31, 2020, the Company entered into a Termination Agreement with the Erie Group pursuant to which all such parties terminated all of their respective rights, duties, obligations, options, and liabilities to each other arising out of or related to the Cryo-Cell International, Inc. Space and Time Sharing (SATS) Lease Agreement, Addendum thereto, Addition to such Addendum, and Amendment to the Cryo-Cell International, Inc. Space and Time Sharing (SATS) Lease Agreement among the Company and the Erie Group (collectively, the “SATS Agreement”). Additionally, pursuant to the terms of the Termination Agreement, the Company made a payment of $1,939,748 on the Effective Date and the parties released each other from all claims related to the SATS Agreement and to dismiss with prejudice the previously disclosed complaint (See Note 12). Pursuant to the terms of the Agreement, the Erie Group will no longer have the rights to share in a portion of the Company’s storage revenues derived from specimens which originated in the state of Illinois and its five contiguous states. The payment amount of $1,939,748 was offset by the carrying amount of the long-term liability related to the SATS in the amount of $550,000 and accrued expenses in the amount of $279,100 to reflect the extinguishment of revenue sharing agreements in the amount of $1,070,900 for the twelve months ended November 30, 2020.
Income Taxes. U.S. income tax expense for the twelve months ended November 30, 2020 was $1,346,625, net of foreign taxes, compared to $992,491, net of foreign income taxes, for the twelve months ended November 30, 2019.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to be recovered or settled. The ultimate realization of our deferred tax assets depends upon generating sufficient future taxable income prior to the expiration of the tax attributes. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we must project future levels of taxable income. This assessment requires significant judgment. We examine the evidence related to the recent history of tax losses, the economic conditions in which we operate and our forecasts and projections to make that determination.
The Company records foreign income taxes withheld from installment payments of non-refundable up-front license fees and royalty income earned on the processing and storage of cord blood stem cell specimens in certain geographic areas where the Company has license agreements. The Company recorded approximately $68,102 and $108,000 for the years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019,
respectively, of foreign income tax expense, which is included in income tax expense in the accompanying consolidated statements of comprehensive income.
There was approximately $1,877,000 and $2,801,000 of U.S. income taxes paid for fiscal years ended November 30, 2020 and November 30, 2019, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On May 20, 2016, the Company entered into a Credit Agreement (“Agreement”) with Texas Capital Bank, National Association (“TCB”) for a term loan of $8.0 million in senior credit facilities. The proceeds of the term loan were used by the Company to fund repurchases of the Company’s common stock. Subject to the terms of the Agreement, on May 20, 2016, TCB advanced the Company $100.00. On July 1, 2016, TCB advanced the remaining principal amount of $7,999,900 per a promissory note dated May 20, 2016 between the Company and TCB.
On August 26, 2016, the Company entered into a First Amendment to Credit Agreement with TCB. Pursuant to terms of the First Amendment to Credit Agreement, on August 26, 2016, TCB made an additional advance to the Company in principal amount of $2,133,433 per an Amended and Restated Promissory Note dated August 26, 2016 between the Company and TCB. The additional proceeds of the term loan were used by the Company to fund the extinguishment of revenue sharing agreements.
On June 11, 2018, the Company entered into a Second Amendment to Credit Agreement with TCB. Pursuant to the terms of the Second Amendment to Credit Agreement, TCB made an additional advance to the Company in principal amount of $9,000,000 per an Amended and Restated Promissory Note dated June 11, 2018 between the Company and TCB in the principal amount of $15,500,000. The proceeds were used to finance a portion of the purchase price of the Cord:Use Purchase.
Prior to the loans, the Company’s principal source of cash has been from sales of its umbilical cord blood program to customers and royalties from licensees.
At November 30, 2020, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $10,361,125 as compared to $6,541,037 at November 30, 2019. The increase in cash and cash equivalents during the twelve months ended November 30, 2020 was primarily attributable to the following:
Net cash provided by operating activities in fiscal 2020 was $8,466,603 which was attributable to the Company’s operating activities and a portion of the Company’s new clients choosing the prepaid storage plans versus the annual storage fee plan.
Net cash provided by operating activities in fiscal 2019 was $6,294,843 which was attributable to the Company’s operating activities and an increase in the Company’s new clients choosing the prepaid storage plans versus the annual storage fee plan.
Net cash provided by investing activities in fiscal 2020 was $357,485 which was attributable to cash received due to the liquidation of marketable securities in the amount of $807,447, offset by $99,962 used to purchase property and equipment and $350,000 used as part of the Patent Option Agreement with Duke (See Note 19).
Net cash used in investing activities in fiscal 2019 was $662,295 which was primarily attributable to cash used to purchase property and equipment.
Net cash used in financing activities in fiscal 2020 was $5,004,000, which was primarily attributable to the payments of $3,100,000 to repay the note payable described above, $1,900,000 used to terminate a revenue sharing agreement (See Note 14), and $45,000 used to pay the Cord:Use earnout (See Note 1) which are offset by the receipt of $41,000 from the exercise of stock options.
Net cash used in financing activities in fiscal 2019 was $5,131,544, which was primarily attributable to the payments of $4,100,000 to repay the note payable described above and $45,000 to Cord:Use and $992,244 used to repurchase common stock which was offset by the receipt of $5,700 from the exercise of stock options.
The Company does not have a line of credit.
The Company anticipates making discretionary capital expenditures of approximately $500,000 over the next twelve months for software enhancements and purchases of property and equipment. The Company anticipates funding future property and equipment purchases with cash-on-hand and cash flows from future operations.
The Company anticipates that its cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities and cash flows from future operations will be sufficient to fund its known cash needs for at least the next 12 months. Cash flows from operations will depend primarily upon increasing revenues from sales of its umbilical cord blood and cord tissue cellular storage services and managing discretionary expenses. If expected increases in revenues are not realized, or if expenses are higher than anticipated, the Company may be required to reduce or defer cash expenditures or otherwise manage its cash resources during the next 12 months so that they are sufficient to meet the Company’s cash needs for that period. In addition, the Company may consider seeking equity or debt financing if deemed appropriate for its plan of operations, and if such financing can be obtained on acceptable terms. There is no assurance that any reductions in expenditures, if necessary, will not have an adverse effect on the Company’s business operations, including sales activities and the development of new services and technology.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. The SEC has defined a company’s critical accounting policies as the ones that are most important to the portrayal of the company’s financial condition and results of operations, and which require the company to make its most difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. The Company believes that its estimates and assumptions are reasonable under the circumstances; however, actual results may vary from these estimates and assumptions. We have identified the following critical accounting policies that affect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements. For further discussion of the Company’s significant and critical accounting policies, refer to Note 1 - “Description of Business and Summary of Critical and Significant Accounting Policies” to the Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 of this document.
Revenue Recognition
Effective December 1, 2018, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”), using the modified retrospective transition method. The Company recognized the cumulative effect of applying the new revenue standard to all contracts with customers that were not completed as of December 1, 2018 as an adjustment to the opening balance of stockholders' deficit at the beginning of fiscal year 2019. The reported results for 2019 reflect the application of ASC 606 guidance while the reported results for 2018 were prepared under the guidance of ASC 605, Revenue Recognition (ASC 605). ASC 606 applies to all contracts with customers, except for contracts that are within the scope of other standards, such as leases, insurance, collaboration arrangements and financial instruments. ASC 606 also impacts certain other areas, such as the accounting for costs to obtain or fulfill a contract. ASC 606 also requires disclosure of the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts with customers.
The adoption of ASC 606 did not have an impact on the amount of reported revenues with respect to the Company’s product or service revenues. In connection with the adoption of ASC 606, the Company is required to capitalize certain contract acquisition costs consisting primarily of commissions paid when contracts are signed and amortize these costs on a systematic basis, consistent with the pattern of transfer of the storage services provided over time for which the asset relates. As of December 1, 2018, the Company capitalized in deposits and other assets, net, $329,231 in incremental contract acquisition costs related to sales commissions on prepaid storage contracts and reversed $18,408 of its variable consideration that the Company determined to be fully constrained, with a corresponding change in the opening balance of stockholders’ deficit of $253,447, net of tax, of $94,192.
Under ASC 606, revenue is recognized when, or as, obligations under the terms of a contract are satisfied, which occurs when control of the promised services are transferred to the customers. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for transferring services to a customer ("transaction price").
At contract inception, if the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, the Company evaluates its contracts with customers using the five-step model: (1) identify the contract with the customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to separate performance obligations; and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) each performance obligation is satisfied. The Company evaluates its contracts for legal enforceability at contract inception and subsequently throughout the Company’s relationship with its customers. If legal enforceability with regards to the rights and obligations exist for both the Company and the customer, then the Company has an enforceable contract and revenue recognition is permitted subject to the satisfaction of the other criteria. If, at the outset of an arrangement, the Company determines that a contract with enforceable rights and obligations does not exist, revenues are deferred until all criteria for an enforceable contract are met. The Company only applies the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that collection of the consideration that the Company is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services being transferred to the customer, will occur.
Income Taxes
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to be recovered or settled. The Company records a valuation allowance when it is “more likely than not” that all future income tax benefits will be realized. When the Company changes its determination as to the amount of deferred income tax assets that can be realized, the valuation allowance is adjusted with a corresponding impact to income tax expense in the period in which such determination is made. The ultimate realization of the Company’s deferred income tax assets depends upon generating sufficient taxable income prior to the expiration of the tax attributes. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, the Company projects future levels of taxable income. This assessment requires significant judgment. The Company examines the evidence related to the recent history of losses, the economic conditions in which the Company operates and forecasts and projections to make that determination.
Long-Lived Assets
The Company evaluates the realizability of its long-lived assets, which requires impairment losses to be recorded on long-lived assets used in operations when indicators of impairment, such as reductions in demand or when significant economic slowdowns are present. Reviews are performed to determine whether the carrying value of an asset is impaired, based on comparisons to undiscounted expected future cash flows. If this comparison indicates that there is impairment and carrying value is in excess of fair value, the impaired asset is written down to fair value, which is typically calculated using: (i) quoted market prices or (ii) discounted expected future cash flows utilizing a discount rate. The Company did not note any impairment for the twelve months ended November 30, 2020 and 2019.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price of the assets acquired from Cord:Use over the estimated fair value of the net tangible and identifiable assets acquired. The annual assessment of the reporting unit is performed as of September 1st, and an assessment is performed at other times if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the asset below its carrying value. The Company first performs a qualitative assessment to test goodwill for impairment and concludes if it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If the qualitative assessment concludes that it is not more likely than not that the fair value is less than the carrying value, the two-step goodwill impairment test is not required. If the qualitative assessment concludes that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying value, then the two-step goodwill impairment test is required. Step one of the impairment assessment compares the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying value and if the fair value exceeds its carrying value, goodwill is not impaired. If the carrying value exceeds the fair value, the implied fair value of goodwill is compared to the carrying value of goodwill. If the implied fair value exceeds the carrying value then goodwill is not impaired; otherwise, an impairment loss would be recorded by the amount the carrying value exceeds the implied fair value.
Stock Compensation
As of November 30, 2020, the Company has two stock-based employee compensation plans, which are described in Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements.
The Company recognizes stock-based compensation based on the fair value of the related awards. Under the fair value recognition guidance of stock-based compensation accounting rules, stock-based compensation expense is estimated at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period of the award. The fair value of service-based vesting condition and performance-based vesting condition stock option awards is determined using the Black-Scholes valuation model. For stock option awards with only service-based vesting conditions and graded vesting features, the Company recognizes stock compensation expense based on the graded-vesting method. To value awards with market-based vesting conditions the Company uses a binomial valuation model. The Company recognizes compensation cost for awards with market-based vesting conditions on a graded-vesting basis over the derived service period calculated by the binomial valuation model. The use of these valuation models involves assumptions that are judgmental and highly sensitive in the determination of compensation expense and include the expected life of the option, stock price volatility, risk-free interest rate, dividend yield, exercise price, and forfeiture rate. Forfeitures are estimated at the time of valuation and reduce expense ratably over the vesting period.
The estimation of stock awards that will ultimately vest requires judgment and to the extent that actual results or updated estimates differ from current estimates, such amounts will be recorded as a cumulative adjustment in the period they become known. The Company considered many factors when estimating forfeitures, including the recipient groups and historical experience. Actual results and future changes in estimates may differ substantially from current estimates.
The Company issues performance-based equity awards which vest upon the achievement of certain financial performance goals, including revenue and income targets. Determining the appropriate amount to expense based on the anticipated achievement of the stated goals requires judgment, including forecasting future financial results. The estimate of the timing of the expense recognition is revised periodically based on the probability of achieving the required performance targets and adjustments are made as appropriate. The cumulative impact of any revision is reflected in the period of the change. If the financial performance goals are not met, the award does not vest, so no compensation cost is recognized and any previously stock-recognized stock-based compensation expense is reversed.
The Company issues equity awards with market-based vesting conditions which vest upon the achievement of certain stock price targets. If the awards are forfeited prior to the completion of the derived service period, any recognized compensation is reversed. If the awards are forfeited after the completion of the derived service period, the compensation cost is not reversed, even if the awards never vest.
License and Royalty Agreements
The Company has entered into licensing agreements with certain investors in various international markets in an attempt to capitalize on the Company’s technology. The investors typically pay a licensing fee to receive Company marketing programs, technology and know-how in a selected area. The investor may be given a right to sell sub-license agreements as well. As part of the accounting for the up-front license revenue, revenue from the up-front license fee is recognized based on such factors as when the payment is due, collectability and when all material services or conditions relating to the sale have been substantially performed based on the terms of the agreement. The Company has twelve active licensing agreements. The following areas each have one license agreement: El Salvador, Guatemala, Panama, Honduras, China, and Pakistan. The following areas each have two license agreements: India, Nicaragua and Costa Rica. In October 2012, the Company sent a notice of termination to the Company’s Venezuelan affiliate for failure to meet its payment obligation in accordance with the contract. Subsequent to the notice of termination, payment was received for outstanding processing and storage fees due from Venezuela. The Company is in the process of discussing a new agreement with Venezuela. In December 2012, the Company sent notice of termination to the Company’s affiliate in Ecuador for failure to meet its payment obligation in accordance with the contract. Subsequent to the notice of termination, payment was received for outstanding processing and storage fees due from Ecuador. In August 2013, the Company was notified that its affiliate in Ecuador was closed by the National Institute of Organic Donation (INDOT). As a result, the Company recorded an allowance for uncollectible receivables for the $150,000 processing and storage fee receivable due from Ecuador in the third quarter of fiscal 2013. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2013, the Company began to bill the Ecuadorian clients directly for cord blood specimens that are stored at the Company’s facility in Oldsmar, Florida. In the future, if the Company loses revenue due to lack of payment from the foreign affiliates or the foreign affiliates are closed, the Company’s overall revenue will decrease.
In addition to the license fee, the Company earns a royalty on processing and storage fees on subsequent processing and storage revenues received by the licensee in the licensed territory and a fee on any sub-license agreements that are sold by the licensee where applicable. The Company processes and stores specimens sent directly from customers of licensees in Mexico, El Salvador, Guatemala, Ecuador, Panama, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Pakistan and Venezuela. The Company also processes and stores specimens from sub-licenses of Venezuela, who are Chile, Colombia and Peru. These fees are included in processing and storage fees revenue on the consolidated statements of comprehensive income. As part of the accounting for royalty revenue from India, the Company uses estimates and judgments based on historical processing and storage volume in determining the timing and amount of royalty revenue to recognize. The Company periodically reviews license and royalty receivables for collectability and, if necessary, will record an expense for an allowance for uncollectible accounts. If the financial condition of the Company’s sub-licensees were to deteriorate beyond the estimates, the Company may have to increase the allowance for doubtful accounts which could have a negative impact on earnings. If the licensee’s customer base were to decrease, it would negatively impact the Company’s ongoing license income.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable consist of uncollateralized amounts due from clients that have enrolled and processed in the umbilical cord blood stem cell processing and storage programs and amounts due from license affiliates, and sublicensee territories. Accounts receivable are due within 30 days and are stated at amounts net of an allowance for doubtful accounts. Accounts outstanding longer than the contractual payment terms are considered past due. The Company determines its allowance by considering the length of time accounts receivable are past due, the Company’s previous loss history, and the client’s current
ability to pay its obligations. Therefore, if the financial condition of the Company’s clients were to deteriorate beyond the estimates, the Company may have to increase the allowance for doubtful accounts which could have a negative impact on earnings. The Company writes-off accounts receivable when they become uncollectible, and payments subsequently received on such receivables are credited to the allowance for doubtful accounts.
Inventories
As part of the Asset Purchase Agreement, the Company has an agreement with Duke University (“Duke”) expiring on January 31, 2025 for Duke to receive, process, and store cord blood units for the Public Cord Blood Bank (“Duke Services”). As of November 30, 2020, the Company had approximately 6,000 cord blood units in inventory. These units are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Costs include the cost of collecting, transporting, processing and storing the unit. Costs charged by Duke for their Duke Services are based on a monthly fixed fee for processing and storing 12 blood units per month. The Company computes the cost per unit for these Duke Services and capitalizes the unit cost on all blood units shipped and stored in a year at Duke. If the Company ships and stores less than 144 blood units with Duke in a one-year period, a portion of these fixed costs are expensed and included in facility operating costs. Certain costs of collection incurred, such as the cost of collection staff and transportation costs incurred to ship Public Bank units from hospitals to the stem cell laboratory are allocated to banked units based on an average cost method. The change in the number of expected units to be sold could have a significant impact on the estimated net realizable value of banked units which could have a material effect on the value of the inventory. Costs incurred related to cord blood units that cannot be sold are expensed in the period incurred and are included in facility operating costs in the accompanying statements of operations. The Company records a reserve against inventory for units which have been processed and frozen but may not ultimately become distributable (see Note 2).
Patents and Trademarks
The Company incurs certain legal and related costs in connection with patent and trademark applications. If a future economic benefit is anticipated from the resulting patent or trademark or an alternate future use is available to the Company, such costs are capitalized and amortized over the expected life of the patent or trademark. The Company’s assessment of future economic benefit involves considerable management judgment. A different conclusion could result in the reduction of the carrying value of these assets.
Revenue Sharing Agreements
The Company has entered into Revenue Sharing Agreements (“RSAs”) with various parties whereby these parties contracted with the Company for a percentage of future storage revenues the Company generates and collects from clients in specific geographical areas. The RSAs have no definitive term or termination provisions. The sharing applies to the storage fees collected for all specified specimens in the area up to the number covered in the contract. When the number of specimens is filled, any additional specimens stored in that area are not subject to revenue sharing. As there are empty spaces resulting from attrition, the Company agrees to fill them as soon as possible. The parties typically pay the Company a non-refundable up-front fee for the rights to these future payments. The Company recognized these non-refundable fees as a long-term liability. Given the criteria under which these RSAs are established, cash flows related to these contracts can fluctuate from period to period. All payments made to the other parties to the RSAs are recognized as interest expense. At such time as the total payments can be determined, the Company will commence amortizing these liabilities under the effective interest method. The Company does not intend to enter into additional RSAs.
Contingent Consideration
The contingent consideration is the earnout that Cord:Use is entitled to from the Company’s sale of the public cord blood inventory from and after closing. The estimated fair value of the contingent earnout was determined using a Monte Carlo analysis examining the frequency and mean value of the resulting earnout payments. The resulting value captures the risk associated with the form of the payout structure. The risk-neutral method is applied, resulting in a value that captures the risk associated with the form of the payout structure and the projection risk. The carrying amount of the liability may fluctuate significantly and actual amounts paid may be materially different from the estimated value of the liability.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on its financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.