Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion is intended to analyze major elements of our consolidated financial statements and provide insight into important areas of management’s focus. This section should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying Notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Statements in the following discussion may include forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors,” for additional discussion of these factors and risks.
Previously, our operations included our new unit sales business that included designing and fabricating a majority of the new standard and custom-designed, engineered compressor packages that were used to provide compression services or sold to our customers. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we fully exited the new unit sales business. These operations were previously included in equipment sales revenues and are now reflected as discontinued operations for all periods presented.
On January 29, 2021, Spartan acquired from TETRA the Partnership’s general partner, IDRs and 10.95 million common units in the Partnership (the “GP Sale”). In connection with the GP Sale, on January 29, 2021, TETRA entered into a Transition Services Agreement (the “Transition Services Agreement”) with the Partnership, pursuant to which TETRA will provide certain accounting, information technology and back office support services to the Partnership for a period of up to one year following closing. See Note 18 - “Subsequent Events” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for further information.
Business Overview
We provide compression services for natural gas and oil production, gathering, artificial lift, production enhancement, transmission, processing, and storage. Our compression and related services business includes a fleet of approximately 4,900 compressor packages providing approximately 1.2 million capacity in aggregate horsepower, utilizing a full spectrum of low-, medium-, and high-horsepower engines. Our aftermarket business provides compressor package overhaul, repair, engineering and design, reconfiguration and maintenance services, as well as the sale of compressor package parts and components manufactured by third-party suppliers. Our customers operate throughout many of the onshore producing regions of the United States, as well as Mexico, Canada and Argentina.
Our operations are significantly dependent upon the demand for, and production of, oil and the associated natural gas from unconventional oil and natural gas production in the U.S. and international markets in which we operate. During 2020, macroeconomic uncertainty in the oil and natural gas industry continued to drive steep declines in spending by the oil and gas operators but as oil prices stabilized above $40, the pace of horsepower being released slowed in comparison to the second quarter. In addition, the unprecedented drop in U.S. onshore oil and natural gas activity in the second quarter led to some of our customers temporarily shutting in wells and requesting that compression units be placed on standby. Customers continued bringing production back online throughout the third and fourth quarters and we ended the fourth quarter with approximately 7% of our U.S. fleet on standby as compared to 15% in the second quarter.
Throughout 2020 and in response to the aforementioned market conditions, we saw our customers revise their capital budgets substantially downward and adjust their operations accordingly. Given the decline in orders for new compression equipment to be fabricated and sold to third parties, in early April 2020, we announced our plan to shut-down our Midland manufacturing facility. On July 2, 2020, we completed the previously announced sale of our Midland manufacturing facility for a total sale price of $17.0 million. We continued to operate the facility until the completion and sale of our remaining backlog, which was completed in October 2020. Following the completion of the backlog, we are no longer fabricating new compressor packages for sales to third parties or for our own service fleet. Future packaging needs for expansion in our service fleet will be met utilizing existing third-party packager relationships.
The COVID-19 pandemic and decline in oil prices had a significant impact on our customers and industry. During the first quarter of 2020, we concluded that these events were indicators of impairment for all our asset groups. As a result, we performed a recoverability analysis on all our long-lived asset groups and we determined that the carrying values of our Midland manufacturing facility and related new unit sales inventory exceeded their respective fair values. Therefore, we recorded impairments of approximately $5.5 million during the first quarter of 2020 related to these assets. During the second quarter of 2020, primarily as a result of continued negative impacts on our compression fleet associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and declines in oil and gas prices, we recorded
impairments and other charges of approximately $9.0 million associated with non-core used compressor equipment that we have held for sale, the low-horsepower class of our compression fleet, and field inventory for compression and related services. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we recorded impairments and other charges of approximately $6.5 million associated with compressor equipment. Given the dynamic nature of the current market amidst the pandemic and a prolonged recovery, we are not able to reasonably estimate how long our operations will be impacted and the full impact these events will have on our operations. As a result, we could have indicators of impairment again in future periods resulting in additional asset impairments. We have and will continue to evaluate the sale of non-core assets, including our low-horsepower compression fleet. We can provide no assurance that we will consummate a future sale of our low-horsepower compression fleet or any other non-core asset.
We have taken aggressive cost reduction initiatives to improve our liquidity. In addition, during the second quarter of 2020, we completed a debt exchange that resulted in a reduction in outstanding long-term debt of $9.6 million and the extension of maturity dates of certain of our remaining long-term debt balances.
We actively managed our cost structure as a proactive response to the changing market conditions throughout the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020, taking necessary actions to manage through these conditions, some of which could result in impairments or restructuring charges in future periods. Temporary and permanent cost reductions we have implemented include reductions in 2020 capital expenditures, workforce reductions, salary reductions, furloughs, a reduction in the cash retainers for the directors of our general partner, the suspension of 401(k) matching contributions for our employees, targeted reduction in SG&A expenses, rationalization of our real estate facilities, and negotiated reductions in expenditures with many of our suppliers. In 2021, we plan to monitor our operations and financial performance and make changes as necessary. While we are not able to predict how long market disruptions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and diminished demand for oil will continue, or what impact they will ultimately have on our business, we saw activity leveling out at the end of the fourth quarter. We are encouraged by recent improvements in oil and gas prices and projections of demand recovery, driven by anticipated COVID-19 vaccinations as they are administered on a wider scale. However, the risk of additional strains of COVID-19, increases in the number of cases, that recently developed vaccines may not be successful in preventing COVID-19 or the potential outbreak of a new or mutated virus, and the possibility of future lockdowns makes any forecast for improvement uncertain. In addition, capital discipline throughout the energy sector may limit production growth as the economy recovers from the pandemic. Despite challenging market conditions, we will continue to maintain our commitment to safety and service quality for our customers.
Results of Operations
The following data should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the associated Notes contained elsewhere in this document. Previously, our equipment sales business included our new unit sales business that consisted of the fabrication and sale of new standard and custom-designed, engineered compressor packages fabricated primarily at our facility in Midland, Texas that were used to provide compression services or sold to our customers. We sold the Midland facility in July 2020. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we fully exited the new unit sales business and we have reflected these operations as discontinued operations for all periods presented. See Note 9 - “Discontinued Operations” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for further information. Used equipment sales revenue continues to be included in equipment sales revenue.
2020 Compared to 2019
Revenues
Compression and related services revenues decreased by $30.2 million, or 11.7%, during 2020 compared to the prior year. The COVID-19 pandemic’s impact on demand for oil and natural gas and the resulting decline in oil prices led to a significant reduction in customer activity resulting in a decrease in demand for compression services. We experienced returned compressors, compressors placed on standby rates, and have made some pricing concessions, all contributing to a decrease in revenues. With the recent stabilization of oil prices, some of the compressors previously placed on standby have now been returned to service. The overall compression fleet horsepower utilization rate as of December 31, 2020 decreased to 76.4% compared to 90.0% as of December 31, 2019.
Aftermarket services revenues decreased $16.0 million, or 21.0%, during 2020 compared to the prior year resulting from decreased demand for services as a result of lower customer activity levels and deferral of maintenance on customer compressor fleets.
Equipment sales revenues increased $7.7 million, a 138.7% increase, during 2020 compared to the prior year, primarily because of an increase in used compressor sales during 2020 compared to the prior year period.
Cost of revenues
Cost of compression and related services decreased compared to the prior year consistent with decreased revenues. Cost of compression and related services as a percentage of compression and related services revenues decreased from 48.4% during the prior year to 47.7% during the current year due to cost-saving actions including labor efficiencies, reduced maintenance costs, and lower indirect and overhead costs.
Cost of aftermarket services decreased compared to the prior year period consistent with the decrease
in revenues.
Cost of equipment sales increased less than the increase in associated revenues, improving to a net gain in 2020 from a net loss in 2019.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense primarily consists of the depreciation of compressor packages in our service fleet. In addition, it includes the depreciation of other operating equipment and facilities and the amortization of intangibles. Depreciation and amortization expense increased compared to the prior year due to additions to the high-horsepower class of our compression fleet.
Impairments and other charges
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded impairments and other charges of $15.4 million on our non-core used compressor equipment, certain classes of our compression fleet that are under utilized due to market preferences, and field inventory for compression and related services.
Insurance recoveries
Insurance recoveries relate to insurance claim proceeds received related to fleet compressor packages that were damaged during the prior year.
Selling, general, and administrative expense
Selling, general, and administrative expenses decreased during 2020 compared to the prior year largely due to decreased employee expenses, including wages, incentives, benefits, and other employee related expenses of $2.4 million.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net, increased during 2020 compared to the prior year due to higher interest rates associated with our Second Lien Notes following the June 2020 debt exchange. Interest expense, net, during the current and prior year periods includes $2.6 million and $3.2 million, respectively, of finance cost amortization and other non-cash charges.
Series A Preferred fair value adjustment
The Series A Preferred Units fair value adjustment was $1.5 million charged to earnings during 2019. All the remaining outstanding Preferred Units were redeemed for cash on August 8, 2019.
Other (income) expense, net
Other (income) expense, net, was $3.5 million of expense during 2020 compared to $0.5 million of income during the prior year. This increase in expense is primarily due to $4.8 million of fees associated primarily with the unsecured debt exchange transaction and increased foreign currency losses of $1.1 million, partially offset by decreased expense of $1.5 million associated with the redemption premium incurred during the prior year period in connection with the redemption of Preferred Units for cash.
Provision for income taxes
As a partnership, we are generally not subject to income taxes at the entity level because our income is included in the tax returns of our partners. We are treated as a partnership for federal tax purposes with each partner being separately taxed on its share of our taxable income. However, a portion of our business is conducted through taxable U.S. corporate subsidiaries. Accordingly, a U.S. federal and state income tax provision has been reflected in the accompanying statements of operations. Certain of our operations are located outside of the U.S. and we, through our foreign subsidiaries, are responsible for income taxes in these countries.
Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020, was negative 5.3% primarily attributable to taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions and Texas gross margin taxes combined with losses generated in entities for which no related tax benefit has been recorded. Included in our deferred tax assets are net operating loss carryforwards and tax credits that are available to offset future income tax liabilities in the U.S. as well as in certain foreign jurisdictions.
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax changed from $6.3 million of income for the year ended December 31, 2019 to a $10.9 million loss for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Partnership exited the new unit sales business during 2020, with final completions in October. New unit sales revenues decreased $100.0 million while costs of sales and services associated with new unit sales decreased $83.8 million. The 2020 loss includes $5.5 million of impairments. The increase in losses was partially offset by a $2.6 million decrease in selling, general, and administrative expenses primarily from bad debt expense recorded in 2019 related to the bankruptcy of a customer.
How We Evaluate Our Operations
Operating Expenses. We use operating expenses as a performance measure for our business. We track our operating expenses using month-to-month, quarter-to-quarter, year-to-date, and year-to-year comparisons and as compared to budget. This analysis is useful in identifying adverse cost trends and allows us to investigate the cause of these trends and implement remedial measures if possible. The most significant portions of our operating expenses are for our field labor, repair and maintenance of our equipment, vehicle leases and for the fuel and other supplies consumed while providing our services. The costs of other materials consumed while performing our services, ad valorem taxes, other labor costs, truck maintenance, rent on storage facilities, and insurance expenses comprise the significant remainder of our operating expenses. Our operating expenses generally fluctuate with our level of activity.
Our labor costs consist primarily of wages and benefits for our field personnel, as well as expenses related to their training and safety. Additional information regarding our operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, is provided within the Results of Operations sections below.
Adjusted EBITDA. We view Adjusted EBITDA as one of our primary management tools, and we track it on a monthly basis, both in dollars and as a percentage of revenues (typically compared to the prior month, prior year period, and to budget). We define Adjusted EBITDA as earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, and before certain non-cash charges and other non-recurring or unusual expenses or charges, including impairments, equity compensation, bad debt expense attributable to bankruptcy of customer, non-income tax contingency, non-cash costs of compressors sold, fair value adjustments of our Preferred Units, write-off of unamortized financing costs, and excluding Series A Convertible Preferred Unit redemption premiums and severance. Adjusted EBITDA is used as a supplemental financial measure by our management to:
•assess our ability to generate available cash sufficient to make distributions to our common unitholders and general partner;
•evaluate the financial performance of our assets without regard to financing methods, capital structure, or historical cost basis;
•measure operating performance and return on capital as compared to those of our competitors; and
•determine our ability to incur and service debt and fund capital expenditures.
The following table reconciles net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA from continuing and discontinued operations for the periods indicated:
Free Cash Flow. We define Free Cash Flow as cash from operations less capital expenditures, net of sales proceeds. Management primarily uses this metric to assess our ability to retire debt, evaluate our capacity to further invest and grow, and measure our performance as compared to our peers. The following table reconciles cash provided by operations, net, to Free Cash Flow for the periods indicated:
Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow are financial measures that are not in accordance with U.S. GAAP and should not be considered an alternative to net income, operating income, cash flows from operating activities, or any other measure of financial performance presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. These measures may not be comparable to similarly titled financial metrics of other entities, as other entities may not calculate Adjusted EBITDA or Free Cash Flow in the same manner as we do. Management compensates for the limitations of Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow as analytical tools by reviewing the comparable U.S. GAAP measures, understanding the differences between the measures, and incorporating this knowledge into management’s decision-making processes. Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow should not be viewed as indicative of the actual amount of cash
we have available for distributions or that we plan to distribute for a given period, nor should it be equated with “available cash” as defined in our partnership agreement.
Horsepower Utilization Rate of our Compressor Packages. We measure the horsepower utilization rate of our fleet of compressor packages as the amount of horsepower of compressor packages used to provide services as of a particular date, divided by the amount of horsepower of compressor packages in our services fleet as of such date. Management primarily uses this metric to determine our future need for additional compressor packages for our service fleet and to measure marketing effectiveness.
The following table sets forth the total horsepower in our compression fleet, our total horsepower in service, and our total horsepower utilization rate as of the dates shown.
The following table sets forth our horsepower utilization rates by each horsepower class of our compression fleet as of the dates shown.
The total horsepower utilization rate and the utilization rate by each horsepower class have each decreased this year compared to the prior year due to significantly lower customer activity levels. The current year has been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and we believe our utilization rates for the first quarter of 2021 will also continue to be negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and related market conditions in the oil and gas industry. Natural gas prices have increased from 2020 lows.
Net Increases/Decreases in Compression Fleet Horsepower. We measure the net increase (or decrease) in our compression fleet horsepower during a given period by taking the difference between the aggregate horsepower of compressor packages added to the fleet during the period, less the aggregate horsepower of compressor packages removed from the fleet during the period. We measure the net increase (or decrease) in our compression fleet horsepower in service during a given period by taking the difference between the aggregate horsepower of compressor packages placed into service during the period, less the aggregate horsepower of compressor packages removed from service during the period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary cash requirements are for distributions, working capital requirements, debt service, normal operating expenses, and capital expenditures. Our potential sources of funds are our existing cash balances, cash generated from our operations, and long-term and short-term borrowings, which we believe will be sufficient to meet our working capital and reduced growth capital requirements during 2021. We are monitoring the spending plans of our customers due to the macroeconomic uncertainties resulting from the recent substantial declines in prices of oil and natural gas and the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. These uncertainties have negatively impacted our customers’ demands for our products and services, which has negatively impacted our businesses. Although oil and natural gas prices have recovered in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 from their lows earlier in the year, the outlook for 2021 is uncertain. If oil and natural gas prices decrease from current levels, our businesses could be further negatively impacted. In addition, current conditions in the market for debt and equity securities in the energy
sector have increased the difficulty of obtaining equity and debt financing and we expect this to continue in the near future. Despite these challenges, we remain committed to a long-term growth strategy. Our near-term focus is to maintain our compression fleet, while continuing to preserve and enhance liquidity through strategic, operating and financial measures. We periodically evaluate engaging in strategic transactions and may consider divesting non-core assets where our evaluation suggests such transactions are in the best interests of our business, such as the sale of the Midland facility and the agreement we entered into during the second quarter to sell 58 of our idle units below 500 horsepower to one of our customers. We are subject to business and operational risks that could materially adversely affect our cash flows and together with risks associated with current debt and equity market conditions, our ability or desire to issue such securities.
Following the redeployment of our idle fleet, meeting increased demand for our compression services will require ongoing capital expenditure investment, which could be significant. We expect to fund any future capital expenditures, along with potential acquisitions, if any, with existing cash balances, cash flow generated from our operations, and funds received from the issuance of additional debt and equity securities. We may also seek to expand our compression fleet through finance or operating leases with third parties. However, we are subject to business and operational risks that could materially adversely affect our cash flows and together with risks associated with current debt and equity market conditions, our ability or desire to issue such securities. Please read “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
The level of future growth capital expenditures depends on demand for compression services, the level of cash available to fund these expenditures, and our decisions whether to utilize available cash to fund increases in our quarterly common unit distribution, retire debt, or make capital expenditures. We anticipate capital expenditures in 2021 to range from $30.0 million to $40.0 million. These capital expenditures include approximately $20.0 million to $24.0 million of maintenance capital expenditures and approximately $8.0 million to $12.0 million of capital expenditures primarily associated with the expansion of our compression services fleet and $2.0 million to $4.0 million of capital expenditures related to investments in technology, primarily software and systems. The foregoing estimates were based on assumptions regarding the ongoing impact of the decline of oil and gas prices and the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect that the combination of cash on hand and operating cash flows expected to be generated during the year will be sufficient to fund capital expenditures without having to incur additional long-term debt and without having to access the equity markets.
On January 19, 2021, our general partner declared a cash distribution attributable to the quarter ended December 31, 2020 of $0.01 per common unit. This distribution equates to a distribution of $0.04 per outstanding common unit on an annualized basis. This quarterly distribution was paid on February 12, 2021 to each of the holders of common units of record as of the close of business on January 29, 2021.
Cash Flows
A summary of our sources and uses of cash during the year ended December 31, 2020 is as follows:
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $46.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 to $20.8 million compared to $67.7 million provided by operating activities in 2019. Our cash provided from operating activities was primarily generated from the provision of compression and related services as well as the sale of new compressor packages which we have now exited. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to a decrease in revenue and the effect of working capital movements, particularly related to timing of payments of accounts payable.
Cash provided from our foreign operations is subject to various uncertainties, including the volatility associated with interruptions caused by customer budgetary decisions, uncertainties regarding the renewal of our
existing customer contracts, and other changes in contract arrangements, the timing of collection of our receivables, and the repatriation of cash generated by our international operations.
Investing Activities
Capital expenditures during the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $61.1 million compared to 2019 as we adjusted to market conditions. Total capital expenditures during 2020 were $27.5 million, including the $12.8 million cost of compression units sold. Total capital expenditures for 2020 include $18.9 million of maintenance capital expenditures. Proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment was $19.4 million in 2020 primarily from the sale of our Midland manufacturing facility.
During 2020 the Partnership launched an initiative to rationalize its fleet by selling smaller and mid-sized equipment to focus on the larger-horsepower fleet as well as to sell equipment outside its core area of focus. During the year, one of the Partnership’s larger customers requested to buy large units recently deployed. Additionally during 2020, the Partnership sold its Midland fabrication facility and real estate for $17 million. As a result, cash proceeds in 2020 from the sale of used equipment exceed the purchase of new equipment. In addition, the level of growth capital expenditures depends on forecasted demand for compression services. If the forecasted demand for compression services increases or decreases, the amount of planned expenditures on growth and expansion will be adjusted, subject to the availability of funds. We continue to review all capital expenditure plans carefully in an effort to conserve cash and fund our liquidity needs.
Financing Activities
Distributions
Beginning with the distribution to common unitholders during February 2019, we reduced our common unit distributions from $0.75 per unit per year (or $0.1875 per quarter) to $0.04 per unit per year (or $0.01 per quarter). We used the cash savings from the reduced distribution to redeem the remaining Preferred Units for cash. Accordingly, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we distributed $1.9 million of cash distributions to our common unitholders and general partner.
Series A Convertible Preferred Units
In January 2019, we began redeeming Preferred Units for cash resulting in 2,660,569 Preferred Units being redeemed during the year ended December 31, 2019 for $31.9 million, which includes $1.5 million of redemption premium that was paid. The last redemption of the remaining Preferred Units occurred on August 8, 2019.
Credit Facility
As of December 31, 2020, and subject to compliance with the covenants, borrowing base, and other provisions of the agreements that may limit borrowings under the Credit Agreement, we had availability of $14.2 million. On January 29, 2021, the Partnership amended the Loan and Security Agreement dated June 29, 2018 (as amended, restated, amended and restated, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time, the “Credit Agreement”). The Credit Agreement provides for maximum revolving credit commitments of $35.0 million and includes a $5.0 million reserve, which results in reduced borrowing availability. The Credit Agreement was amended on January 29, 2021 to temporarily increase the size of the reserve to $10.0 million and also require that Spartan backstop all of our outstanding letters of credit. These temporary restrictions will expire on April 30, 2021 if there has not been a “Change of Control” under the Partnership’s secured senior notes indentures. The Credit Agreement includes a $25.0 million sublimit for letters of credit.
The maturity date of the Credit Agreement is June 29, 2023. As of December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding balance and had $3.5 million in letters of credit against our Credit Agreement. As of March 2, 2021, we have no balance outstanding under our Credit Agreement and $3.5 million in letters of credit which are backstopped by Spartan and not counted against availability, leaving availability under the CCLP Credit Agreement of $10.0 million. The amounts the Partnership may borrow under the Credit Agreement are based on the amounts of CCLP’s accounts receivable and the value of certain inventory. Decreases in the amount of CCLP’s accounts receivable and the value of its inventory would result in reduced borrowing availability under the Credit Agreement.
Notes
We may from time to time seek to retire or purchase certain amounts of our outstanding senior notes through cash purchases, in open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Such repurchases, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors.
7.25% Senior Notes due 2022
As of December 31, 2020, our 7.25% Senior Notes due 2022 (the “Senior Notes”) had $80.0 million outstanding net of unamortized discounts and unamortized deferred financing costs. Interest on these notes is payable on February 15 and August 15 of each year. The Senior Notes are unsecured obligations, and are guaranteed on an unsecured basis by the Partnership’s subsidiaries that guarantee the Credit Agreement.
Our Senior Notes are jointly and severally, and fully and unconditionally, guaranteed by each of the Partnership’s domestic restricted subsidiaries (other than CSI Compressco Finance Inc.) that guarantee the Partnership’s other indebtedness (collectively, the "Guarantor Subsidiaries”).
The Senior Notes indenture includes customary provisions for the release of the guarantees by the Guarantor Subsidiaries upon the occurrence of certain allowed events including the release of a guarantor under our revolving credit facility.
7.50% First Lien Notes due 2025
As of December 31, 2020, our 7.50% First Lien Notes due 2025 (the “First Lien Notes”) had $399.7 million outstanding net of unamortized discounts, unamortized deferred financing costs and deferred restructuring gains. Interest on these notes is payable on April 1 and October 1 of each year. The First Lien Notes are secured by a first-priority security interest in substantially all of the Partnership’s and its subsidiaries assets, subject to certain permitted encumbrances and exceptions, and are guaranteed on a senior secured basis by each of the Partnership’s U.S. restricted subsidiaries (other than Finance Corp, certain immaterial subsidiaries and certain other excluded U.S. subsidiaries).
10.000%/10.750% Second Lien Notes due 2026
As of December 31, 2020, our 10.000%/10.750% Second Lien Notes due 2026 (the “Second Lien Notes”) had $159.0 million outstanding, net of unamortized discounts, unamortized deferred financing costs and deferred restructuring gains. Interest on the Second Lien Notes is payable on April 1 and October 1 of each year. The Second Lien Notes are secured by a second-priority security interest in substantially all of the Partnership’s and its subsidiaries assets, subject to certain permitted encumbrances and exceptions, and are guaranteed on a senior secured basis by each of the Partnership’s U.S. restricted subsidiaries (other than Finance Corp, certain immaterial subsidiaries and certain other excluded U.S. subsidiaries). In connection with the payment of PIK Interest (as defined below), if any, in respect of the Second Lien Notes, the issuers will be entitled, to increase the outstanding aggregate principal amount of the Second Lien Notes or issue additional notes (“PIK notes”) under the Second Lien Notes indenture on the same terms and conditions as the already outstanding Second Lien Notes. Interest will accrue at (1) the annual rate of 7.250% payable in cash, plus (2) at the election of the Issuers (made by delivering a notice to the Second Lien Trustee not less than five business days prior to the record date), the annual rate of (i) 2.750% payable in cash (together with the annual rate set forth in clause (1), the “Cash Interest Rate”) or (ii) 3.500% payable by increasing the principal amount of the outstanding Second Lien Notes or by issuing additional PIK notes, in each case rounding up to the nearest $1.00 (such increased principal amount or additional PIK notes, the “PIK Interest”).
In addition, the indentures governing our First Lien Notes and Second Lien Notes contain customary covenants restricting our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to: (i) pay distributions on, purchase, or redeem our common units, make certain investments and other restricted payments, or purchase or redeem any subordinated debt; (ii) incur or guarantee additional indebtedness or issue certain kinds of preferred equity securities; (iii) create or incur certain liens securing indebtedness; (iv) sell assets, including dispositions of the collateral securing our First Lien Notes and Second Lien Notes; (v) consolidate, merge, or transfer all or substantially all of our assets; (vi) enter into transactions with affiliates; and (vii) enter into agreements that restrict distributions or other payments from our restricted subsidiaries to us. Our Second Lien Notes indenture further restricts our ability to make distributions in respect of our common units in any amount exceeding $0.04 per common unit per year, unless such increased distribution is funded by proceeds from an equity offering. These covenants are subject to a number of important limitations and exceptions, including certain provisions permitting us, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions, to transfer assets to certain of our unrestricted subsidiaries. The indentures also contain customary events of default and acceleration provisions relating to events of default, which provide that upon an event of default under the indentures, the Trustee or the holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding First Lien Notes and Second Lien Notes may declare all of the First Lien Notes and Second Lien Notes to be due and payable immediately. We are in compliance with all covenants of the First Lien Notes and Second Lien Notes indentures as of December 31, 2020.
Leases
We have operating leases for some of our office space, warehouse space, operating locations, and machinery and equipment. Our leases have remaining lease terms ranging from 1 to 10 years. Some of our leases have options to extend for various periods, while some have termination options with prior notice of generally 30 days or six months. See Note 5 - “Leases” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for further information.
Other Financing
In December 2020, TETRA sold 15 high horsepower compressors to Spartan Energy Services LLC, a subsidiary of Spartan, which were subject to an existing lease with the Partnership. In connection with the GP sale, TETRA also assigned the leases for that compression services equipment with the Partnership to Spartan. As of December 31, 2020, all compression units pursuant to this arrangement were completed. See Note 7 - “Related Party Transactions” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for further information.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no “off balance sheet arrangements” that may have a current or future material effect on our consolidated financial condition or results of operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements. We prepared these financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP. In preparing our consolidated financial statements, we make assumptions, estimates, and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the periods presented. We base these estimates on historical experience, available information, and various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. We periodically evaluate these estimates and judgments, which may change as new events occur, as new information is acquired, and with changes in our operating environment. Actual results are likely to differ from current estimates, and those differences may be material. The following critical accounting policy reflects the most significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We conduct a determination of impairment of long-lived assets whenever indicators of impairment are present. If such indicators are present, the determination of the amount of impairment is based on our judgments as to the future operating cash flows to be generated from these assets throughout their estimated useful lives. If an impairment of a long-lived asset is warranted, we estimate the fair value of the asset based on a present value of these cash flows or the value that could be realized from disposing of the asset in a transaction between market participants. The estimation of future operating cash flows is inherently imprecise, and, if our estimates are materially incorrect, it could result in an overstatement or understatement of our financial position and results of operations. In particular, the oil and gas industry is cyclical, and estimates of the period over which future cash flows will be generated, as well as the predictability of these cash flows, can have an additional significant impact on the carrying value of these assets and, particularly in periods of prolonged down cycles, may result in impairment charges. Historically, our business has not experienced significant impairments of its long-lived compression assets, as utilized compressor packages generate cash flows sufficient to support their carrying values. Unutilized assets are maintained and evaluated on a regular basis. Serviceable compressor packages that are currently unutilized are anticipated to be placed in service in future years as demand increases or as fully depreciated packages in service are replaced. Sales of compressor packages have historically been at selling prices in excess of asset cost. Intangible assets recognized as part of the CSI acquisition include trademark/tradename, customer relationships, and other intangible assets that are supported primarily by the estimated future cash flows of our operations. During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded impairments of $15.4 million and $2.3 million on certain long-lived assets where the carrying values exceeded their respective fair values, including non-core used compressor equipment, the low-horsepower class of our compression fleet, certain classes of our compression fleet that are under utilized due to market preferences, and field inventory for compression and related services. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we recorded no impairments of long-lived assets. Impairments of our long-lived assets could occur in the future, particularly in the event of a significant and sustained deterioration of natural gas production or pricing.
Commitments and Contingencies
From time to time, we are involved in litigation relating to claims arising out of our operations in the normal course of business. While the outcome of these lawsuits or other proceedings against us cannot be predicted with certainty, management does not consider it reasonably possible that a loss resulting from such lawsuits or proceedings in excess of any amounts accrued has been incurred that is expected to have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of new accounting pronouncements that may affect our consolidated financial statements, see Note 2 - “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, New Accounting Pronouncements,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report.