ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations (“MD&A”) should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes contained in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. All references in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to “the Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Clear Channel Outdoor Holdings, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries.
The MD&A is organized as follows:
•Overview - Discussion of the nature, key developments and trends of our business in order to provide context for the remainder of the MD&A.
•Results of Operations - An analysis of our financial results of operations at the consolidated and segment levels.
•Liquidity and Capital Resources - Discussion of our cash flows, anticipated cash requirements and financial condition, sources and uses of capital and liquidity, and guarantor subsidiaries.
•Critical Accounting Estimates - Discussion of accounting estimates that we believe are most important to understanding the assumptions and judgments incorporated in our consolidated financial statements.
This discussion contains forward-looking statements that are subject to risks and uncertainties, and actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. See “Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements” contained in Item 1A. Risk Factors within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
OVERVIEW
Relationship with and Separation from iHeartCommunications
Prior to May 1, 2019, we were indirectly owned by iHeartCommunications and its parent company, iHeartMedia, through Clear Channel Holdings, Inc. (“CCH”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of iHeartCommunications. As of December 31, 2018, CCH, directly and indirectly through its subsidiaries, collectively represented approximately 89.1% of the outstanding shares of our common stock and nearly 100% of the total voting power.
On March 14, 2018, iHeartMedia and certain of its subsidiaries, including iHeartCommunications and CCH, (collectively, the “Debtors”) filed voluntary petitions for relief (the “iHeart Chapter 11 Cases”) under Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code. (CCOH and its subsidiaries did not file petitions for relief and were not Debtors in the iHeart Chapter 11 Cases.)
The Debtors emerged from Chapter 11 bankruptcy on May 1, 2019 (the “Effective Date”), and, pursuant to the iHeartMedia Plan of Reorganization, CCH, CCOH and its subsidiaries (collectively, the “Outdoor Group”) were separated from, and ceased to be controlled by, iHeartMedia and iHeartCommunications (collectively, with its subsidiaries, the “iHeart Group”) through a series of transactions (the “Separation”). CCOH merged with and into CCH (the “Merger”), with CCH surviving the Merger, becoming the successor to CCOH and changing its name to Clear Channel Outdoor Holdings, Inc.
In connection with the Settlement and Separation Agreement (the “Separation Agreement”), several agreements that governed our relationship with iHeartCommunications (the “Intercompany Agreements”), including agreements related to corporate services, employees and taxes, were terminated, and we entered into a transition services agreement (the “Transition Services Agreement”) with the iHeart Group, which ended on August 31, 2020. In addition, certain intercompany notes and accounts among the Outdoor Group and the iHeart Group were settled, terminated and canceled, including the Due from iHeartCommunications Note and the post-petition intercompany balance outstanding. We also received the Clear Channel tradename and other trademarks, as well as title and interest in the Outdoor assets as specified in the Separation Agreement.
In total, we received a net payment of $115.8 million from iHeartCommunications pursuant to the Separation Agreement. Refer to Notes 1 and 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements located in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more details.
Format of Presentation
Prior to the Separation, the historical financial statements of the Company consisted of the carve-out financial statements of the Outdoor Business of CCH and its subsidiaries and excluded the portion of the radio businesses that had historically been owned by CCH and reported as part of iHeartMedia’s iHM segment. CCH, which was a holding company prior to the Separation, had no independent assets or operations. Upon the Separation and the transactions related thereto, the Company’s only assets, liabilities and operations were those of the Outdoor Business.
Certain prior period amounts included herein have been reclassified to conform to the 2020 presentation.
Description of Our Business
Our revenue is derived from selling advertising space on the displays we own or operate in key markets worldwide, consisting primarily of billboards, street furniture and transit displays. Our advertising contracts with clients typically outline the number of displays reserved, the duration of the advertising campaign and the unit price per display.
We changed our presentation of segment information during the first quarter of 2020 to reflect changes in the way the business is managed and resources are allocated by the Company’s Chief Operating Decision Maker (“CODM”). Effective January 1, 2020, there are two reportable business segments: Americas, which includes operations primarily in the U.S., and Europe, which consists of operations in Europe and Singapore. Our remaining operating segments, China (before its sale, as described under “Executive Summary” below) and Latin America, do not meet the quantitative thresholds to qualify as reportable segments and are disclosed as “Other.” We have conformed the segment disclosures for prior periods in this MD&A and throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K to the 2020 presentation. Refer to Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details regarding our segments.
We own the majority of our advertising displays, which typically are located on sites that we either lease or own or for which we have acquired permanent easements. The significant expenses associated with our operations include site lease expenses, as well as direct production, maintenance and installation expenses.
•Our site lease expenses include lease payments for use of the land under our displays, as well as any revenue-sharing arrangements or minimum guaranteed amounts payable under our billboard, street furniture and transit display contracts. The terms of our site leases and revenue-sharing or minimum guaranteed contracts generally range from 1 to 20 years.
•Our direct production, maintenance and installation expenses include costs for printing, transporting and changing the advertising copy on our displays; related labor costs; vinyl costs, which vary according to the complexity of the advertising copy and the quantity of displays; electricity costs and costs of cleaning and maintaining our displays.
COVID-19 Update
In March 2020, the COVID-19 outbreak was characterized as a pandemic by the World Health Organization. The pandemic is still ongoing as of the filing date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
COVID-19 initially caused unprecedented worldwide lock-downs, significant travel and transportation restrictions in airports and transit systems, a significant reduction in time spent out-of-home by consumers, reductions in consumer spending and volatile economic conditions and business disruptions across the globe. Starting in March, we observed a significant decrease in out-of-home audience metrics indicating a reduction in consumer advertising display engagement, a sharp decline in customer bookings, an unprecedented level of requests to defer, revise or cancel sales contracts as customers sought to conserve cash, and customers forced to close their businesses temporarily or permanently.
As lock-downs and restrictions lifted, the negative impacts of COVID-19 began to lessen during the last weeks of the second quarter, and we saw an increase in mobility, traffic and other out-of-home metrics, including from our own RADAR data movement platform. During the third quarter, out-of-home metrics, travel patterns, consumer behavior and economic activity improved to varying degrees across our global platform. During the fourth quarter, the resurgence of COVID-19 cases, particularly in Europe, increased mobility restrictions, causing the positive momentum experienced during the third quarter to slow down. Our fourth quarter revenues remained significantly below historic norms in all our segments.
For the first quarter of 2021, we expect Americas segment revenue to be down high 20 percentage points against prior year, with our roadside business performing significantly ahead of our transit business. The recent mobility restrictions in European countries, particularly in France and the U.K., have created significant volatility in our Europe segment booking activity. As a result, for the first quarter of 2021, we expect Europe segment revenue to be down mid 30 percentage points against prior year. Both our Americas and Europe segments are experiencing customer advertising buying decisions later in the buying cycle, which can delay bookings and may cause performance to vary from our current expectations. Latin America bookings continue to be severely constrained.
The duration and severity of COVID-19's impacts continue to evolve and remain unknown. Since the onset of the pandemic, we have taken various measures to increase our liquidity and preserve and strengthen our financial flexibility, including aggressive operating cost and capital expenditure savings initiatives, a restructuring plan to reduce headcount and other targeted liquidity measures, as further described under “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below.
We continue to consider other cost savings initiatives in order to better align our operating expense base with revenues and to provide additional financial flexibility as circumstances warrant. However, the extent to which COVID-19 will ultimately impact our results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain, and the curtailed customer demand we have experienced and are continuing to experience could materially adversely impact our business, results of operations and overall financial performance in future periods. See “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Executive Summary
The key developments that impacted our business during the year ended December 31, 2020 are summarized below:
•Consolidated revenue decreased 30.9% during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019. Excluding the impact from movements in foreign exchange rates, consolidated revenue decreased 31.4%. This decrease was primarily driven by COVID-19 and its extensive impact on the global advertising market, which severely reduced our performance in both Americas and Europe in 2020.
•On April 28, 2020, we sold our stake in Clear Media, our former indirect, non-wholly owned subsidiary based in China, for $253.1 million. In October 2020, we paid $23.3 million of withholding taxes to the Chinese taxing authorities related to our $75.2 million gain on the sale.
•In May 2020, CCIBV, our indirect wholly-owned subsidiary, issued a promissory note, which was transferred to the holder of our mandatorily-redeemable preferred stock (“Preferred Stock”) in exchange for the Preferred Stock, which remains outstanding and held by one of our subsidiaries and is eliminated in consolidation. This promissory note was repaid in full in August 2020.
•In August 2020, CCIBV issued $375 million aggregate principal amount of 6.625% Senior Secured Notes due 2025 (the “CCIBV Senior Secured Notes”).
•We have taken a number of additional liquidity measures in 2020, including making a cautionary draw of $150 million under our Revolving Credit Facility, of which $20.0 million was repaid during the fourth quarter, and amending our senior credit agreement to suspend the springing financial covenant of the Revolving Credit Facility through June 2021 and delay the timing of the financial covenant step-down until March 31, 2022.
•We recognized reductions of rent expense on lease and non-lease contracts due to negotiated rent abatements of $77.7 million. We also received European governmental support and wage subsidies in response to COVID-19 of $15.6 million, which have been recorded as reductions in compensation and rent costs.
•In September 2020, we committed to a restructuring plan to reduce headcount in Europe and Latin America. We expect to substantially complete this plan by the first half of 2022, but we are unable to estimate the anticipated cost savings with certainty at this time. Also, during the third quarter, we began a similar restructuring plan in our Americas segment, with expected annualized pre-tax cost savings of approximately $7 million. In conjunction with these plans, we expect an additional annualized pre-tax cost savings of approximately $5 million in our Corporate operations. We incurred a combined $14.6 million in restructuring costs pursuant to these plans as of December 31, 2020. Refer to Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details related to these restructuring plans.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The discussion of our results of operations is presented on both a consolidated and segment basis. In connection with our change in reportable segments, beginning in 2020, our operating segment profit measure is Segment Adjusted EBITDA, which is calculated as revenue less direct operating expenses and selling, general and administrative expenses, excluding restructuring and other costs, which are defined as costs associated with cost-saving initiatives such as severance, consulting and termination costs and other special costs. The material components of Segment Adjusted EBITDA are discussed below by segment for all periods presented. Corporate expenses, depreciation and amortization, impairment charges, other operating income and expense, all non-operating income and expenses, and income taxes are managed on a total company basis and are, therefore, included only in our discussion of consolidated results.
Revenue and expenses “excluding the impact of movements in foreign exchange rates” in this MD&A are presented because management believes that viewing certain financial results without the impact of fluctuations in foreign currency rates facilitates period-to-period comparisons of business performance and provides useful information to investors. Revenue and expenses “excluding the impact of movements in foreign exchange rates” are calculated by converting the current period’s revenue and expenses in local currency to U.S. dollars using average foreign exchange rates for the prior year.
2020 Compared to 2019
Consolidated Results of Operations
The comparison of our historical results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019 is as follows:
Consolidated Revenue
Consolidated revenue decreased $829.2 million, or 30.9%, during 2020 compared to 2019. Excluding the $12.4 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, consolidated revenue decreased $841.6 million, or 31.4%, primarily due to the significant adverse impacts of COVID-19 on our business. Also contributing to the decrease in consolidated revenue was the sale of our Clear Media business on April 28, 2020.
Consolidated Direct Operating Expenses
Consolidated direct operating expenses decreased $251.0 million, or 17.3%, during 2020 compared to 2019. Excluding the $4.4 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, consolidated direct operating expenses decreased $255.4 million, or 17.6%. This decrease was largely due to lower site lease and other direct operating expenses throughout our business, mainly driven by lower revenue and renegotiated contracts with landlords and municipalities to better align fixed site lease expenses with reductions in revenue. We recognized reductions of rent expense on lease and non-lease contracts due to negotiated rent abatements of $77.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Additionally, direct employee compensation costs were lower driven by global cost saving initiatives implemented by the Company in response to COVID-19 and the receipt of European governmental support and wage subsidies totaling $10.4 million in 2020. Also contributing to the decrease in consolidated direct operating expenses was the sale of our Clear Media business.
Restructuring and other costs included within consolidated direct operating expenses were $7.3 million and $4.6 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Included within restructuring and other costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 were severance costs of $4.1 million related to the restructuring plans to reduce headcount.
Consolidated Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”) Expenses
Consolidated SG&A expenses decreased $78.6 million, or 15.1%, during 2020 compared to 2019. Excluding the $0.6 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, consolidated SG&A expenses decreased $79.2 million, or 15.2%. This decrease was largely due to lower employee compensation costs driven by operating cost savings initiatives implemented by the Company in response to COVID-19, including reductions in salaries, bonuses and employee hours, as well as hiring freezes and furloughs; European governmental support and wage subsidies totaling $5.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020; and lower revenue. Also contributing to the decrease in consolidated SG&A expenses was the sale of our Clear Media business.
Restructuring and other costs included within consolidated SG&A expenses were $11.9 million and $10.8 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Included within restructuring and other costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 were severance costs of $7.9 million related to the restructuring plans to reduce headcount.
Corporate Expenses
Corporate expenses decreased $7.0 million, or 4.9%, during 2020 compared to 2019. This decrease was primarily driven by lower variable incentive compensation expense resulting from declines in operating performance due to COVID-19, as well as lower costs incurred related to the investigation in China. These decreases were partially offset by higher professional fees and consulting costs for various projects, including the build-out of new corporate functions after the Separation.
Restructuring and other costs included within corporate expenses were $13.8 million and $27.7 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Included within restructuring and other costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 were severance costs of $2.5 million related to the restructuring plans to reduce headcount.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization decreased $39.9 million, or 12.9%, during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily driven by the sale of our Clear Media business, with the remaining decrease due to lower capital expenditures.
Impairment Charges
During 2020, we recorded total impairment charges of $150.4 million, including $140.7 million on indefinite-lived permits in multiple markets of our Americas segment and $9.7 million related to goodwill allocated to our Latin America business. These impairment charges were primarily driven by reductions in projected cash flows related to the expected negative financial statements from COVID-19. In 2019, we recognized $5.3 million in impairment charges related to permits in one market in our Americas segment as the result of our annual impairment test.
Other Operating Income, Net
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized other operating income, net, of $53.6 million and $1.2 million, respectively. The increase in 2020 was driven by the recognition of a $75.2 million gain on the sale of our Clear Media business, partially offset by legal costs and consulting fees incurred related to the sale.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net, decreased $59.3 million in 2020 compared to 2019. This was primarily driven by the lower rates of interest on the new debt issued as part of the August 2019 refinancing and, to a lesser extent, the redemption of a portion of our CCWH Senior Notes in July 2019. Interest expense was also higher in 2019 due to the overlapping period between the close of the February 2019 debt refinancing transaction and the redemption date of the old debt. These items were partially offset by the new interest resulting from the issuance of the CCIBV Senior Secured Notes in August 2020 and the draw under our Revolving Credit Facility in March 2020.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
In 2020, we recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt of $5.4 million related to the August repayment of the CCIBV Promissory Note. In 2019, we recognized losses on extinguishment of debt of $101.7 million, including $5.5 million related to the refinancing of the CCWH 7.625% Subordinated Notes due 2020, $13.7 million related to the partial redemption of the CCWH Senior Notes, and $82.6 million related to the refinancing of the CCWH 6.5% Senior Notes due 2022 and CCIBV 8.75% Senior Notes due 2020.
Loss on Due from iHeartCommunications
Pursuant to the Separation Agreement, the note payable by iHeartCommunications to the Company was canceled upon Separation, and we received a recovery amount of approximately $149.0 million in cash. As this was less than the outstanding Due from iHeartCommunications balance, we recognized a loss of $5.8 million during 2019.
Other Expense, Net
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized other expense, net, of $0.2 million and $15.4 million, respectively. The decrease in 2020 was largely driven lower costs incurred in connection with the Separation and, to a lesser extent, lower net foreign exchange losses recognized in connection with intercompany notes denominated in foreign currencies.
Income Tax Benefit (Expense)
The effective tax rate for 2020 was 8.8%. The benefit we received from reporting tax losses was partially offset by the recognition of $59.7 million of U.S. federal and foreign tax expense as a result of the Clear Media sale, as well as valuation allowances recorded against current period deferred tax assets in the U.S. and certain foreign jurisdictions due to uncertainty regarding our ability to realize those assets in future periods.
The effective tax rate for 2019 was (25.0)% and was primarily impacted by the $56.9 million valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets in certain foreign jurisdictions, which were no longer expected to be realized. The 2019 effective tax rate was also impacted by the valuation allowance recorded against federal and state deferred tax assets due to uncertainty regarding our ability to realize those assets in future periods.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was signed into law in the U.S. to provide certain relief as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act, among other things, relaxes the limitation for business interest deductions for 2019 and 2020 by allowing taxpayers to deduct interest up to the sum of 50% of adjusted taxable income and permits net operating loss carryovers to offset 100% of taxable income for taxable years beginning before 2021. As of December 31, 2020, the CARES Act did not have significant impact on our effective tax rate.
Americas Results of Operations
1Includes restructuring and other costs that are excluded from Segment Adjusted EBITDA.
Americas revenue decreased $296.0 million, or 23.3%, during 2020 compared to 2019. Revenue in our Americas segment was adversely affected by COVID-19 in 2020, resulting in decreases in revenue across all our products, with the largest decreases in revenue from print billboards, airport displays, and digital billboards and street furniture. Americas total digital revenue decreased 27.2% to $299.3 million during 2020, including $231.7 million from billboards and street furniture, as compared to $411.0 million during 2019, including $303.5 million from billboards and street furniture. Revenue generated from national sales comprised 37.2% and 39.3% of total revenue for 2020 and 2019, respectively, while the remainder of revenue was generated from local sales.
Americas direct operating expenses decreased $74.6 million, or 13.6%, during 2020 compared to 2019 largely due to lower site lease expenses related to lower revenue and renegotiated contracts with landlords and municipalities. Additionally, production, maintenance and installation expenses decreased due to lower revenue.
Americas SG&A expenses decreased $27.0 million, or 12.4%, during 2020 compared to 2019. Lower employee compensation costs, driven by lower revenue and operating cost savings initiatives, were partially offset by higher bad debt expense.
Europe Results of Operations
1Includes restructuring and other costs that are excluded from Segment Adjusted EBITDA.
Europe revenue decreased $307.4 million, or 27.6%, during 2020 compared to 2019. Excluding the $19.3 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, Europe revenue decreased $326.7 million, or 29.4%. COVID-19 had a negative impact on revenues in each country in which we operate, with the largest revenue reductions occurring in France, the U.K., Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and Italy. Europe digital revenue decreased $75.2 million, or 23.3%, to $248.0 million during 2020 as compared to $323.2 million during 2019. Excluding the $5.1 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, Europe digital revenue decreased $80.3 million, or 24.8%.
Europe direct operating expenses decreased $90.9 million, or 12.2%, during 2020 compared to 2019. Excluding the $11.1 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, Europe direct operating expenses decreased $102.0 million, or 13.7%. Direct operating expenses decreased in each country in which we operate, with the largest decreases occurring in Spain, Switzerland, Italy, Norway, France, the U.K. and Sweden. The primary drivers of these decreases were lower site lease expense driven by lower revenue and renegotiated contracts with landlords and municipalities; lower production, maintenance and installation expenses driven by lower revenue; and lower employee compensation expense related to operating cost savings initiatives and governmental support and wage subsidies received.
Europe SG&A expenses decreased $20.3 million, or 8.6%, during 2020 compared to 2019. Excluding the $4.0 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, Europe SG&A expenses decreased $24.3 million, or 10.3%. SG&A expenses decreased in almost all countries in which we operate, with the largest decreases occurring in the U.K., France and Spain. These decreases are largely due to lower employee compensation expense related to lower revenue, operating cost savings initiatives and governmental support and wage subsidies received.
Other Results of Operations
1Includes restructuring and other costs that are excluded from Segment Adjusted EBITDA.
2Our Latin America business represented ($8.9) million and $19.5 million of Other Segment Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Other revenue decreased $225.8 million, or 75.5%, during 2020 compared to 2019. Excluding the $6.9 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, Other revenue decreased $218.9 million, or 73.2%, primarily due to the sale of our Clear Media business. Revenue from our Latin America business was $44.0 million in 2020, down from $89.6 million in 2019 due to the adverse impact of COVID-19 on our operations.
Other direct operating expenses decreased $85.4 million, or 53.3%, during 2020 compared to 2019. Excluding the $6.7 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, Other direct operating expenses decreased $78.7 million, or 49.1%, primarily due to the sale of our Clear Media business. Direct operating expenses from our Latin America business were $34.3 million and $45.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in Latin America direct expenses was largely due to lower site lease expense related to lower revenue and renegotiated contracts with landlords and municipalities.
Other SG&A expenses decreased $31.3 million, or 46.9%, during 2020 compared to 2019. Excluding the $3.4 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, Other SG&A expenses decreased $27.9 million, or 41.9%, primarily due to the sale of our Clear Media business. SG&A expenses from our Latin America business were $19.8 million and $25.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
2019 Compared to 2018
As discussed in “Overview” above, we changed our presentation of segment information during the first quarter of 2020 to reflect changes in the way the business is managed and resources are allocated by our CODM. Certain prior period segment information has been retrospectively revised to conform to the current period presentation. References to “International business” or “International businesses” herein refer to the Company’s operations in its Europe segment and in its Latin America and China operating segments, which are disclosed as “Other.”
Consolidated Results of Operations
The comparison of our historical results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2018 is as follows:
Consolidated Revenue
Consolidated revenue decreased $37.9 million, or 1.4%, during 2019 compared to 2018. Excluding the $70.8 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, consolidated revenue increased $32.9 million, or 1.2%. This increase was driven by revenue growth of 7.0% in our Americas business, largely related to digital displays, partially offset by a revenue decline of 3.3% in our International business, excluding the impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, primarily driven by lower revenues in China.
Consolidated Direct Operating Expenses
Consolidated direct operating expenses decreased $18.5 million, or 1.3%, during 2019 compared to 2018. Excluding the $46.5 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, consolidated direct operating expenses increased $28.0 million, or 1.9%. Higher site lease expenses in both our Americas and International businesses primarily due to increased revenue were partially offset by lower direct operating expenses related to the non-renewal of contracts in certain countries in our International business.
Consolidated Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”) Expenses
Consolidated SG&A expenses decreased $2.0 million, or 0.4%, during 2019 compared to 2018. Excluding the $15.5 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, consolidated SG&A expenses increased $13.5 million, or 2.6%. This increase primarily resulted from higher employee compensation expense in our Americas business, including variable incentive compensation, partially offset by a decrease in SG&A expenses in our International business.
Corporate Expenses
Corporate expenses decreased $7.7 million, or 5.1%, during 2019 compared to 2018. Excluding the $2.3 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, corporate expenses decreased $5.4 million, or 3.6%. This decrease was primarily driven by the elimination of costs associated with the termination of the agreements comprising trademark and IP licenses and sponsor management fees that were in place prior to the Separation. The decrease in expenses was partially offset by incremental stand-alone costs associated with the build-out of new corporate functions, expenses related to the investigations in China and Italy, and higher compensation-related expenses including share-based compensation.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization decreased $9.6 million during 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to assets in our Americas and International businesses becoming fully depreciated or fully amortized and the impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, partially offset by amortization of the Clear Channel trademark, which the Company received from iHeartCommunications as part of the Separation.
Impairment Charges
We perform our annual impairment tests for indefinite-lived intangible assets and goodwill as of July 1 of each year. In addition, we test for impairment of property, plant and equipment whenever events and circumstances indicate that depreciable assets might be impaired. As a result of these impairment tests, we recorded impairment charges of $5.3 million and $7.8 million during 2019 and 2018, respectively, related to permits in one market in our Americas segment.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net, increased $31.8 million in 2019 compared to 2018. This increase was driven by the issuance of the CCWH Senior Notes in February at a higher rate of interest than the notes that were refinanced and the overlapping period between the close of the debt refinancing transaction and the redemption date, partially offset by the lower rates of interest on the new debt from the August refinancing as compared to the notes that were refinanced.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Refer to the “2020 Compared to 2019” discussion above for details regarding the $101.7 million loss on extinguishment of debt recognized in 2019. We did not extinguish any debt in 2018.
Loss on Due from iHeartCommunications
Refer to the “2020 Compared to 2019” discussion above for details regarding the $5.8 million loss on Due from iHeartCommunications recognized in 2019.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net, decreased $19.0 million during 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to decreases in net foreign exchange losses recognized in connection with intercompany notes denominated in foreign currencies, partially offset by costs incurred in 2019 in connection with the Separation.
Income Tax Expense
For periods prior to the Separation, our operations were included in a consolidated income tax return filed by iHeartMedia. For our financial statements, however, our provision for income taxes was computed as if we filed separate consolidated federal income tax returns with our subsidiaries for all periods.
The effective tax rate for 2019 was (25.0)%; refer to the “2020 Compared to 2019” discussion above for details. The effective tax rate for 2018 was (19.1)% and was primarily impacted by the valuation allowances recorded against federal and state deferred tax assets due to the uncertainty of the ability to utilize those assets in future periods. In addition, losses in certain foreign jurisdictions were not benefited primarily due to the uncertainty of the ability to utilize those losses in future periods.
Americas Results of Operations
1Includes restructuring and other costs that are excluded from Segment Adjusted EBITDA.
Americas revenue increased $83.7 million, or 7.0%, during 2019 compared to 2018. The largest driver was a 13.6% increase in digital revenue from billboards and street furniture, which was driven by a combination of organic growth and the deployment of new digital displays. Increases in revenue from print billboards, digital airport displays, other transit displays and wallscapes also contributed to the growth in revenue. Americas total digital revenue increased 15.0% to $411.0 million during 2019, including $303.5 million from billboards and street furniture, as compared to $357.4 million during 2018, including $267.1 million from billboards and street furniture. Revenue generated from national sales comprised 39.3% and 38.5% of total revenue for 2019 and 2018 respectively, while the remainder of revenue was generated from local sales.
Americas direct operating expenses increased $22.8 million, or 4.3%, during 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to higher site lease expenses related to higher revenue.
Americas SG&A expenses increased $18.7 million, or 9.4%, during 2019 compared to 2018, largely due to higher employee compensation expense, including variable incentive compensation.
Europe Results of Operations
1Includes restructuring and other costs that are excluded from Segment Adjusted EBITDA.
Europe revenue decreased $61.8 million, or 5.3%, during 2019 compared to 2018. Excluding the $57.5 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, Europe revenue decreased $4.3 million, or 0.4%. The effects of non-renewal of contracts in certain countries, including Italy and Spain, were partially offset by increases in revenue from digital display expansion in various markets, particularly in the U.K., and new contracts in France. Europe digital revenue increased 5.9% to $323.2 million during 2019 as compared to $305.1 million during 2018. Excluding the $16.0 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, Europe digital revenue increased $34.1 million, or 11.2%.
Europe direct operating expenses decreased $33.8 million, or 4.3%, during 2019 compared to 2018. Excluding the $39.0 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, Europe direct operating expenses increased $5.2 million, or 0.7%. This increase was primarily driven by higher site lease expenses in countries experiencing revenue growth, particularly in the U.K., and in countries with new contracts, particularly in France, partially offset by lower direct operating expenses, including site lease, labor and material expenses, related to the non-renewal of contracts in Italy and Spain.
Europe SG&A expenses decreased $21.2 million, or 8.2%, during 2019 compared to 2018. Excluding the $12.4 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, Europe SG&A expenses decreased $8.8 million, or 3.4%. This decrease was primarily driven by lower spending on restructuring and other cost initiatives, partially offset by higher marketing and employee compensation expenses in the U.K., primarily due to its favorable operating performance, and higher consulting fees in France.
Other Results of Operations
1Includes restructuring and other costs that are excluded from Segment Adjusted EBITDA.
2Our Latin America business represented $19.5 million and $20.8 million of Other Segment Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Other revenue decreased $59.7 million, or 16.6%, during 2019 compared to 2018. Excluding the $13.3 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, Other revenue decreased $46.4 million, or 12.9%, driven by weakening economic conditions in China. Revenue from our Latin America business was $89.6 million in 2019 compared to $86.2 million in 2018.
Other direct operating expenses decreased $7.5 million, or 4.5%, during 2019 compared to 2018. Excluding the impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, Other direct operating expenses remained flat year-over-year. Direct operating expenses from our Latin America business were $45.1 million and $41.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Other SG&A expenses increased $0.5 million, or 0.8%, during 2019 compared to 2018. Excluding the $3.1 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, Other SG&A expenses increased $3.6 million, or 5.5%. SG&A expenses from our Latin America business were $25.1 million and $23.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Cash Flows
The following discussion highlights cash flow activities during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Operating Activities
Net cash used for operating activities was $137.8 million during 2020. The net cash outflow was driven by the adverse impacts of COVID-19 on our sales and collections, which were only partially offset by reduced expenditures related to operating cost savings initiatives, including rent abatements and deferrals, reductions in compensation and certain discretionary expenses, and the deferral of payments to optimize working capital.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $214.5 million and $187.3 million during 2019 and 2018, respectively. The year-over-year increase in cash from operating activities was driven by changes in working capital balances, most notably, an increase in accrued interest due to a change in the timing of our interest payments on our outstanding debt from weekly to semi-annually (in February and August) upon Separation. Cash paid for interest, including cash paid for dividends on our Preferred Stock, decreased $51.6 million during 2019 compared to 2018.
Investing Activities
Proceeds from Disposal of Assets
Net cash provided by investing activities in 2020 reflects the April sale of Clear Media, which resulted in $216.0 million of net proceeds, which is net of cash retained by Clear Media. Net cash proceeds from the disposal of assets were $10.7 million and $9.8 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Capital Expenditures
Cash used for investing activities reflects our capital expenditures, which primarily relate to construction and sustaining activities for billboards, street furniture and other out-of-home advertising displays, including digital displays, in our Americas and Europe segments. We had the following capital expenditures during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
(1)In 2020, we reduced or deferred capital expenditures as part of our strategy to increase our liquidity and preserve and strengthen our financial flexibility given the adverse financial impacts and economic uncertainty resulting from COVID-19.
(2)Prior to the sale of Clear Media on April 28, 2020, we had capital expenditures related to the addition of transit advertising structures and purchase of concession rights in China.
(3)Corporate capital expenditures increased in 2019 due to the build-out of the new San Antonio office and IT infrastructure after the Separation, and the build-out of IT infrastructure continued in 2020.
Refer to the Contractual Obligations table under the “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Contractual Obligations” section of this MD&A for our future capital expenditure commitments.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during 2020 primarily reflected $375.0 million of proceeds from the issuance of the CCIBV Senior Secured Notes and the cautionary draw of $150.0 million that we made under our Revolving Credit Facility to enhance liquidity and preserve financial flexibility during the economic downturn resulting from COVID-19, partially offset by a $20.0 million repayment of the Revolving Credit Facility. These financing cash net inflows were partially offset by the repayment of the $53.0 million CCIBV Promissory Note, which was issued in May 2020 in exchange for the outstanding mandatorily-redeemable preferred stock, which was subsequently transferred to one of our subsidiaries; principal payments of $20.0 million on our Term Loan Facility in accordance with the terms of the Senior Secured Credit Agreement; and $10.5 million of debt issuance costs.
Net cash provided by financing activities during 2019 primarily reflected net transfers of $159.2 million in cash from iHeartCommunications, including proceeds from the settlement of the Due from iHeartCommunications Note upon Separation; proceeds of $43.8 million from the issuance of mandatorily-redeemable preferred stock, net of fees and expenses; and a net increase in cash of $27.6 million related to our 2019 capital market transactions, including the refinancing of all of our outstanding long-term debt, the issuance of common stock and subsequent redemption of a portion of our outstanding debt, and related early redemption penalties and debt issuance costs.
Net cash provided by financing activities during 2018 primarily reflected net transfers of $78.8 million in cash from iHeartCommunications related to the intercompany arrangement, partially offset by cash dividends paid in the aggregate amount of $30.7 million.
Anticipated Cash Requirements
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash on hand, cash flow from operations, and our credit facilities. Our primary uses of liquidity are for our working capital used to fund the operations of the business, capital expenditures and debt service obligations.
Trends and Uncertainties
COVID-19's extensive impact on the global advertising market had a significant negative impact on our results of operations during 2020. In response, we have taken a number of measures to increase our liquidity and preserve and strengthen our financial flexibility, including the following:
•Renegotiated contracts with landlords and municipalities to better align fixed site lease expenses with reductions in revenue;
•Cut compensation costs through reductions in salaries, bonuses and employee hours, as well as hiring freezes and furloughs;
•Obtained European governmental support and wage subsidies;
•Eliminated and reduced certain discretionary expenses;
•Deferred capital expenditures; and
•Deferred site lease and other payments to optimize working capital levels.
Additionally, in September we committed to a restructuring plan to reduce headcount in Europe and Latin America. The Latin America portion of the plan was substantially completed in the third quarter of 2020, and we expect to substantially complete the Europe portion of the plan by the first half of 2022. As of December 31, 2020, we had incurred approximately $8.9 million in charges related to this restructuring plan, but we are unable to estimate total charges or the anticipated cost savings with certainty at this time. In addition, we incurred $3.2 million in charges pursuant to a separate plan to reduce headcount in our Americas segment. This plan was completed during the fourth quarter of 2020, and we expect annualized pre-tax cost savings of approximately $7 million. In conjunction with these plans, we incurred charges of $2.5 million related to Corporate operations. We expect annualized pre-tax cost savings of approximately $5 million with limited further charges related to Corporate operations, which we anticipate will be paid over the same time frame as the Europe portion of the international plan. Actual final charges pursuant to these plans may be materially different from our estimates, and there is no guarantee that we will achieve the cost savings that we expect.
We believe that our cash on hand and borrowing capacity under our credit facilities, combined with cash flows from operations and our continued savings initiatives will enable us to meet our working capital, capital expenditure, debt service, restructuring and other funding requirements for at least the next 12 months. However, our anticipated results are subject to significant uncertainty and may be affected by events beyond our control, including prevailing economic, financial and industry conditions. Our ability to meet our funding requirements depends on the impacts from these uncertainties, including the impacts related to COVID-19, our future operating performance, our cash flow from operations, and our ability to manage our liquidity and obtain supplemental liquidity, if necessary. Additional factors may emerge that could cause our expectations to change. If we are unable to generate sufficient cash through our operations or obtain sources of supplemental liquidity, we could face substantial liquidity problems, which could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and on our ability to meet our obligations. We may take further cost-cutting measures beyond those discussed above to generate short-term liquidity in the event of an unanticipated need for cash. In addition, we regularly consider, and enter into discussions with our lenders related to, potential financing alternatives, which may include supplemental liquidity through issuances of secured or unsecured debt or other capital-raising transactions. We believe that our investments prior to the pandemic combined with the strength of our platform, our focus on the key pillars of our strategy, and the actions we took in 2020 give us sufficient liquidity to manage through this period of uncertainty; however, there can be no assurances that this will be the case.
Our significant interest payment obligations reduce our financial flexibility, make us more vulnerable to changes in operating performance and economic downturns generally, reduce our liquidity over time and could negatively affect our ability to obtain additional financing in the future. In the future, we may need to obtain additional financing from banks or other lenders, through public offerings or private placements of debt or equity, through strategic relationships or other arrangements, or from a combination of these sources. There can be no assurance that financing alternatives will be available in sufficient amounts or on terms acceptable to us in the future due to market conditions, our financial condition, our liquidity constraints, our lack of history operating as a company independent from iHeartCommunications or other factors, many of which are beyond our control, and even if financing alternatives are available to us, we may not find them suitable or at reasonable interest rates. In addition, the terms of our existing or future debt agreements may restrict us from securing financing on terms that are available to us at that time or at all.
We frequently evaluate strategic opportunities both within and outside our existing lines of business, and we expect from time to time to dispose of certain businesses and may pursue acquisitions. These dispositions or acquisitions could be material. Specifically, as we continue to focus on operational efficiencies that drive greater margin and cash flow, we will continue to review and consider opportunities to unlock shareholder value, which may include, among other things, potential asset or operational divestitures intended to deleverage and increase free cash flow. We have in the past and may from time to time in the future consider strategic transactions, including, among other things, the sale of one or more of our markets or businesses.
Sources of Capital and Liquidity
Cash and Cash Equivalents
As of December 31, 2020, we had $785.3 million of cash on our balance sheet, including $347.2 million of cash held outside the U.S. by our subsidiaries. Excess cash from our foreign operations may be transferred to our operations in the U.S. if needed to fund operations in the U.S., subject to the foreseeable cash needs of our foreign operations and restrictions in the CCIBV Senior Secured Notes Indenture. We could presently repatriate excess cash with minimal U.S. tax consequences, as calculated for tax law purposes. Additionally, dividend distributions from our international subsidiaries may be exempt from U.S. federal income tax.
Credit Facilities
We have access to a $175.0 million Revolving Credit Facility and a $125.0 million Receivables-Based Credit Facility. Both credit facilities include sub-facilities for letters of credit and for short-term borrowings, referred to as the swing line borrowings, and are scheduled to mature on August 23, 2024.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $130.0 million of borrowings and $43.2 million of letters of credit outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility, resulting in $1.8 million of excess availability. In addition, we had $62.4 million of letters of credit outstanding under our Receivables-Based Credit Facility, which had a borrowing base less than its borrowing limit of $125.0 million, limiting excess availability to $35.3 million as of December 31, 2020. Access to availability under our credit facilities is limited by the covenants relating to incurrence of secured indebtedness in the indenture governing the CCWH Senior Notes. We may request incremental credit commitments under each facility at any time, subject to customary conditions; however, the lenders under such facilities are not under any obligation to provide any such incremental commitments.
The Senior Secured Credit Agreement contains a springing financial covenant, applicable solely to the Revolving Credit Facility if the balance of the Revolving Credit Facility is greater than $0 and undrawn letters of credit exceed $10 million, that generally requires compliance with a first lien net leverage ratio of 7.60 to 1.00, with a step-down to 7.10 to 1.00 originally scheduled to commence with the last day of the fiscal quarter ending June 30, 2021. In June 2020, we amended the Senior Secured Credit Agreement to suspend the springing financial covenant of the Revolving Credit Facility from the third quarter of 2020 through the second quarter of 2021. This amendment also delays the timing of the financial covenant step-down of the first lien net leverage ratio until the first quarter of 2022. During the suspension period, we are required to maintain minimum liquidity of $150 million, including cash on hand and availability under our Receivables-Based Credit Facility and Revolving Credit Facility, and we agreed not to make voluntary restricted payments with certain exceptions. We expect this amendment to support our efforts to manage through the uncertainties caused by the unprecedented COVID-19 situation while maintaining compliance with the terms of our Revolving Credit Facility. We were in compliance with the minimum liquidity covenant as of December 31, 2020.
Refer to Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements located in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more details on each of these credit facilities.
Note Issuances
In May 2020, we issued the CCIBV Promissory Note through our indirect wholly-owned subsidiary and then transferred this note to the holder of our Preferred Stock in exchange for the Preferred Stock, which remains outstanding and is held by one of our affiliates and, therefore, eliminates upon consolidation. This transfer of the Preferred Stock to an affiliate effectively eliminated certain restrictions on our flexibility to potentially pursue liquidity-enhancing capital structure transactions.
In August 2020, CCIBV issued $375.0 million aggregate principal amount of CCIBV Senior Secured Notes due 2025 through our indirect wholly-owned subsidiary. A portion of these proceeds was used to pay the CCIBV Promissory Note in full, including paid-in-kind interest, and the remainder of the proceeds will be used for general corporate purposes, including to fund the operating expenses and capital expenditures of our Europe segment.
In February 2021, the Company issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 7.750% Senior Notes Due 2028. The Company plans to use a portion of these proceeds, together with cash on hand, to redeem $940.0 million aggregate principal amount of its CCWH Senior Notes and to pay related transaction fees and expenses.
Refer to Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements located in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion on our debt agreements.
Uses of Capital and Liquidity
Working Capital Needs
We utilize working capital to fund the operations of our business, and we have future cash obligations under non-cancelable operating leases and other types of non-cancelable contracts. We lease office space, certain equipment and the majority of the land occupied by our advertising structures under long-term operating leases. Some of our lease agreements contain renewal options and annual rental escalation clauses (generally tied to the consumer price index), as well as provisions for our payment of utilities and maintenance. We also have minimum payments associated with non-cancelable contracts that enable us to display advertising on such media as buses, trains, bus shelters and terminals. The majority of these contracts contain rent provisions that are calculated as the greater of a percentage of the relevant advertising revenue or a specified guaranteed minimum annual payment. These costs are included in our direct operating expenses and have historically been satisfied by cash flows from operations. As previously described, we have successfully renegotiated contracts with landlords and municipalities in both the U.S. and Europe in order to better align fixed site lease expenses with reductions in revenue as we continue to be impacted by COVID-19, and we have also deferred site lease and other payments when possible. Refer to the Contractual Obligations table under the “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Contractual Obligations” section of this MD&A for a quantification of contractual obligations related to non-cancelable operating leases and other non-cancellable contracts.
Additionally, during 2020, we paid $8.8 million on the restructuring plans outlined above to reduce headcount throughout our business. We expect to incur additional cash expenditures related to the Europe portion of the international plan through the first half of 2022, although we are unable to estimate the total charges with certainty at this time. Refer to Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements located in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on our restructuring plans.
Capital Expenditures
The primary driver of our capital expenditure requirements is the construction of new advertising structures, including the continued deployment of digital displays in accordance with our long-term strategy to digitize our network as an alternative to traditional methods of displaying our clients’ advertisements. We believe cash flow from operations will be sufficient to fund these expenditures because we expect enhanced margins through lower costs of production as digital advertisements are controlled by a central computer network, decreased down-time on displays as digital advertisements are digitally changed rather than manually posted, and incremental revenue through more targeted and time-specific advertisements. However, in light of the rapidly-evolving impact of COVID-19 and the uncertainty around the related economic downturn, we deferred certain capital expenditures beginning in the second quarter of 2020, resulting in a decrease in our capital expenditures for the year ended 2020 as compared to 2019, as previously described. If COVID-19 and the related economic uncertainty continue to adversely affect our results of operations and liquidity, we expect to continue deferring certain of our planned capital expenditures.
In 2020, our Americas business was awarded a long-term airport advertising and sponsorship contract with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which we expect to result in approximately $20 million of capital expenditures over the next two years and an additional $48 million over the remainder of the initial 12-year term, subject to reduction based upon the level of passenger traffic at the airports. Almost all of the capital expenditures will be for digital media. Additionally, we have commitments relating to required purchases of property, plant and equipment under certain street furniture contracts, and certain of our contracts contain penalties for not fulfilling our commitments related to our obligations to build bus stops, kiosks and other public amenities or advertising structures. Refer to the Contractual Obligations table under the “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Contractual Obligations” section of this MD&A for our future capital expenditure commitments.
Debt Service Obligations
A substantial amount of our cash requirements is for debt service obligations. During 2020, we spent $323.8 million of cash to pay interest on our debt, which reflects a change in payment terms for interest on our Senior Secured Credit Facilities from monthly to every three months. After giving effect to the issuance of the 7.750% Senior Notes and anticipated partial redemption of the CCWH Senior Notes as discussed above, we anticipate cash interest payment obligations of approximately $361.5 million and $334.8 million in 2021 and 2022, respectively. Additionally, during 2020, we made $20.0 million in principal payments on the Term Loan Facility and repaid $20.0 million of the outstanding balance on the Revolving Credit Facility.
As of December 31, 2020, we had the following debt outstanding:
•$1,975.0 million of borrowings under the Term Loan Facility, to be paid in quarterly installments of $5 million, with the remaining balance maturing on August 23, 2026;
•$130.0 million of borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility, which matures on August 23, 2024;
•$1,250.0 million of borrowings under the CCOH Senior Secured Notes, which bear interest at a rate of 5.125% per annum and mature on August 15, 2027;
•$375.0 million of borrowings under the CCIBV Senior Secured Notes, which bear interest at a rate of 6.625% per annum and mature on August 1, 2025;
•$1,901.5 million of borrowings under the CCWH Senior Notes, which bear interest at a rate of 9.25% per annum and mature on February 15, 2024; and
•$6.8 million of borrowings under finance leases utilized for general operating purposes.
Our next material debt maturity is in 2024 when the outstanding balances under the CCWH Senior Notes and Revolving Credit Facility are due; however, at our option, we may redeem a portion of our outstanding debt prior to maturity in accordance with the terms of our debt agreements. After giving effect to the anticipated partial redemption of the CCWH Senior Notes in 2021, the remaining balance outstanding on the CCWH Senior Notes will be $961.5 million.
Each of our debt agreements includes negative covenants that, subject to significant exceptions, limit our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to, among other things, incur or guarantee additional indebtedness or issue certain preferred stock; incur certain liens; engage in mergers, consolidations, liquidations and dissolutions; sell certain assets, including capital stock of our subsidiaries; pay dividends and distributions or repurchase capital stock; make certain investments, loans, or advances; redeem, purchase or retire subordinated debt; engage in certain transactions with affiliates; enter into agreements which limit our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to incur restrictions on the ability to make distributions; and amend or waive organizational documents. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the covenants contained in our financing agreements.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1)Refer to Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements located in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for details on our outstanding long-term debt. Note that the amounts of principal and interest payments presented in this contractual obligations table are as of December 31, 2020 and therefore do not give effect to the issuance of the 7.750% Senior Notes and anticipated partial redemption of the CCWH Senior Notes in the first quarter of 2021.
(2)Operating lease obligations represent our future minimum rental commitments under non-cancelable operating lease agreements.
(3)Obligations under non-cancelable contracts include minimum payments under contracts that do not meet the definition of a lease as they provide the supplier with a right to fulfill the arrangement with property, plant and equipment not specified within the contract.
(4)Capital expenditure obligations include our commitments relating to required purchases of property, plant and equipment under certain street furniture contracts; penalties required under certain contracts if we do not fulfill our commitments related to obligations to build bus stops, kiosks and other public amenities or advertising structures; and commitments under the initial 12-year term of the new airport advertising and sponsorship contract with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey (subject to reduction based upon the level of passenger traffic at the airports).
(5)The non-current portion of unrecognized tax benefits is included in the “Thereafter” column as we cannot reasonably estimate the timing or amounts of additional cash payments, if any, at this time. For additional information about unrecognized tax benefits, refer to Note 8 to our Consolidated Financial Statements located in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(6)Other long-term obligations includes $64.6 million of pension liabilities, $46.2 million of asset retirement obligations, and $26.5 million related to other long-term obligations with a specific maturity.
Guarantor Subsidiaries
The Company and certain of the Company’s direct and indirect wholly-owned domestic subsidiaries (the “Obligor Group”) fully and unconditionally guarantee, on a joint and several basis, the CCWH Senior Notes. On February 28, 2020, the Company and the guarantors under the CCWH Senior Notes Indenture filed a registration statement with the SEC to register the offer to exchange the CCWH Senior Notes and the guarantees thereof for a like principal amount of CCWH Senior Notes and guarantees thereof that have been registered under the Securities Act, in accordance with the deadlines set forth in the Registration Rights Agreement. The registration statement, as amended on April 6, 2020, became effective on April 7, 2020.
In our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, we included certain consolidating information with respect to the Company, Clear Channel Worldwide Holdings, Inc. (“CCWH”) and our wholly-owned subsidiaries that guarantee the CCWH Senior Notes in the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements pursuant to Rule 3-10 of Regulation S-X. In March 2020, the SEC adopted amendments to this Rule to simplify the financial disclosure requirements for guarantors and issuers of guaranteed registered securities. In compliance with these amendments, we no longer include consolidating financial information in the notes to our consolidated financial statements, and we instead include certain summary financial information related to the Obligor group in the MD&A in accordance with Rule 13-01 of Regulation S-X.
The following summary financial information of the Obligor Group, which includes the parent guarantor, the issuer and the subsidiary guarantors, is provided in conformity with the SEC’s Regulation S-X Rule 13-01:
(1) Investments in non-guarantor subsidiaries have been excluded from the presentation of Other assets. Other assets primarily consists of goodwill, intangible assets and right-of-use assets.
As of December 31, 2020, CCWH had $1,901.5 million of CCWH Senior Notes outstanding. The CCWH Senior Notes are guaranteed, jointly and severally, irrevocably and unconditionally, on an unsecured senior basis, by the Company and certain of the Company’s existing and future subsidiaries (the “Guarantors”). Not all of the Company’s subsidiaries guarantee the CCWH Senior Notes. The Company’s subsidiaries that do not guarantee the CCWH Senior Notes (the “Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries”) include all foreign subsidiaries of the Company, all non-wholly-owned subsidiaries of the Company, certain domestic subsidiaries and all immaterial subsidiaries. The CCWH Senior Notes are structurally subordinated to all existing and future obligations of the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries, and the claims of creditors of the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries, including trade creditors, will have priority as to the assets of these subsidiaries. In the event of a bankruptcy, liquidation or reorganization of any of the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries, holders of their indebtedness and their trade and other creditors will generally be entitled to payment of their claims from the assets of those subsidiaries before any assets are made available for distribution to CCWH and, in turn, to its creditors.
In addition, as of December 31, 2020, CCWH guaranteed $1,250.0 million principal amount of CCOH Senior Secured Notes, $1,975.0 million of borrowings under the Term Loan Facility, $130.0 million of borrowings and $43.2 million of letters of credit under the Revolving Credit Facility, and $62.4 million of letters of credit under the Receivables-Based Credit Facility. All of the subsidiaries of CCOH that guarantee the CCWH Senior Notes are guarantors of this secured indebtedness. The CCWH Senior Notes are effectively subordinated to, and the guarantee of each Guarantor of the CCWH Senior Notes is effectively subordinated to, the CCOH Senior Secured Notes, the Term Loan Facility, the Revolving Credit Facility and the Receivables-Based Credit Facility, to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness.
The obligations of each Guarantor under its guarantee are limited as necessary to prevent such guarantee from constituting a fraudulent conveyance under applicable law. If a guarantee were to be rendered voidable, it could be subordinated by a court to all other indebtedness (including guarantees and other contingent liabilities) of the Guarantor, and, depending on the amount of such indebtedness, a Guarantor’s liability on its guarantee could be reduced to zero. Each guarantee by a Guarantor provides by its terms that it shall be automatically and unconditionally released and discharged upon: (1) any sale, exchange or transfer (by merger or otherwise) of the Guarantor in a manner in compliance with the applicable provisions of the CCWH Senior Notes Indenture; (2) the designation of any restricted subsidiary that is a Guarantor as an unrestricted subsidiary; (3) CCWH’s exercising legal defeasance or covenant defeasance in accordance with the relevant provisions of the CCWH Senior Notes Indenture; or (4) a Guarantor ceasing to be a restricted subsidiary as a result of a transaction or designation permitted under the CCWH Senior Notes Indenture.
CCWH is a holding company with no significant operations or material assets other than the direct and indirect equity interests in its subsidiaries. CCWH derives all of its operating income from its subsidiaries. As a result, its cash flow and the ability to service its indebtedness, including the CCWH Senior Notes, depends on the performance of its subsidiaries and the ability of those entities to distribute funds to it.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, at the date of the financial statements and the reported amount of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates that are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The results of these evaluations form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the reported amount of revenue and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such difference could be material. Our significant accounting policies are discussed in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Management believes that the following accounting estimates are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, and they require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, resulting from the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. The following narrative describes these critical accounting estimates, management's judgments and assumptions, and the effect if actual results differ from these assumptions.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Accounts receivable are recorded at the invoiced amount, net of allowances for credit losses. We evaluate the collectability of our accounts receivable based on a combination of factors. In circumstances where we are aware of a specific customer’s inability to meet its financial obligations, we record a specific reserve to reduce the amounts recorded to what we believe will be collected. For all other customers, we apply historical write-off rates, net of recoveries, to outstanding accounts receivable balances by aging bucket to determine the expected credit loss. We believe our concentration of credit risk is limited due to the large number and the geographic diversification of our customers. Our determination of our credit loss reserve considers the impacts of COVID-19 on our forecast of future write offs. If our agings were to improve or deteriorate, resulting in a 10% change in our allowance, we estimate that our bad debt expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 would have changed by approximately $3.2 million.
Leases
The most significant estimates used by management in accounting for leases and the impact of these estimates are as follows:
Lease term. Lease term includes the non-cancelable period of the lease together with all of the following: periods covered by an option to extend the lease if the lessee is reasonably certain to exercise that option, periods covered by an option to terminate the lease if the lessee is reasonably certain not to exercise that option, and periods covered by an option to extend (or not to terminate) the lease in which exercise of the option is controlled by the lessor. When calculating our lease liability for contracts in which we are the lessee, we generally exclude renewal periods from the lease term as we do not consider exercise of such options to be reasonably certain for most of our leases. Therefore, unless exercise of a renewal option is considered reasonably certain, the optional terms and payments are not included within the lease liability. The expected lease term is used in determining whether the lease is accounted for as an operating lease or a finance lease. A lease is considered a finance lease if the lease term is for a major part of the remaining economic life of the underlying asset. The expected lease term is also used in determining the depreciable life of the asset. An increase in the expected lease term will increase the probability that a lease may be considered a finance lease and will generally result in higher interest and depreciation expense for a leased property recorded on our balance sheet.
Incremental borrowing rate. We use the incremental borrowing rate ("IBR") to determine the present value of lease payments at the commencement of a lease. The IBR, as defined in ASC Topic 842, is the rate of interest that a lessee would have to pay to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term at an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment. We also use the IBR in determining whether the lease is accounted for as an operating lease or a finance lease. An increase in the IBR decreases the net present value of the minimum lease payments and reduces the probability that a lease will be considered a finance lease.
Fair market value of leased asset. The fair market value of leased property is generally estimated based on comparable market data as provided by third-party sources. Fair market value is used in determining whether the lease is accounted for as an operating lease or a finance lease. A higher fair market value as compared to the present value of lease payments reduces the likelihood that a lease will be considered a finance lease.
Long-lived Assets
Long-lived assets, including structures, other property, plant and equipment and definite-lived intangibles, are reported at historical cost less accumulated depreciation and amortization. We estimate the useful lives for various types of advertising structures and other long-lived assets based on our historical experience and our plans regarding how we intend to use those assets. Advertising structures have different lives depending on their nature, with large format bulletins generally having longer depreciable lives and posters and other displays having shorter depreciable lives. Street furniture and transit displays are depreciated over their estimated useful lives or appropriate contractual periods, whichever is shorter. Our experience indicates that the estimated useful lives applied to our portfolio of assets have been reasonable, and we do not expect significant changes to the estimated useful lives of our long-lived assets in the future. When we determine that structures or other long-lived assets will be disposed of prior to the end of their useful lives, we estimate the revised useful lives and depreciate the assets over the revised period. We also review long-lived assets for impairment when events and circumstances indicate that depreciable and amortizable long-lived assets might be impaired and the undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than the carrying amounts of those assets. When specific assets are determined to be unrecoverable, the cost basis of the asset is reduced to reflect the current fair market value.
We use various assumptions in determining the remaining useful lives of assets to be disposed of prior to the end of their useful lives and in determining the current fair market value of long-lived assets that are determined to be unrecoverable. Estimated useful lives and fair values are sensitive to factors including contractual commitments, regulatory requirements, future expected cash flows, industry growth rates and discount rates, as well as future salvage values. Our impairment loss calculations require management to apply judgment in estimating future cash flows, including forecasting useful lives of the assets and selecting the discount rate that reflects the risk inherent in future cash flows.
If actual results are not consistent with our assumptions and judgments used in estimating future cash flows and asset fair values, we may be exposed to future impairment losses that could be material to our results of operations.
Annual Impairment Tests
We perform impairment tests on indefinite-lived intangible assets and goodwill at least annually, as of July 1 of each year, and more frequently as events or changes in circumstances warrant. During the first and third quarters of 2020, we performed impairment tests due to changes in our estimates and assumptions related to the expected negative financial statement impacts of COVID-19, including reductions in projected cash flows, as described below. There continues to be a high level of uncertainty in estimating our expected economic and operational impacts relative to COVID-19 as it is an evolving situation. As expected impacts from COVID-19 and other factors are revised, our estimates and assumptions may change, and we may experience further potential impacts to our financial statements in future periods.
Indefinite-lived Intangible Assets
Indefinite-lived intangible assets, such as our billboard permits, are reviewed at least annually for possible impairment and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable using the direct valuation method as prescribed in ASC 805-20-S99. Under the direct valuation method, the estimated fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible assets is calculated at the market level as prescribed by ASC 350-30-35, and it is assumed that rather than acquiring indefinite-lived intangible assets as a part of a going concern business, the buyer hypothetically develops indefinite-lived intangible assets and builds a new operation with similar attributes from scratch. Thus, the buyer incurs start-up costs during the build-up phase that are normally associated with going concern value. Initial capital costs are deducted from the discounted cash flow model to calculate the value that is directly attributable to the indefinite-lived intangible assets. Our key assumptions using the direct valuation method are market revenue growth rates, market share, profit margin, duration and profile of the build-up period, estimated start-up capital costs and losses incurred during the build-up period, the risk-adjusted discount rate and terminal values. This data is populated using industry-normalized information representing an average asset within a market.
We performed our annual impairment test as of July 1, 2020, in accordance with ASC 350-30-35, which did not result in any impairment to our intangible assets. Due to the expected impacts from COVID-19, we also tested our intangible assets for impairment as of March 31, 2020 and September 30, 2020, resulting in the recognition of impairment charges of $123.1 million and $17.5 million in the first and third quarters of 2020, respectively, related to permits in multiple markets in our Americas segment, primarily driven by reductions in projected cash flows and an increased discount rate. In determining the fair value of our billboard permits as of March 31, 2020 and September 30, 2020, the following key assumptions were used:
•Industry revenue growth forecasts were used for the initial four-year period, which varied by market;
◦For the March 31 test, industry revenue growth forecasts for the initial four-year period included an average growth of 2.4% over the first two years, factoring in the impacts related to COVID-19, and between 2.9% and 3.0% during the remaining two years;
◦For the September 30 test, industry revenue growth forecasts started with the trailing twelve month forecast period ending September 30, 2021, and annual revenue growth on average of 8% was assumed from year two to year four, factoring in recovery from the impacts related to COVID-19;
•Revenue growth beyond the initial four-year period was assumed to be 3.0%;
•Revenue was grown over a build-up period, reaching maturity by the second year;
•Operating margins gradually climb to the industry average margin (as high as 53.3% for the March 31 test and 47.9% for the September 30 test, depending on market size); and
•Discount rate was assumed to be 10.0% as of March 31, 2020 and 9.5% as of September 30, 2020.
While we believe we have made reasonable estimates and utilized appropriate assumptions to calculate the fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets, it is possible that a material change could occur. If future results are not consistent with our assumptions and estimates, we may be exposed to impairment charges in the future. As of September 30, 2020, markets with billboard permit fair values exceeding carrying amounts by 30% or less represented $74.9 million of the total fair value of billboard permits. These permits had fair values exceeding carrying amounts by $9.0 million in total. The fair value of billboard permits impaired during the three months ended September 30, 2020 was $46.9 million. The following table shows the decrease in the fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets as of September 30, 2020 that would result from decreases of 100 basis points in our discrete and terminal period revenue growth rate and profit margin assumptions and an increase of 100 basis points in our discount rate assumption:
1, 2, 3 The change in each assumption as of September 30, 2020 would have resulted in additional impairment of $58.6 million, $13.1 million and $61.2 million, respectively.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of identifiable net assets acquired in business combinations. We test goodwill at interim dates if events or changes in circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired. The fair value of our reporting units is used to apply value to the net assets of each reporting unit. To the extent that the carrying amount of net assets would exceed the fair value, an impairment charge is recorded. The discounted cash flow approach that we use for valuing goodwill as part of the impairment testing approach involves estimating future cash flows expected to be generated from the related assets, discounted to their present value using a risk-adjusted discount rate. Terminal values are also estimated and discounted to their present value.
As previously described, we changed our presentation of segment information as of January 1, 2020 to reflect changes in the way the business is managed and resources are allocated by the CODM. This resulted in a change to our operating segments and certain reporting units. Corresponding with the change in our reporting units, we tested goodwill for impairment immediately before and after the change utilizing a discount rate of approximately 8.5% to 10.0% for each of our reporting units and an estimated perpetual growth rate of 3.0%. This testing did not identify impairment.
We performed our annual impairment test as of July 1, 2020, in accordance with ASC 350-30-35, which did not result in any goodwill impairment. Due to the expected impacts from COVID-19, we also tested our goodwill for impairment as of March 31, 2020 and September 30, 2020. This resulted in the recognition of an impairment charge of $9.7 million during the third quarter of 2020, representing the entire goodwill balance allocated to our Latin America reporting unit, reported within Other. In determining the fair value of our reporting units as of March 31, 2020 and September 30, 2020, we used the following assumptions:
•Expected cash flows underlying our business plans for the periods 2020 through 2025, which are based on detailed, multi-year forecasts performed by each of our operating segments and reflect the advertising outlook across our businesses;
•Cash flows beyond 2025 were projected to grow at a perpetual growth rate, which we estimated at 3.0%; and
•In order to risk-adjust the cash flow projections in determining fair value, we utilized a discount rate for each of our reporting units of approximately 9.5% to 11.0% as of March 31, 2020 and 8.5% to 10.5% as of September 30, 2020.
Based on our assessment using the assumptions described above, a hypothetical 10% reduction in the estimated fair value of each of our reporting units with goodwill would not result in a material impairment condition as of September 30, 2020.
While we believe we have made reasonable estimates and utilized appropriate assumptions to calculate the estimated fair value of our reporting units, it is possible a material change could occur. If future results are not consistent with our assumptions and estimates, we may be exposed to impairment charges in the future. The following table shows the decrease in the fair value of each of our reporting units with goodwill as of September 30, 2020 that would result from decreases of 100 basis points in our discrete and terminal period revenue growth rate and profit margin assumptions and an increase of 100 basis points in our discount rate assumption:
Changes to our assumptions by these amounts would not result in additional goodwill impairment as the fair value of goodwill for each reporting unit would still be greater than its carrying value.
Tax Provisions
Our estimates of income taxes and the significant items giving rise to deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are shown in Note 8 to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, reflect our assessment of actual future taxes to be paid on items reflected in the financial statements, giving consideration to both timing and probability of these estimates. Actual income taxes could vary from these estimates due to future changes in income tax law or results from the final review of our tax returns by federal, state or foreign tax authorities.
We use our best and most informed judgment to determine whether it is more likely than not that our deferred tax assets will be realized. Deferred tax assets are reduced by valuation allowances if we believe it is more likely than not that some portion or the entire asset will not be realized.
We also use our best and most informed judgment to determine whether it is more likely than not that we will sustain positions that we have taken on tax returns and, if so, the amount of benefit to initially recognize within our financial statements. We regularly review our uncertain tax positions and adjust our unrecognized tax benefits (“UTBs”) in light of changes in facts and circumstances, such as changes in tax law, interactions with taxing authorities and developments in case law. These adjustments to our UTBs may affect our income tax expense, and settlement of uncertain tax positions may require use of our cash.
Litigation Accruals
We are currently involved in certain legal proceedings. Based on current assumptions, we have accrued an estimate of the probable costs for the resolution of those claims for which the occurrence of loss is probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated. Future results of operations could be materially affected by changes in these assumptions or the effectiveness of our strategies related to these proceedings. Management’s estimates have been developed in consultation with counsel and are based upon an analysis of potential results, assuming a combination of litigation and settlement strategies. Refer to Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Pension Benefits
We estimate pension benefit obligations and costs based on actuarial valuations. The annual measurement date for our pension benefit plan is December 31. The actuarial valuations require the use of certain assumptions including discount rates, expected long-term rates of return on plan assets and expected rates of compensation increase. Changes in these assumptions are primarily influenced by factors outside our control. We determine the discount rate based on a range of factors, including a yield curve composed of rates of return on high-quality corporate bonds that have a comparable cash flow pattern to the expected payments to be made under our plans. The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is based upon the weighted averages of the expected long-term rates of return for the broad categories of investments held in our plans. The expected rate of compensation increase represents average long-term salary increases.
These assumptions can have an effect on the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements. A 0.25% change in the discount rate and compensation rate assumptions would have resulted in increases of the projected benefit obligation as of December 31, 2020 of $10.1 million and $1.3 million, respectively.
Asset Retirement Obligations
ASC Subtopic 410-20 requires us to estimate our obligation upon the termination or non-renewal of a lease to dismantle and remove our billboard structures from the leased land and to reclaim the site to its original condition. Due to the high rate of lease renewals over a long period of time, our calculation assumes that the related assets will be removed at some period over the next 50 years. An estimate of third-party cost information is used with respect to the dismantling of structures and site reclamation. The interest rate used to calculate the present value of such costs over the retirement period is based on an estimated risk-adjusted credit rate for the same period. If our assumption of the risk-adjusted credit rate used to discount current year additions to the asset retirement obligation changed approximately 1%, our liability as of December 31, 2020 would not be materially impacted.
Share-Based Compensation
Under the fair value recognition provisions of ASC Subtopic 718-10, share-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award. Determining the fair value of share-based awards at the grant date requires assumptions and judgments, such as expected volatility, among other factors. If actual results differ significantly from these estimates, our results of operations could be materially impacted.
NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
For a description of the expected impact of newly issued but not yet adopted accounting pronouncements on our financial position and results of operations, refer to Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements located in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.