Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with Item 1. Business, Item 1A. Risk Factors, Forward-Looking Statements and Item 15. Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes and other data, all of which appear elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Management's Discussion and Analysis below generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this
Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results or Operations” in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 filed with the SEC on March 5, 2020 and such information is incorporated herein by reference.
Business Overview
We provide total talent management services, including strategic workforce solutions, contingent staffing, permanent placement, and consultative services for healthcare customers. We recruit and place highly qualified healthcare professionals in virtually every specialty and area of expertise. Our diverse customer base includes both public and private acute care and non-acute care hospitals, outpatient clinics, ambulatory care facilities, single and multi-specialty physician practices, rehabilitation facilities, urgent care centers, public and charter schools, correctional facilities, government facilities, pharmacies, and many other healthcare providers. Through our national staffing teams and network of office locations, we offer our workforce solutions and we can place clinicians on travel and per diem assignments, local short-term contracts, and permanent positions. Our workforce solutions include MSPs, IRP, RPO, and other outsourcing and consultative services as described in Item 1. Business. By utilizing our various solutions, customers can better plan their personnel needs, talent acquisition and management processes, strategically flex and balance their workforce, access quality healthcare personnel, and provide continuity of care for improved patient outcomes. We have a longstanding history of investing in our diversity, equality, and inclusion strategic initiatives as a key component of the organization’s overall corporate social responsibility program which is closely aligned with its core values to create a better future for our people, communities, the planet, and our shareholders.
We manage and segment our business based on the nature of the services we offer to our customers. As a result, we report three business segments - Nurse and Allied Staffing, Physician Staffing, and Search.
● Nurse and Allied Staffing - For the year ended December 31, 2020, Nurse and Allied Staffing represented approximately 91% of our total revenue. The Nurse and Allied Staffing segment provides workforce solutions and traditional staffing, including temporary and permanent placement of travel nurses and allied professionals, as well as per diem and contract nurses and allied personnel. We also provide clinical and non-clinical professionals on long-term assignments to clients such as public and charter schools, correctional facilities, skilled nursing facilities, and other non-acute settings. We provide flexible workforce solutions to our healthcare customers through diversified offerings designed to meet their unique needs, including: MSP, OWS, IRP and consulting services.
● Physician Staffing - For the year ended December 31, 2020, Physician Staffing represented approximately 8% of our total revenue. Physician Staffing provides physicians in many specialties, as well as CRNAs, NPs, and PAs as independent contractors on temporary assignments throughout the U.S.
● Search - For the year ended December 31, 2020, Search represented approximately 1% of our total revenue. Search includes retained and contingent search services for physicians, healthcare executives, and other healthcare professionals, as well as RPO.
Summary of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2020, revenue from services increased 1.7% year-over-year to $836.4 million, driven by growth in our largest segment, Nurse and Allied Staffing, due to continued acceleration in demand primarily as a result of a high volume of COVID-19 assignments, as well as our support of two labor disruptions. As a result of the rise in demand and a tight labor market, our average travel bill rates increased due to the increases in pay rates required to attract healthcare professionals. Throughout the pandemic, we have worked with our clients to adjust bill rates, both increasing and decreasing rates as necessary, to provide critical healthcare professionals. Revenue from Physician Staffing and Search decreased year-over-year by 8.9% and 28.8%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020, as both segments continued to experience an adverse impact from COVID-19. Within Physician Staffing, revenue from advanced practices increased, offset by declines in other physician specialties.
Net loss attributable to common shareholders for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $13.0 million as compared to a net loss of $57.7 million in the prior year. Profitability in the current year was impacted by $6.1 million of restructuring costs and $16.2 million of impairment charges. Profitability in the year ended December 31, 2019 was impacted by $3.6 million of restructuring costs, $16.3 million of impairment charges, $1.6 million of legal settlement charges, $2.0 million loss on early extinguishment of debt, and $1.3 million loss on derivative.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated cash flow from operating activities of $27.2 million and repaid a net of $17.6 million on our senior-secured asset-based credit facility (ABL). As of December 31, 2020, we had $1.6 million in cash
and cash equivalents, and availability under the ABL of $125.5 million, with $53.4 million of borrowings drawn under our ABL, and $18.5 million of undrawn letters of credit outstanding, leaving $53.6 million available for borrowing. See Note 8 - Debt to our consolidated financial statements.
We expect that COVID-19 will continue to have a mixed impact on our business, with rapid changes possible in both demand and bill rates, and that higher bill rates will likely trend down throughout 2021.
See Results of Operations, Segment Results, and Liquidity and Capital Resources sections that follow for further information.
Operating Metrics
We evaluate our financial condition by tracking operating metrics and financial results specific to each of our segments. Key operating metrics include hours worked, days filled, number of contract personnel on a full-time equivalent basis (FTE), revenue per FTE, and revenue per day filled. Other operating metrics include number of open orders, candidate applications, contract bookings, length of assignment, bill and pay rates, and renewal and fill rates, number of active searches, and number of placements. These operating metrics are representative of trends that assist management in evaluating business performance. Due to the timing of our business process and other factors, certain of these operating metrics may not necessarily correlate to the reported GAAP results for the periods presented. Some of the segment financial results analyzed include revenue, operating expenses, and contribution income. In addition, we monitor cash flow as well as operating and leverage ratios to help us assess our liquidity needs.
Business Segment Business Measurement
Nurse and Allied Staffing FTEs represent the average number of Nurse and Allied Staffing contract personnel on a full-time equivalent basis.
Average revenue per FTE per day is calculated by dividing the Nurse and Allied Staffing revenue per FTE by the number of days worked in the respective periods. Nurse and Allied Staffing revenue also includes revenue from the permanent placement of nurses.
Physician Staffing Days filled is calculated by dividing the total hours invoiced during
the period, including an estimate for the impact of accrued revenue,
by 8 hours.
Revenue per day filled is calculated by dividing revenue as reported
by days filled for the period presented.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes, for the periods indicated, selected consolidated statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of revenue. Our historical results of operations are not necessarily indicative of future operating results.
Comparison of Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue from services
Revenue from services increased $14.2 million, or 1.7%, to $836.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $822.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due primarily to growth in our Nurse and Allied Staffing segment, partially offset by declines in our Physician Staffing and Search segments. Revenue growth within Nurse and Allied was driven primarily by higher demand and bill rates related to COVID-19, which were partially offset by declines in revenue from education clients, and other specialties impacted by hospitals deferrals of elective procedures and lower census earlier in the year.
Direct operating expenses
Direct operating expenses are comprised primarily of field employee compensation and independent contractor expenses, housing expenses, travel expenses, and related insurance expenses. Direct operating expenses increased $15.5 million, or 2.5%, to $633.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $618.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. As a percentage of total revenue, direct operating expenses increased to 75.8% compared to 75.2% in the prior year period, reflecting a change in the mix of business, primarily as the higher compensation of COVID-19 assignments were generally priced at a lower average margin.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $8.2 million, or 4.5%, to $173.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $182.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by reductions in headcount and lower rent expense due to the closure of a significant number of offices, associated with our cost reduction program, as well as lower consulting expenses. These reductions were partially offset by increases in equity compensation
expense, IT expenses relating to our digital transformation, and legal fees, as well as additional compensation expense related to the short-term incentive plan. As a percentage of total revenue, selling, general and administrative expenses were 20.8% and 22.1% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Depreciation and amortization expense
Depreciation and amortization expense in the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $12.7 million as compared to $14.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Amortization expense in both years included accelerated amortization of trade names associated with our rebranding initiatives, partially offset by lower depreciation expense related to fully amortized assets that have not been replaced. See Note 5 - Goodwill, Trade Names, and Other Intangible Assets to our consolidated financial statements. As a percentage of revenue, depreciation and amortization expense was 1.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 1.7% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Restructuring costs
Restructuring costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were primarily comprised of employee termination costs and ongoing lease costs related to the Company's strategic reduction of its real estate footprint, as well as reorganization costs as part of our planned costs savings initiatives for the year ended December 31, 2020. Restructuring costs totaled $6.1 million and $3.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Legal settlement charges
here were no legal settlement charges for the year ended December 31, 2020. Legal settlement charges totaled $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 related to the resolution of a medical malpractice lawsuit in excess of carrier limits, as well as a 2019 California wage and hour class action settlement agreement. T
Impairment charges
Impairment charges totaled $16.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. These were comprised of $10.7 million of impairment, primarily related to goodwill and other intangible assets of our Search and Nurse and Allied businesses, and $5.5 million related to right-of-use assets and related property and equipment in connection with leases that were vacated during the year. During the year ended December 31, 2019, in connection with our restructuring activities, we ceased using leased space which resulted in impairment charges related to our right-of-use assets of $1.2 million and $0.6 million of impairment related to property and equipment. In addition, as part of evolving our go-to-market strategy, in the second quarter of 2019, we eliminated certain brands across all of our segments as part of our rebranding initiatives and, as a result, $14.5 million of indefinite-lived trade names related to Nurse and Allied Staffing were written off as impairment charges. See Note 5 - Goodwill, Trade Names, and Other Intangible Assets and Note 10 - Leases to our consolidated financial statements.
Interest expense
Interest expense totaled $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, due to lower average borrowings and a lower effective interest rate. The effective interest rate on our borrowings was 3.5% and 5.1% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Loss on derivative
There were no charges related to loss on derivative for the year ended December 31, 2020. We incurred a loss on derivative of $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 which was paid to terminate an interest rate hedge related to our term loan that was subsequently refinanced in October 2019. See Note 8 - Debt and Note 9 - Derivative to our consolidated financial statements.
Loss on early extinguishment of debt
There were no charges related to loss on early extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2020. Loss on early extinguishment of debt totaled $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The loss related to write-off and extinguishment costs of $1.5 million related to the refinancing of our debt in the fourth quarter of 2019, and the write-off of debt issuance costs of $0.5 million in the prior quarters related to optional prepayments on our term loan made in the first and second quarters as well as optional reductions in borrowing capacity under our prior revolving credit facility. See Note 8 - Debt to our consolidated financial statements.
Income tax (benefit) expense
Income tax benefit totaled $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to income tax expense of $31.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The effective tax rate was 1.5% and negative 131.1%, including the impact of discrete items, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The effective tax rate in 2020 was impacted by the additional valuation allowance on deferred tax assets, impairment of indefinite-lived intangibles, and international and state taxes. The effective tax rate in 2019 was impacted by the initial establishment of a valuation allowance on the majority of our deferred tax assets, impairment of indefinite-lived intangibles, and international and state taxes. See Note 14 - Income Taxes to our consolidated financial statements.
Segment Results
Information on operating segments and a reconciliation to loss from operations for the periods indicated are as follows:
In 2019, as part of our rebranding efforts, we merged our permanent search recruitment brands. As a result, for the year ended December 31, 2018 $1.7 million of revenue and $0.2 million of contribution income were reclassified from Nurse and Allied Staffing to Search to conform to the current period presentation. See Note 18 - Segment Data.
Certain statistical data for our business segments for the periods indicated are as follows:
See definition of Business Measurements under the Operating Metrics section of our Management's Discussion and Analysis.
Segment Comparison - Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Nurse and Allied Staffing
Revenue increased $25.1 million, or 3.4% to $757.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $732.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Contribution income for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased $10.9 million or 17.0%, to $75.3 million from $64.4 million in year ended December 31, 2019. As a percentage of segment revenue, contribution income margin increased to 9.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 8.8% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The average number of FTEs on contract during the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 15.1% from the year ended December 31, 2019. Average revenue per FTE per day increased approximately 21.6% in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Physician Staffing
Revenue decreased $6.7 million, or 8.9% to $67.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $74.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Contribution income for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased $0.8 million or 31.2% to $3.6 million compared to $2.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. As a percentage of segment revenue, contribution income was 5.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 3.7% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Total days filled decreased 12.2% to 38,987 in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 44,381 in the year ended December 31, 2019. Revenue per day filled was $1,742 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $1,681 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Search
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased $4.3 million, or 28.8%, to $10.5 million from $14.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Contribution loss was $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Corporate overhead
Corporate overhead includes unallocated executive leadership and other centralized corporate functional support costs such as finance, IT, legal, human resources, and marketing, as well as public company expenses and corporate-wide projects. Corporate overhead increased to $51.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $46.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. As a percentage of consolidated revenue, unallocated corporate overhead was 6.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020, and 5.6% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Transactions with Related Parties
See Note 17 - Related Party Transactions to our consolidated financial statements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, we had $1.6 million in cash and cash equivalents and $53.4 million of borrowings drawn under our ABL. Working capital decreased by $8.2 million to $89.7 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $97.9 million as of December 31, 2019, primarily due to the timing of disbursements and increased compensation accruals. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our days' sales outstanding, net of amounts owed to subcontractors, was 58 days. As of December 31, 2020, we do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Our operating cash flow constitutes our primary source of liquidity, and historically, has been sufficient to fund our working capital, capital expenditures, internal business expansion, and debt service. This includes our commitments, both short-term and long-term, of interest expense on our ABL credit facility, payments on our promissory note payable, and operating lease commitments, as well as any settlements on uncertain tax positions, and future principal payments on our ABL credit facility. Although there is uncertainty related to the anticipated impact of COVID-19 on our future results, we expect to meet our future needs from a combination of cash on hand, operating cash flows, and funds available through the ABL. See debt discussion which follows.
Cash Flow Comparisons
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $27.2 million compared to $5.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to stronger collections and the timing of disbursements.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $4.6 million compared to $2.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash used in both periods was for capital expenditures, primarily related to the project to replace our applicant tracking system.
Net cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $22.0 million, compared to $17.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used cash to repay borrowing on our ABL of $17.6 million, $2.4 million to pay our note payable, and $2.0 million for other financing activities. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we used cash to repay borrowing on our ABL and make optional debt prepayments on our prior senior credit facility of $12.9 million, $2.1 million to pay debt issuance costs and other debt-related fees and expenses, and $2.6 million for other financing activities.
Debt
2019 ABL Credit Agreement
As more fully described in Note 8 - Debt to our consolidated financial statements, effective October 25, 2019, our prior senior credit facility entered into in August 2017 was replaced by a $120.0 million ABL Credit Agreement (Loan Agreement), which provides for a five-year senior secured revolving credit facility. On June 30, 2020, we amended the Loan Agreement, which increased the current aggregate committed size of the ABL from $120.0 million to $130.0 million. All other terms, conditions, covenants, and pricing of the Loan Agreement remain the same.
As of December 31, 2020, the interest rate spreads and fees under the Loan Agreement were based on LIBOR plus 2.00% for the revolving portion of the borrowing base and LIBOR plus 4.00% on the Supplemental Availability. The Base Rate (as defined by the Loan Agreement) margins would have been 1.00% and 3.00%, respectively, for the revolving portion and Supplemental Availability, respectively. The LIBOR and Base Rate margins are subject to monthly pricing adjustments, pursuant to a pricing matrix based on our excess availability under the revolving credit facility. In addition, the facility is subject to an unused fee, letter of credit fees, and an administrative fee. The Loan Agreement contains various restrictions and covenants, including a covenant to maintain a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio. We were in compliance with the fixed charge coverage ratio covenant as of December 31, 2020. Availability under the ABL is subject to a borrowing base, which was $125.5 million at December 31, 2020, with $53.4 million of borrowings drawn as well as $18.5 million of letters of credit outstanding, leaving $53.6 million available for borrowing.
Note Payable
As of December 31, 2020, the current portion of the subordinated promissory note payable, made in connection with the Mediscan acquisition, in the amount of $2.4 million is included in other current liabilities and the long-term portion of $2.5 million is included in other long-term liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets.
See Note 8 - Debt to our consolidated financial statements.
Stockholders' Equity
See Note 15 - Stockholders' Equity to our consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We have identified the following critical accounting policies that affect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect our reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We evaluate our estimates on an on-going basis, including those related to asset impairment, accruals for self-insurance, allowance for doubtful accounts and sales allowances, taxes and other contingencies, and litigation. We state our
accounting policies in the notes to the audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, contained herein. These estimates are based on information that is currently available to us and on various assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could vary from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that the following critical accounting policies affect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Goodwill, trade names, and other intangible assets
Our business acquisitions typically result in the recording of goodwill, trade names, and other intangible assets, and the recorded values of those assets may become impaired in the future. The determination of the value of such intangible assets requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect our consolidated financial statements. For intangible assets purchased in a business combination, the estimated fair values of the assets received are used to establish their recorded values. As more fully described in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, we assess the impairment of goodwill of our reporting units and indefinite-lived intangible assets annually, or more often if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Application of the goodwill impairment test requires judgment, including the identification of reporting units, assignment of assets and liabilities to reporting units, assignment of goodwill to reporting units, and determination of the fair value of each reporting unit. Significant judgments are required to estimate the fair value of reporting units including estimating future cash flows, and determining appropriate discount rates, growth rates, company control premium, and other assumptions. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value for each reporting unit. See Note 5 - Goodwill, Trade Names, and Other Intangible Assets, where impairment testing in 2020, 2019, and 2018 is more fully described.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets related to our trade names were not amortized but instead tested for impairment at least annually, or more frequently should an event or circumstances indicate that a reduction in fair value may have occurred. We perform testing of indefinite-lived intangible assets, other than goodwill, at the asset group level using the relief from royalty method. If the carrying value exceeds the fair value, an impairment loss is recorded for that excess.
There can be no assurance that the estimates and assumptions made for purposes of the annual impairment test will prove to be accurate predictions of the future. Although management believes the assumptions and estimates made are reasonable and appropriate, different assumptions and estimates could materially impact the reported financial results.
In addition, we are required to test the recoverability of long-lived assets, including identifiable intangible assets with definite lives, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. In testing for potential impairment, if the carrying value of the asset group exceeds the expected undiscounted cash flows, we must then determine the amount by which the fair value of those assets exceeds the carrying value and determine the amount of impairment, if any.
See Note 10 - Leases and Note 11 - Fair Value Measurements for further discussion of impairment testing.
Risk and Uncertainties
The calculation of fair value used in these impairment assessments included a number of estimates and assumptions that required significant judgments, including projections of future income and cash flows, long-term growth rates, the identification of appropriate market multiples, royalty rates, and the choice of an appropriate discount rate. See Note 5 - Goodwill, Trade Names, and Other Intangible Assets. In addition, deterioration of demand for our services, deterioration of labor market conditions, reduction of our stock price for an extended period, or other factors as described in Item 1A. Risk Factors, may affect our determination of fair value of goodwill, trade names, or other intangible assets. This evaluation can also be triggered by various indicators of impairment which could cause the estimated discounted cash flows to be less than the carrying amount of net assets. If we are required to record an impairment charge in the future, it could have an adverse impact on our results of operations. Under the current credit agreement an impairment charge will not have an impact on our liquidity. As of December 31, 2020, we had total goodwill, intangible assets not subject to amortization, and other intangible assets of $131.7 million or 36.9% of our total assets.
Health, workers' compensation, and professional liability expense
We maintain accruals for our health, workers’ compensation, and professional liability claims that are partially self-insured and are classified as accrued compensation and benefits on our consolidated balance sheets. We determine the adequacy of these accruals by periodically evaluating our historical experience and trends related to health, workers’ compensation, and professional liability claims and payments, based on actuarial models, as well as industry experience and trends. If such models indicate that our accruals are overstated or understated, we will adjust accruals as appropriate. Healthcare insurance accruals have fluctuated with increases or decreases in the average number of temporary healthcare professionals on assignment as well as actual company experience and increases in national healthcare costs. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $3.9 million and $3.6 million accrued, respectively, for incurred but not reported health insurance claims. Corporate and field employees are covered through a partially self-insured health plan. Workers’ compensation insurance accruals can fluctuate over time due to the number of employees and inflation, as well as additional exposures arising from the current policy year. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, we had $12.4 million and $11.8 million accrued for case reserves and for incurred but not reported workers’ compensation claims, net of insurance receivables, respectively. The accrual for workers’ compensation is based on an actuarial model which is prepared or reviewed by an independent actuary semi-annually. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, we had $5.8 million and $6.7 million accrued, respectively, for case reserves and for incurred but not reported professional liability claims, net of insurance receivables. The accrual for professional liability is based on actuarial models which are prepared by an independent actuary semi-annually.
Revenue recognition
We recognize revenue from our services when control of the promised services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for the service. We have concluded that transfer of control of our staffing services, which represents the majority of our revenues, occurs over time as the services are provided, which is consistent with revenue recognition under the prior guidance.
The following is a description of the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows from which we generate revenue.
Temporary Staffing Revenue
Revenue from temporary staffing is recognized as control of the services is transferred over time, and is based on hours worked by our field staff. We recognize the majority of our revenue at the contractual amount we have the right to invoice for services completed to date. Generally, billing to customers occurs weekly, bi-weekly, or monthly and is aligned with the payment of services to the temporary staff. Accounts receivable includes estimated revenue for employees’ and independent contractors’ time worked but not yet invoiced. At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, our estimate of amounts that had been worked but had not been billed totaled $48.3 million and $46.1 million, respectively, and are included in accounts receivable in the consolidated balance sheets.
Other Services Revenue
We offer other optional services to our customers that are transferred over time including: MSPs providing agency services (as further described below in Gross Versus Net Policies), RPO, other outsourcing services, and retained search services, as well as separately billable travel and housing costs, which in total amount to less than 5% of our consolidated revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018. Generally, billing and payment terms for MSP agency services is consistent with temporary staffing as the customers are similar or the same. Revenue from these services are recognized based on the contractual amount for services completed to date which best depicts the transfer of control of services.
For our RPO, other outsourcing, and retained search services, revenue is generally recognized in the amount to which the entity has a right to invoice which corresponds directly with the value to the customer. We do not, in the ordinary course of business, offer warranties or refunds.
Gross Versus Net Policies
We record revenue on a gross basis as a principal or on a net basis as an agent depending on the contracted arrangement, as follows:
•We have certain contracts with acute care facilities to provide comprehensive MSP solutions. Under these contract arrangements, we use our nurses primarily, along with those of third party subcontractors, to fulfill customer orders. If a subcontractor is used, we invoice our customer for these services, but revenue is recorded at the time of billing, net
of any related subcontractor liability. The resulting net revenue represents the administrative fee charged by us for our MSP services.
•Revenue from our Physician Staffing business is recognized on a gross basis as we believe we are the principal in the arrangements.
Allowances
We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments, which results in a provision for bad debt expense. We determine the adequacy of this allowance based on historical write-off experience, current conditions, an analysis of the aging of outstanding receivable and customer payment patterns, and specific reserves for customers in adverse conditions adjusted for current expectations for the customers or industry. Based on the information currently available, we also considered current expectations of future economic conditions, including the impact of COVID-19, when estimating our allowance for doubtful accounts. If the financial condition of our customers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, additional allowances may be required. We write off specific accounts based on an ongoing review of collectability as well as our past experience with the customer. In addition, we maintain a sales allowance for billing-related adjustments which may arise in the ordinary course and adjustments to the reserve are recorded as contra-revenue. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our total allowances were $4.0 million and $3.2 million, respectively.
Contingent liabilities
We are subject to various litigation, claims, investigations, and other proceedings that arise in the ordinary course of our business. These matters primarily relate to employee-related matters that include individual and collective claims, professional liability, tax, and payroll practices. Our healthcare facility clients may also become subject to claims, governmental inquiries and investigations, and legal actions to which we may become a party relating to services provided by our professionals. We record a liability when available information indicates that a loss is probable and an amount or range of loss can be reasonably estimated. Significant judgment is required to determine both the probability of loss and the estimated amount. At least quarterly, we review our accrual and/or disclosures to reflect the impact of negotiations, settlements, rulings, advice of legal counsel, or new information. However, losses ultimately incurred could materially differ from amounts accrued. See Note 13 - Contingencies.
Income taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with the Income Taxes Topic of the FASB ASC. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and other loss carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. As of December 31, 2020, we have deferred tax assets related to certain federal, state, and foreign net operating loss carryforwards of $20.5 million. But for those net operating loss carryforwards with an indefinite carryover, the carryforwards will expire as follows: federal between 2032 and 2040, state between 2021 and 2040, and foreign between 2021 and 2025.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had valuation allowances on our deferred tax assets of $37.5 million and $37.3 million, respectively. As of June 30, 2019, management assessed the available positive and negative evidence to estimate whether sufficient future taxable income will be generated to permit use of its existing deferred tax assets. A significant piece of objective negative evidence evaluated was the cumulative loss incurred over the three-year period ended June 30, 2019. On the basis of this evaluation, an additional valuation allowance of $36.0 million was recorded in the second quarter ($35.8 million of which was recorded as income tax expense and $0.2 million as a reduction of other comprehensive income) to reduce the portion of the deferred tax asset that is not more likely than not to be realized. The Company intends to maintain a valuation allowance until sufficient positive evidence exists to support its reversal. The December 31, 2020 and 2019 valuation allowance applied to all domestic deferred tax assets other than certain deferred tax assets expected to be realized. See Note 14 - Income Taxes to our consolidated financial statements.
We maintain valuation allowances when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. In determining whether a valuation allowance is warranted, we evaluate factors such as prior earnings history, expected future earnings, carryback and carryforward periods, and tax strategies. We consider all positive and negative evidence to estimate if sufficient future taxable income will be generated to realize the deferred tax asset. We consider cumulative losses in recent years as well as the impact of one-time events in assessing our pre-tax earnings. Assumptions
regarding future taxable income require significant judgment. Our assumptions are consistent with estimates and plans used to manage our business, which includes restructuring and other initiatives. In the event that actual results differ from these estimates, or we adjust these estimates in future periods for current trends or changes in our estimating assumptions, we may modify the level of the valuation allowance which could materially impact our business, financial condition, and results of operations.
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and certain foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in determining our consolidated provision for income taxes and recording the related deferred tax assets and liabilities. In the ordinary course of our business there are many transactions and calculations where the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. Accruals for unrecognized tax benefits are provided for in accordance with the Income Taxes Topic of the FASB ASC. An unrecognized tax benefit represents the difference between the recognition of benefits related to exposure items for income tax reporting purposes and financial reporting purposes. The entire portion of the unrecognized tax benefit is classified as a component of other long-term liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets. As of December 31, 2020, total unrecognized tax benefits recorded was $6.9 million. We reserve for interest and penalties on exposure items, if applicable, which is recorded as a component of the overall income tax provision.
We are regularly under audit by tax authorities. Although the outcome of tax audits is always uncertain, we believe that we have appropriate support for the positions taken on our tax returns and that our annual tax provision includes amounts sufficient to pay any assessments. Nonetheless, the amounts ultimately paid, if any, upon resolution of the issues raised by the taxing authorities may differ materially from the amounts accrued for each year.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements.
Seasonality
See Item 1. Business.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation had a significant impact on our results of operations for the periods presented. On an ongoing basis, we seek to ensure that billing rates reflect increases in costs due to inflation. In addition, we attempt to minimize any residual impact on our operating results by controlling operating costs.