Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements, including statements regarding industry outlook, our expectations for the future of our business, and our liquidity and capital resources as well as other non-historical statements. These statements are based on current expectations and are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including but not limited to the risks and uncertainties described in “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by these forward-looking statements.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations covers fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 items and year-over-year comparisons between fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019. Discussions of fiscal 2018 items and year-over-year comparisons between fiscal 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, that was filed with the SEC on February 28, 2020.
Overview
Ceridian is a global HCM software company. We categorize our solutions into two categories: Cloud and Bureau solutions. Cloud revenue is generated from HCM solutions that are delivered via two cloud offerings: Dayforce, our flagship cloud HCM platform, and Powerpay, a cloud HR and payroll solution for the Canadian small business market. We also continue to support customers using our legacy North America Bureau solutions, which we generally stopped actively selling to new customers following the acquisition of Dayforce in 2012. We invest in maintenance and necessary updates to support our Bureau customers and continue to migrate them to Dayforce.
Dayforce provides HR, payroll, benefits, workforce management, and talent management functionality. Our platform is used by organizations, regardless of industry or size, to optimize management of the entire employee lifecycle, including attracting, engaging, paying, deploying, and developing their people. Dayforce was built as a single application from the ground up that combines a modern, consumer-grade user experience with proprietary application architecture, including a single employee record and a rules engine spanning all areas of HCM. Dayforce provides continuous real-time calculations across all modules to enable, for example, payroll administrators access to data through the entire pay period, and managers access to real-time data to optimize work schedules. Our platform is designed to make work life better for our customers and their employees by improving HCM decision-making processes, streamlining workflows, revealing strategic organizational insights, and simplifying legislative compliance. The platform is designed to ease administrative work for both employees and managers, creating opportunities for companies to increase employee engagement. We are a founder-led organization, and our culture combines the agility and innovation of a start-up with a history of deep domain and operational expertise.
In 2020, we launched the Dayforce Wallet in the United States, which gives our customers’ employees greater control over their financial well-being by providing them with instant access to their earnings. This on-demand pay feature allows employees more choice over when they get paid by making any day payday. Dayforce Wallet enables workers to access their already-earned wages anytime during the pay period, net of taxes, withholdings and other payroll deductions. Leveraging Dayforce’s continuous pay calculations, Dayforce Wallet processes a same-day payroll each time a worker requests their pay. The solution is compliant with federal, state, and local remittances and requires no changes to payroll processing including the funding, timing, and close-out of pay. The on-demand wages are loaded onto a paycard, which customers’ employees can use anywhere credit or debit cards are accepted, generating interchange fee revenue.
We sell Dayforce through our direct sales force on a subscription per-employee, per-month (“PEPM”) basis. Our subscriptions are typically structured with an initial fixed term of between three and five years, with evergreen renewal thereafter. Dayforce can serve customers of all sizes, ranging from 100 to over 100,000 employees. We have rapidly grown the Dayforce platform to 4,906 live Dayforce customers, representing approximately 4.2 million active global users as of December 31, 2020. In 2020, we added 543 net new live Dayforce customers. Our customers vary across industries, and no single customer constituted more than 1% of our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our annual Cloud revenue retention rate continues to exceed 95% due to our focus on solving complex problems and our superior customer experience.
29 | 2020 Form 10-K
Our Business Model
Our business model focuses on supporting the rapid growth of Dayforce and maximizing the lifetime value of our Dayforce customer relationships. Due to our subscription model, where we recognize subscription revenues ratably over the term of the subscription period, and our high customer retention rates, we have a high level of visibility into our future revenues. The profitability of a customer to our business depends, in large part, on how long they have been a customer. Because in our current business model, PEPM subscription fees are generally not charged until the customer goes live, and because we incur costs in advance of receiving PEPM revenue that are not offset by our implementation fees, we estimate that it takes approximately 2 years before we are able to recover our implementation, customer acquisition, and other direct costs on a new Dayforce customer contract.
Over the lifetime of the customer relationship, we have the opportunity to realize additional PEPM revenue, both as the customer grows or rolls out the Dayforce solution to additional employees, and also by selling additional functionality to existing customers that do not currently utilize our full platform. We also incur costs to manage the account, to retain customers, and to sell additional functionality. These costs, however, are significantly less than the costs initially incurred to acquire and to implement the customer.
COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 to be a pandemic. The global spread of the COVID-19 pandemic has created significant global volatility, uncertainty, and economic disruption. We have experienced and may continue to experience curtailed customer demand, primarily as a result of declining employment levels at our customers in certain sectors, such as retail and hospitality, as well as lower customer utilization of professional services and customer delays in implementation services, due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, the federal funds rate cuts by the U.S. Federal Reserve and the overnight rate target by the Bank of Canada have had and will continue to have negative effects on our float revenue. The broader implications of the pandemic on our results of operations and overall financial performance remain uncertain. Please refer to the “Results of Operations” section below for further discussion of the financial impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic during the year ended December 31, 2020, and to Part II, Item 1A “Risk Factors” for further discussion of the potential impact of the pandemic on our business.
How We Assess Our Performance
In assessing our performance, we consider a variety of performance indicators in addition to revenue and net income. Set forth below is a description of our key performance measures.
(a)
Annual Cloud revenue retention rate and Cloud annualized recurring revenue are calculated on an annual basis, and the disclosure reflects data as of the most recent fiscal year end. Please see below for further explanation.
(b)
For a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income, please refer to the “Non-GAAP Measures” section.
Live Dayforce Customers
We use the number of live Dayforce customers as an indicator of future revenue and the overall performance of the business and to assess the performance of our implementation services. As shown in the table below, the number of customers live on Dayforce has increased from 482 as of December 31, 2012 to 4,906 as of December 31, 2020. For 2020, our 4,906 live Dayforce customers represented approximately 4.2 million active global users.
30 | 2020 Form 10-K
We market Dayforce to customers of all sizes, including small (under 500 employees), major (500 to 5,999 employees), and enterprise (6,000 or more employees). For 2020, small businesses accounted for 12% of the total number of active global users, major businesses accounted for 53% of the total number of active global users, and enterprise businesses accounted for 35% of the total number of active global users.
From 2019 to 2020, live Dayforce customers increased from 4,363 to 4,906, a net increase of 543. Of the customers taken live during 2020, 76% represented net new customers to Dayforce, and the remainder were migration customers from our Bureau solutions.
The following table sets forth the number of live Dayforce customers at the end of the years presented:
Annual Cloud Revenue Retention Rate
Our annual Cloud revenue retention rate measures the percentage of revenues that we retain from our existing Cloud customers. We use this retention rate as an indicator of customer satisfaction and future revenues. We calculate the annual Cloud revenue retention rate as a percentage, where the numerator is the Cloud annualized recurring revenue for the prior year, less the Cloud annualized recurring revenue from lost Cloud customers during that year; and the denominator is the Cloud annualized recurring revenue for the prior year. Our annual Cloud revenue retention rate has been 95% or above for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018. We set annual targets for Cloud revenue retention rate and monitor progress toward those targets on a quarterly basis by reviewing known and anticipated customer losses. Our Cloud revenue retention rate may fluctuate as a result of a number of factors, including the mix of Cloud solutions used by customers, the level of customer satisfaction, and changes in the number of users live on our Cloud solutions.
Cloud Annualized Recurring Revenue (“ARR”)
We derive the majority of our Cloud revenues from recurring fees, primarily PEPM subscription charges. We also derive recurring revenue from fees related to the rental and maintenance of clocks, charges for once-a-year services, such as year-end tax statements, and investment income on our customer funds held in trust before such funds are remitted to taxing authorities, customer employees, or other third parties (often referred to as “float revenue”). To calculate Cloud ARR, we start with recurring revenue at year end, subtract the once-a-year charges, annualize the revenue for customers live for less than a full year to reflect the revenue that would have been realized if the customer had been live for a full year, and add back the once-a-year charges. We set annual targets for Cloud ARR and monitor progress toward those targets on a quarterly basis.
31 | 2020 Form 10-K
Constant Currency Revenue
We present revenue on a constant currency basis to assess how our underlying business performed, excluding the effect of foreign currency rate fluctuations. We believe this non-GAAP financial measure is useful to management and investors. We have calculated revenue on a constant currency basis by applying the average foreign exchange rate in effect during the comparable prior period.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin, non-GAAP financial measures, are useful to management and investors as supplemental measures to evaluate our overall operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are components of our management incentive plan and are used by management to assess performance and to compare our operating performance to our competitors. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income or loss before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization, as adjusted to exclude gains or losses on assets and liabilities held in a foreign currency other than the functional currency of a company subsidiary, share-based compensation expense and related employer taxes, severance charges, restructuring consulting fees, and certain other non-recurring charges. Adjusted EBITDA margin is determined by calculating the percentage that Adjusted EBITDA is of total revenue. Management believes that Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are helpful in highlighting management performance trends because Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin exclude the results of decisions that are outside the normal course of our business operations. Please refer to the “Results of Operations” section below for a discussion of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin.
Our History
On April 30, 2018, we completed our IPO, issuing a total of 24,150,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $22.00 per share. Immediately subsequent to the closing of our IPO on April 30, 2018, we issued 4,545,455 shares of common stock in a private placement with certain of our existing stockholders. We received gross proceeds of $631.3 million for the IPO and concurrent private placement before deducting underwriting discounts, commissions, and other offering related expenses.
On September 13, 2019, we completed the purchase of 100% of the issued and outstanding shares of Lusworth Holding Pty Ltd. (“RITEQ”) for $20.1 million. RITEQ is an Australian-based workforce management solutions provider, with operations within Australia, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom. On May 29, 2020, we completed the purchase of 100% of the outstanding shares of Excelity Global Solutions Pte. Ltd. (“Excelity”) for $77.2 million. Excelity is a human capital management service provider in the Asia-Pacific region.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenues
We generate recurring revenues primarily from recurring fees charged for the use of our Cloud solutions, Dayforce and Powerpay, as well as from our Bureau solutions. We also generate professional services and other revenue associated primarily with the work performed to assist customers with the planning, design, and implementation of their cloud-based solution. Our solutions are typically provided through long-term customer relationships that result in a high level of recurring revenue. We also generate recurring services revenue from investment income on our Cloud and Bureau customer funds held in trust before such funds are remitted to taxing authorities, customer employees, or other third parties. We refer to this investment income as float revenue.
For Dayforce, we primarily charge monthly recurring fees on a PEPM basis, generally one-month in advance of service, based on the number and type of solutions provided to the customer and the number of employees and other users at the customer. Our standard Dayforce contracts are generally for a three to five-year period. The average time it takes to implement Dayforce typically ranges from three months for smaller customers to nine months for larger customers. We begin to generate recurring revenue when we provide a production instance to the customer, generally when they are ready to go live. We also provide outsourced human resource solutions to certain of our Dayforce customers, which are tailored to meet their individual needs, and entail performing the duties of a customer’s human resources department, including payroll processing, time and labor management, performance management, and recruiting, as needed.
32 | 2020 Form 10-K
The Powerpay offering is our solution designed primarily for small market Canadian customers. The typical Powerpay customer has fewer than 20 employees, and the majority of the revenue is generated from recurring fees charged on a per-employee, per-process basis. Typical processes include the customer’s payroll runs, year-end tax packages, and delivery of customers’ remittance advices or checks. Powerpay can typically be implemented on a remote basis within one to three days, at which point we start receiving recurring fees.
For our Bureau solutions, we typically charge recurring fees on a per-process basis. Typical processes include the customer’s payroll runs, year-end tax packages, and delivery of customers’ remittance advices or checks. In addition to customers who use our payroll services, certain customers use our tax filing services on a stand-alone basis; and we started to sell stand-alone tax services again in 2019. Our outsourced human resource solutions are tailored to meet the needs of individual customers, and entail our contracting to perform many of the duties of a customer’s human resources department, including payroll processing, time and labor management, performance management, and recruiting. We also perform individual services for customers, such as check printing, wage attachment and disbursement, and ACA management.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists of costs to deliver our solutions. Most of these costs are recognized as incurred. Some costs of revenue are recognized in the period that a service is sold and delivered. Other costs of revenue are recognized over the period of use or in proportion to the related revenue.
The costs recognized as incurred consist primarily of customer service staff costs, customer technical support costs, implementation personnel costs, costs of hosting applications, consulting and purchased services, delivery services, and royalties. The costs of revenue recognized over the period of use are depreciation and amortization, rentals of facilities and equipment, and direct and incremental costs associated with deferred implementation service revenue.
Cost of recurring services revenues primarily consists of costs to provide maintenance and technical support to our customers and the costs of hosting our applications. The cost of recurring services revenues also includes compensation and other employee-related expenses for data center staff, payments to outside service providers, data center expenses, and networking expenses.
Cost of professional services and other revenues primarily consists of costs to provide implementation consulting services and training to our customers, as well as the cost of time clocks. Costs to provide implementation consulting services include compensation and other employee-related expenses for professional services staff, costs of subcontractors, and travel. Implementation consulting services are expected to continue to be primarily associated with the implementation of our Cloud solutions.
Product development and management expense, included in cost of revenue, consists of costs related to software development activities that do not qualify for capitalization, such as development, quality assurance, testing of new technologies, and enhancements to our existing solutions that do not result in additional functionality. Product development and management expense also includes costs related to the management of our solutions.
Depreciation and amortization related to cost of revenue primarily consists of amortization of capitalized software.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expense
Selling expense includes costs related to maintaining a direct marketing infrastructure and sales force and other direct marketing efforts, such as marketing events, advertising, telemarketing, direct mail, and trade shows. Advertising costs are expensed as incurred. Our sales and marketing expenses are expected to continue to be primarily associated with selling and marketing our Cloud solutions.
General and administrative expense includes costs that are not directly related to delivery of services, selling efforts, or product development and management, primarily consisting of corporate-level costs, such as administration, finance, legal, and human resources. Also included in this category are depreciation, and amortization of other intangible assets not reflected in cost of revenue, and the provision for doubtful accounts receivable.
33 | 2020 Form 10-K
Other (Income) Expense, net
Other (income) expense, net includes the results of transactions that are not appropriately classified in another category. These items include certain foreign currency translation gains and losses resulting mainly from intercompany receivables and payables denominated in currencies other than the subsidiary’s functional currency, and net periodic benefit plan expense.
Income Tax Provision
Our income tax provision represents federal, state, and international taxes on our income recognized for financial statement purposes and includes the effects of temporary differences between financial statement income and income recognized for tax return purposes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded for temporary differences between the financial reporting basis and the tax basis of assets and liabilities as adjusted for the expected benefits of utilizing net operating loss carryforwards. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to reflect the net deferred tax assets that we believe will be realized. As of December 31, 2020, we will continue to record a valuation allowance against certain deferred tax assets including some state net operating loss carryovers.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods presented:
(a)
For a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income, please refer to the “Non-GAAP Measures” section.
34 | 2020 Form 10-K
Revenue. The following table sets forth certain information regarding our consolidated revenues for periods presented:
(a)
Please refer to “Non-GAAP Measures” section for additional information on our constant currency revenue, a non-GAAP financial measure.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had an adverse impact on our revenue streams during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily in the form of lower employment levels at our customers, lower float revenue resulting from reductions in the U.S. Federal Reserve federal funds rate and the Bank of Canada overnight rate target, lower average float balances for our customer trust funds, lower demand for professional services, and customer delays in implementation services, among other effects. We estimate the impact of lower employment levels at our customers was an approximately $27.5 million reduction in our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, of which approximately $20.5 million was related to Dayforce and approximately $7 million was related to Powerpay. In addition, we estimate the reduction in float revenue was approximately $20 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Of the approximately $20 million reduction in float revenue, approximately $15 million was due to rate reductions that occurred during the first quarter of 2020, and approximately $5 million was due to lower average float balances for our customer trust funds.
Total revenue increased $18.4 million, or 2.2%, to $842.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $824.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily driven by an increase in Cloud revenue of
35 | 2020 Form 10-K
$69.4 million, or 10.5%, from $660.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, to $729.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Cloud revenue increase was primarily due to an increase of $61.7 million, or 11.9%, in Cloud recurring services revenue, and $7.7 million, or 5.4%, in Cloud professional services and other revenue. The increase in Cloud recurring services revenue of $61.7 million was attributable to increases of $57.7 million from new customers, add-ons, and revenue uplift from migrations of Bureau customers; $21.4 million from the migration of Bureau customers, partially offset by a $17.4 million decline in float revenue allocated to Cloud recurring services revenue.
Excluding float revenue and on a constant currency basis, total revenue grew 6.4% reflecting a 14.7% increase in Cloud revenue, partially offset by a 27.3% decline in Bureau revenue. Excluding float revenue and on a constant currency basis, Cloud revenue growth reflected a 17.5% increase in Cloud recurring services revenue and a 5.6% increase in Cloud professional services and other revenue. Excluding float revenue and on a constant currency basis, Dayforce revenue increased 18.1%, reflecting a 22.7% increase in Dayforce recurring service revenue and a 5.8% increase in Dayforce professional services and other revenue. Excluding float revenue and on a constant currency basis, Powerpay revenue declined 7.7%.
Dayforce revenue grew 13.9%, and Powerpay revenue declined 10.7% in 2020 as compared to 2019. On a constant currency basis, Dayforce revenue increased 14.0%, and Powerpay revenue declined 10.4% for the year-ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Powerpay is designed primarily for small market Canadian customers, which typically have fewer than 20 employees, and we believe those customers have been more adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic than larger Dayforce customers. Our new business sales to Dayforce and Powerpay customers comprised 70% of our increase in Cloud revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, and the remaining 30% consisted primarily of customer migration to Dayforce from our Bureau solutions.
The increase in Cloud revenue was partially offset by a decline in Bureau revenue of $51.0 million, or 31.1%. Of the decline in Bureau revenue, approximately 41% was attributable to customer migrations to Dayforce. As we continue to sunset the legacy technology of the North America Bureau platforms, we expect to see a continued decline in Bureau revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2020, recurring services revenue from Bureau payroll customers accounted for $73.0 million, including $16.8 million from Excelity, and Bureau stand-alone tax recurring services revenue accounted for $37.5 million.
Float revenue included in recurring services revenue was $52.3 million and $80.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Float revenue allocated to Cloud revenue was $45.8 million and $63.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The average float balance for our customer trust funds for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $3,240.8 million, compared to $3,427.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. On a constant currency basis, the average float balance for our customer trust funds declined 5.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to year ended December 31, 2019. The average yield was 1.61% during the year ended December 31, 2020, a decline of 73 basis points compared to the average yield for the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, approximately 35% of our average float balance consisted of Canadian customer trust funds, compared to approximately 36% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cost of revenue. Total cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $501.2 million, an increase of $45.3 million, or 9.9%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Recurring services cost of revenue increased by $11.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to additional costs related to global expansion, including Excelity, which is classified as a Bureau solution, and costs to support the growing Dayforce customer base, partially offset by reductions in costs to support our legacy Bureau customers. The increase in cost of revenue for professional services and other of $13.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to additional costs incurred to implement new customers.
Product development and management expense increased $15.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Excluding the impact of share-based compensation and related employer taxes, and severance expense, product development and management expense would have increased by $9.0 million. This increase reflects additional personnel costs that are not eligible for capitalization, as we work to build out the Dayforce Wallet and our international offerings. For the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, our investment in software development was $78.3 million and $66.7 million, respectively, consisting of $39.6 million and $34.1 million of research and development expense, which is included within product development and management expense, and $38.7 million and $32.6
36 | 2020 Form 10-K
million of capitalized software development, respectively. Please refer to Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” for further discussion of our accounting policy for capitalizing internally developed software costs.
Depreciation and amortization expense associated with cost of revenue increased by $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, as we continue to capitalize Dayforce related and other development costs and subsequently amortize those costs.
Gross profit. The following table presents total gross margin and solution gross margins for the periods presented:
Total gross margin is defined as total gross profit as a percentage of total revenue, inclusive of product development and management costs as well as depreciation and amortization associated with cost of revenue. Gross margin for each solution in the table above is defined as total revenue less cost of revenue for the applicable solution as a percentage of total revenue for that related solution, exclusive of any product development and management or depreciation and amortization cost allocations.
Total gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020, declined by $26.9 million, or 7.3%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The $26.9 million decline in gross profit was primarily attributable to the $27.9 million decline in float revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cloud recurring services gross margin was 71.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 69.6% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Excluding float revenue, Cloud recurring service gross margin was 68.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 65.4% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in Cloud recurring services gross margin reflects an increase in the proportion of Dayforce customers live for more than two years, which increased from 69% as of December 31, 2019 to 76% as of December 31, 2020, and was also attributable to consistent configuration that has enabled us to realize economies of scale in customer support and hosting costs. Bureau recurring services gross margin declined from 72.7% for the year ended December 31, 2019, to 58.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to lower Bureau recurring revenue, including high margin float revenue. Professional services and other gross margin was (7.5%) for the year ended December 31, 2020, declining from (4.0)% for the year ended December 31, 2019, reflecting additional costs incurred to take new customers live and lower utilization during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Selling, general, and administrative expense. Selling, general, and administrative expense increased $37.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Excluding the impact of share-based compensation and related employer taxes, severance expense, and certain other non-recurring charges, including lease abandonment charges of $16.8 million in 2020; selling, general, and administrative expenses would have increased $7.1 million. This adjusted increase of $7.1 million was primarily due to a $11.6 million increase in sales and marketing expenses, primarily personnel costs, partially offset by a $4.5 million reduction in general and administrative expense, primarily customer list amortization expense.
Interest expense, net. Interest expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $25.1 million, compared to $32.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This $7.3 million reduction in interest expense, net was primarily due to a reduction in our term debt rate and a reduction in the London Inter-bank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) rates generally, partially offset by increased debt outstanding under our revolving credit facility.
Other expense (income), net. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, other expense, net of $2.7 million and $5.6 million, respectively, was comprised of net periodic pension expense, as well as foreign currency translation income in 2020 compared to foreign currency translation loss in 2019.
37 | 2020 Form 10-K
Income tax (benefit) expense. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had income tax benefit of $16.0 million and $44.4 million, respectively. The $28.4 million reduction in tax benefit was primarily due to the $62.6 million tax benefit from the release of our valuation allowance for the year ended December 31, 2019, that was not repeated in the year ended December 31, 2020, partially offset by a tax benefit of $13.6 million for a reduction in the base erosion anti-abuse tax (BEAT), a $11.4 million tax benefit from the results of operations, a $3.1 million reduction in tax attributable to international rate differences, a $2.2 million reduction in the tax attributable to unremitted foreign earnings, a $1.8 million reduction in tax attributable to state and local tax, and $2.1 million of other tax benefits.
Net income (loss). Net loss was $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which included charges of $16.8 million related to the abandonment of certain leased facilities. Net income was $78.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, including a tax benefit of $62.6 million from the release of our valuation allowance. Excluding the lease abandonment charges in 2020 and the tax benefit from the release of the valuation allowance in 2019, net income would have been $12.8 million and $16.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Adjusted EBITDA. Adjusted EBITDA declined by $25.6 million to $159.0 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the decline in float revenue and accordingly, Adjusted EBITDA margin declined to 18.9% in 2020 from 22.4% in 2019. Adjusted EBITDA, excluding float revenue, increased $2.3 million to $106.7 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Quarterly Results of Operations
The following table sets forth statements of operations data for each of the quarters presented. We have prepared the quarterly statements of operations data on a basis consistent with the audited consolidated financial statements. In the opinion of management, the financial information reflects all adjustments, consisting of normal recurring adjustments, which we consider necessary for a fair presentation of this data. This information should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes. The results of historical periods are not necessarily indicative of the results for any future period.
38 | 2020 Form 10-K
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are our existing cash and equivalents, cash provided by operating activities, borrowings under our credit facilities, and proceeds from equity offerings. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and equivalents of $188.2 million and availability under our revolving credit facility of $300.0 million. Our total debt balance was $673.4 million as of December 31, 2020. Please refer to Note 10, “Debt,” to our consolidated financial statements, for further information on our debt and the “Our Indebtedness” section below. In October 2020, we contributed $105.0 million to the U.S. pension plan, which represented $17.0 million of required minimum contributions and $88.0 million of voluntary contributions. In 2019, we contributed $18.0 million to our U.S. pension plan.
On February 19, 2020, Ceridian completed the first amendment to the 2018 Senior Secured Credit Facility, in which the 2018 Term Debt interest rate was reduced from LIBOR plus 3.00% to LIBOR plus 2.50%. Further, the interest rate trigger under the applicable rating by Moody’s Investor Service was removed by the first amendment.
Our primary liquidity needs are related to funding of general business requirements, including the payment of interest and principal on our debt, capital expenditures, and product development. We believe that our cash flow from operations, availability under our revolving credit facility, and available cash and equivalents will be sufficient to meet our liquidity needs for the foreseeable future. We anticipate that to the extent that we require additional liquidity, it will be funded through the issuance of equity, the incurrence of additional indebtedness, or a combination thereof. We cannot assure you that we will be able to obtain this additional liquidity on reasonable terms, or at all. Additionally, our liquidity and our ability to meet our obligations and to fund our capital requirements are also dependent on our future financial performance, which is subject to general economic, financial, and other factors that are beyond our control. Accordingly, we cannot assure you that our business will generate sufficient cash flow from operations or that future borrowings will be available from additional indebtedness or otherwise to meet our liquidity needs. If we decide to pursue one or more significant acquisitions, we may incur additional debt or sell additional equity to finance such acquisitions, which would result in additional expenses or dilution.
Our customer trust funds are held and invested with the primary objectives being to protect the principal balance and to ensure adequate liquidity to meet cash flow requirements. In accordance with these objectives, we maintain approximately 49% of customer trust funds in liquidity portfolios with maturities ranging from one to 120 days, consisting of high-quality bank deposits, money market mutual funds, commercial paper, or collateralized short-term investments; and we maintain on average approximately 51% of customer trust funds in fixed income portfolios with maturities ranging from 120 days to 10 years, consisting of U.S. Treasury and agency securities, Canada government and provincial securities, as well as highly rated asset-backed, mortgage-backed, municipal, corporate and bank securities. To maintain sufficient liquidity in the trust to meet payment obligations, we also have financing arrangements and may pledge fixed income securities for short-term financing. The assets held in trust are intended for the specific purpose of satisfying client fund obligations and therefore are not freely available for our general business use.
39 | 2020 Form 10-K
Statements of Cash Flows
Changes in cash flows due to purchases of customer trust fund marketable securities and proceeds from the sale or maturity of customer trust fund marketable securities, as well as the carrying value of customer trust fund accounts as of period end dates can vary significantly due to several factors, including the specific day of the week the period ends, which impacts the timing of funds collected from customers and payments made to satisfy customer obligations to employees, taxing authorities, and others. The customer trust funds are fully segregated from our operating cash accounts and are evaluated and tracked separately by management. Therefore, we have provided the table below excluding the cash flows and restricted cash and equivalents held within our customer trust funds to provide supplemental information regarding the cash flows related to our core business.
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities, excluding customer trust fund activity, was $41.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily attributed to a $161.1 million reduction in cash as a result of net changes in working capital and a net loss of $4.0 million, partially offset by the net impact of adjustments for certain non-cash items of $134.9 million, including $65.8 million of non-cash share-based compensation expense, $51.8 million of depreciation and amortization, and $16.8 million of lease abandonment costs. Net changes in working capital were primarily attributable to a $104.0 million reduction in liabilities for employee compensation and benefits, primarily due to $106.9 million in pension contributions, $32.0 million decrease in working capital related to other assets and liabilities, a $12.0 million increase in trade and other receivables, and a $6.8 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets.
Net cash provided by operating activities, excluding customer trust fund activity, was $61.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily attributed to net income of $78.7 million and the net impact of adjustments for certain non-cash items of $33.4 million, partially offset by a $61.5 million reduction in cash as a result of net changes in working capital. Adjustments for certain non-cash items primarily related to $57.1 million of depreciation and amortization and $36.5
40 | 2020 Form 10-K
million of non-cash share-based compensation expense, partially offset by a $69.4 million of deferred income tax benefit. Net changes in working capital were primarily attributable to a $19.5 million decrease in working capital related to other assets and liabilities, a $16.4 million increase in trade and other receivables, an $11.1 million reduction in accrued taxes, and an $11.1 million reduction in liabilities for employee compensation and benefits, primarily due to pension contributions. Included within net cash flows provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019, was $37.4 million in cash interest payments on our long-term debt, $35.9 million in cash taxes, net of refunds received, and $18.0 million in pension contributions.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities, excluding customer trust fund activity, was $130.4 million, related to capital expenditures of $59.8 million and acquisition costs, net of cash acquired, of $58.3 million. Our capital expenditures included $41.7 million for software and technology and $18.1 million in capital expenditures for property and equipment.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities, excluding customer trust fund activity, was $85.4 million, related to capital expenditures of $55.2 million and acquisition costs, net of cash acquired, of $30.2 million. Our capital expenditures included $38.9 million for software and technology and $16.3 million in capital expenditures for property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities, excluding the change in customer trust fund obligations, was $81.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. This cash inflow was primarily attributable to proceeds from the issuance of common stock under share-based compensation plans of $91.7 million, partially offset by payments on our long-term debt obligations of $10.0 million. The payments on our long-term financing obligations included $6.8 million in payments towards our Senior Term Loan and $3.2 million in payments towards our financing lease obligations.
Net cash provided by financing activities, excluding the change in customer trust fund obligations, was $79.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. This cash inflow was primarily attributable to proceeds from the issuance of common stock under share-based compensation plans of $87.0 million, partially offset by payments on our long-term debt obligations of $7.2 million. The payments on our long-term financing obligations included $6.8 million in payments towards our Senior Term Loan and $0.4 million in payments towards our financing lease obligations.
Backlog and Seasonality
For a discussion of backlog and seasonality, please refer to Part 1, Item I, “Business” of this Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any “off-balance sheet arrangements” (as such term is defined in Item 303 of Regulation S-K).
Our Indebtedness
On April 30, 2018, Ceridian entered into a credit agreement pursuant to which the lenders agreed to provide Senior Credit Facilities, consisting of the Senior Term Loan in the original principal amount of $680.0 million and a $300.0 million Revolving Facility. The Revolving Facility may, at our option, be made available in United States Dollars, Canadian Dollars, Euros and/or Pounds Sterling; up to $70.0 million may, at our option, be made available for letters of credit and $100.0 million may, at our option, be made available for swingline loans (denominated in Canadian Dollars and/or United States Dollars).
The Senior Term Loan will mature on April 30, 2025. We are required to make annual amortization payments in respect of the Senior Term Loan in an amount equal to 1.00% of the original principal amount thereof, payable in equal quarterly installments of 0.25% of the original principal amount of the first lien term loan. The Revolving Facility matures on April 30, 2023 and does not require amortization payments.
41 | 2020 Form 10-K
The obligations of Ceridian under the Senior Credit Facilities are secured by first priority security interests in substantially all of the assets of Ceridian and the guarantors, subject to permitted liens and other exceptions. All of our domestic subsidiaries are guarantors under the Senior Credit Facilities, subject to certain exceptions. The Senior Credit Facilities contain financial covenants and certain business covenants, including restrictions on dividend payments, which Ceridian must comply with during the term of the agreement. As of December 31, 2020, Ceridian was in full compliance with the terms of the Senior Credit Facilities.
Borrowings under the Senior Credit Facilities bear interest at a rate per annum equal to:
1.
in the case of borrowings denominated in U.S. dollars on any day (a) at Ceridian’s election, either (i) an amount (not less than 1.00%) equal to the greater of (A) a base rate determined by reference to the rate of interest per annum announced by Deutsche Bank AG New York Branch (“DBNY”) as its prime rate on such day, (B) the federal funds effective rate on such date plus 1/2 of 1.00% and (C) LIBOR plus 1.00% or (ii) if available, LIBOR for U.S. dollars determined by reference to the applicable Reuters screen page two business days prior to the commencement of the interest period relevant to the subject borrowing, adjusted for certain additional costs, which may not be less than 0.00% plus (b) an applicable margin;
2.
in the case of borrowings under the Revolving Facility denominated in Canadian Dollars on any day (a) at Ceridian’s election, either (i) the rate of interest per annum quoted or established as the “prime rate” of Deutsche Bank AG Canada Branch plus an applicable margin or (ii) CDOR for Canadian dollars determined by reference to the applicable Reuters screen page on date of the commencement of the interest period relevant to the subject borrowing, adjusted for certain additional costs, which may not be less than 0.00% plus (b) an applicable margin;
3.
in the case of borrowings under the Revolving Facility denominated in Euros on any day, (a) The London interbank offered rate in Euros (“EURIBOR”) determined by reference to the applicable Reuters screen page two business days prior to the commencement of the interest period relevant to the subject borrowing, which may not be less than 0.00% plus (b) an applicable margin; or
4.
in the case of borrowings under the Revolving Facility denominated in Pounds Sterling, (a) Sterling LIBOR determined by reference to the applicable Reuters screen page one business day prior to the commencement of the interest period relevant to the subject borrowing, which may not be less than 0.00% plus (b) an applicable margin.
As of December 31, 2020, the applicable margin for the Senior Term Loan is (i) 2.50% per annum, in the case of LIBOR loans and (ii) 1.50% per annum, in the case of base rate loans. On March 26, 2019, Moody’s Investor Service upgraded the rating of our senior secured credit facilities from B3 to B2, which reduced the floating rate term debt interest rate from LIBOR plus 3.25% to LIBOR plus 3.00%, so long as the rating is maintained. On February 19, 2020, Ceridian completed the first amendment to the Senior Credit Facilities in which the Senior Term Debt interest rate was reduced from LIBOR plus 3.00% to LIBOR plus 2.50%. Further, the interest rate trigger under the applicable rating by Moody’s Investor Service was removed by the first amendment.
The applicable margin for loans under the Revolving Facility is determined in accordance with the table set forth below:
42 | 2020 Form 10-K
We are also required to pay a customary annual administration fee to the administrative agent under the Senior Credit Facilities.
For an additional description of the Senior Credit Facilities, please refer to Note 10, “Debt,” to our consolidated financial statements.
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth our contractual obligations and other commercial commitments as of December 31, 2020, whether or not they appear on our consolidated balance sheet. Variable interest payments are projected based on an interest rate forecast in effect at the end of 2020. All amounts in the table may reflect rounding.
(a)
We have not estimated our benefit plan funding obligations beyond 2029, and thus, any potential future contributions have been excluded from the table.
Our long-term debt obligations are described in Note 10, “Debt,” to our consolidated financial statements, and the “Our Indebtedness” section above.
The lease payments represent scheduled payments under the terms of the lease agreements. We conduct substantially all of our operations in leased facilities. Most of these leases contain renewal options and require payments for taxes, insurance, and maintenance. We also lease equipment for use in our business. We ceased use of certain leased facilities during the fourth quarter of 2020 and recognized lease abandonment charges within our consolidated statements of operations; however, we are still required to make future payments under the existing lease terms. These required future lease payments are included in the table above.
Payments of retirement plan obligations include employer commitments to fund our defined benefit and postretirement plans and do not include estimated future benefit payments to participants expected to be made from liquidation of the assets in our defined benefit plan trusts. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we contributed $105.0 million to our largest U.S. pension plan, satisfying all expected contributions for the foreseeable future for this defined benefit plan. At December 31, 2020, our defined benefit pension plans had a fair value of the plans’ assets that exceeded the projected benefit obligation by $3.5 million and our postretirement benefit plan had a projected benefit obligation that exceeded the fair value of the plans’ assets by $14.1 million. We expect to satisfy these remaining obligations through investment income from and appreciation in the fair value of plan assets held in trust and from future employer contributions.
The amount of our obligation to vendors for capital expenditures at December 31, 2020 was not material, and no such amount is included in the table above.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements and related notes, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements and related notes requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. Certain of our accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by
43 | 2020 Form 10-K
management in selecting the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. These judgments are based on our historical experience, terms of existing contracts, our evaluation of trends in the industry, information provided by our customers, and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an on-going basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates.
The accounting policy that we believe to be the most critical to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations and that requires the most complex and subjective management judgments is our revenue recognition policy. Please refer to Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” for a description of our revenue recognition policy and our significant accounting policies.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” for a full discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
Non-GAAP Measures
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin, non-GAAP financial measures, are useful to management and investors as supplemental measures to evaluate our overall operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are components of our management incentive plan and are used by management to assess performance and to compare our operating performance to our competitors.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income or loss before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization, as adjusted to exclude gains or losses on assets and liabilities held in a foreign currency other than the functional currency of a company subsidiary, share-based compensation expense and related employer taxes, severance charges, restructuring consulting fees, and certain other non-recurring charges. Adjusted EBITDA margin is determined by calculating the percentage that Adjusted EBITDA is of total revenue. Management believes that Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are helpful in highlighting management performance trends because Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin exclude the results of decisions that are outside the control of operating management.
Our presentation of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are intended as supplemental measures of our performance that are not required by, or presented in accordance with, GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin should not be considered as alternatives to net income (loss), earnings per share, or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP, or as measures of operating cash flows or liquidity. Our presentation of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin should not be construed to imply that our future results will be unaffected by similar items to those eliminated in this presentation. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are included in this discussion because they are key metrics used by management to assess our operating performance.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are not defined under GAAP, are not measures of net income or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP, and are subject to important limitations. Our use of the terms Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies in our industry and are not measures of performance calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin have important limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation or as substitutes for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are that Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin do not reflect the following:
•
our cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•
changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•
any charges for the assets being depreciated and amortized that may need to be replaced in the future;
44 | 2020 Form 10-K
•
the impact of share-based compensation upon our results of operations;
•
the significant interest expense or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt;
•
our income tax expense or the cash requirements to pay our income taxes; and
•
certain other non-recurring charges.
In evaluating Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin, you should be aware that in the future we may incur expenses similar to those eliminated in this presentation.
The following table reconciles net (loss) income to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented:
(a)
We define EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest, taxes, and depreciation and amortization.
(b)
Represents share-based compensation expense and related employer taxes.
(c)
Represents costs for severance compensation paid to employees whose positions have been eliminated or who have been terminated not for cause.
(d)
Represents consulting fees and expenses incurred during the periods presented in connection with any acquisition, investment, disposition, recapitalization, equity offering, issuance or repayment of debt, issuance of equity interests, or refinancing.
(e)
Comprised of (1) (recovery) loss on unrecovered duplicate payments associated with our isolated service incident, and (2) charges of $16.8 million during 2020 related to the abandonment of certain leased facilities. Please refer to Note 16, “Leases” and Note 17, “Commitments and Contingencies” for further discussion of these items.
45 | 2020 Form 10-K
The following tables present a reconciliation of our reported results to our non-GAAP Adjusted EBITDA basis for all periods presented:
(a)
Other operating expenses includes intercompany foreign exchange loss, restructuring consulting fees, recovery of duplicate payments and lease abandonment charges.
(a)
Other operating expenses includes intercompany foreign exchange loss, restructuring consulting fees, loss on unrecovered duplicate payments, and a tax benefit of $62.6 million related to the release of our valuation allowance.
46 | 2020 Form 10-K