ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis or Financial Condition and Results of Operation contains forward-looking statements that involve future events, our future performance and our expected future operations and actions. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by the use of words such as “may”, “will”, “should”, “anticipate”, “believe”, “expect”, “plan”, “future”, “intend”, “could”, “estimate”, “predict”, “hope”, “potential”, “continue”, or the negative of these terms or other similar expressions. These forward-looking statements are only our predictions and involve numerous assumptions, risks, and uncertainties. Our actual results or actions may differ materially from these forward-looking statements for many reasons, including, but not limited to, the matters discussed in this report under the caption “Risk Factors”. We urge you not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date of this prospectus. We undertake no obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
The following discussion of our consolidated financial condition and consolidated results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in this report.
The following table provides segment reporting for selected financial data about the Company as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. For detailed financial information, see the audited consolidated financial statements included in this report.
Results of Operations
Revenues. We had revenues in the amount of $3,453,058 and $3,707,360 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in revenue was primarily due to the disposition of our food services sector businesses mid-year and the effect of the COVID 19 Pandemic to ongoing operations. We expect revenue to increase during 2021, as our financial services sector holdings rebound from the Covid-19 Pandemic. Further, we continue our e continuous effort for new acquisitions.
Cost of Goods Sold. We had costs of sales in the amount of $1,668,146 and $1,665,486 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in cost of sales was primarily due to our Tax Service businesses which incurred increasing labor costs.
Operating Expenses. Operating expenses consist of depreciation, impairments, and general and administrative expenses. We had operating expenses of $3,589,063 and $3,313,142 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease is primarily due to reduced selling and administrative expenses as a result of closures due to the COVID-19 Pandemic.
Change in value of derivative liability. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 the change in value of derivative liability amounted to $379,892 and $(3,102,392), respectively. In 2020, we issued nine convertible promissory notes totaling $865,500, all of which were convertible into shares of the Company’s common stock at discount to the market. As a result, we had change in value of derivative liability of $(697,034). We remeasured the fair value of the beneficial conversion derivative through the date of conversion (with a change to earnings), with $262,959 derivative liability reclassified to paid-in capital at conversion.
Amortization of debt discounts. We had amortization of debt discount of $1,192,044 and $648,468 for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Amortization of debt discount is related to our convertible debt.
Interest Expense. During the years end December 31, 2020 and 2019, interest expense amounted to $332,704 and $489,294, respectively. The decrease in interest was a result of conversions in 2020.
Net Loss. As a result of the foregoing, we had a net loss of $2,905,133 for the December 31, 2020, which is compared to the net loss for the December 31, 2019 of $6,363,632.
Our activities have a focus on growing revenue and cash flow. We plan to continue this strategy into 2021.
To try to operate at a break-even level based upon our current level of proposed business activity, we believe that we must generate approximately $20,000,000 in revenue per year. Each dollar of revenue is not directly tied to increasing costs. We believe that we can become profitable without incurring additional costs under our current operating cost structure. However, if our forecasts are inaccurate, we will need to raise additional funds. If we need additional capital, our directors have informally agreed to borrow such funds as may be necessary through December 31, 2021 for working capital purposes, although they have no obligation to do so.
On the other hand, if we decide that we cannot operate at a profit in our current configuration, we may choose to scale back our operations to operate at break-even with a smaller level of business activity, while adjusting our overhead to meet the revenue from current operations. In such event, we will probably continue to not be profitable. In addition, we expect that we will need to raise additional funds if we decide to pursue more rapid expansion, the development of new or enhanced services or products, appropriate responses to competitive pressures, or the acquisition of complementary businesses or technologies, or if we must respond to unanticipated events that require us to make additional investments. We cannot assure that additional financing will be available when needed on favorable terms, or at all.
We expect to incur operating losses in future periods because we will be incurring expenses and not generating sufficient revenues. We expect approximately $6,400,000 in operating costs over the next twelve months. We cannot guarantee that we will be successful in generating sufficient revenues or other funds in the future to cover these operating costs. Failure to generate sufficient revenues or additional financing when needed could cause us to go out of business.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $279,311 and a working capital deficit of $12,303,549. As of December 31, 2019, we had cash of $76,902 and a working capital deficit of $10,826,234.
Net cash used in by operating activities was $1,048,243 for the December 31, 2020, representing a $225,857 increase in net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in the amount of net cash used in operating activities in 2020 compared to last year was primarily attributable the recognition of deferred revenue of $222,428.
Net cash used in investing activities was $32,448 for the December 31, 2020 compared with cash used in investing activities of $760,153, during the December 31, 2019.
Cash flows provided by financing activities were $1,399,825 for the December 31, 2020, which compares to cash flows provided by financing activities of $717,859 for the December 31, 2019.
There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain sufficient capital from debt or equity transactions or from operations in the necessary time frame or on terms acceptable to us. Should we be unable to raise sufficient funds, we may be required to curtail our operating plans and possibly relinquish rights to portions of our technology or products. In addition, increases in expenses or delays in product development may adversely impact our cash position and may require cost reductions. No assurance can be given that we will be able to operate profitably on a consistent basis, or at all, in the future.
In order to continue our operations, development of our products, and implementation of our business plan, we need additional financing. We are currently attempting to obtain additional working capital in a term loan transaction. The Company entered into a Security Purchase Agreement dated November 20, 2019 to sell preferred series R shares. Stated value $1,200 per share. These shares shall have a $0.001 par value and shall be non-dilutable stock with voting rights - votes with the Common at 1 vote per share. Conversion rights - converts to Common stock at a ratio of 1 share preferred to 1:25 shares of Common. All newly issued Stock are subject to a lock-up/leak-out agreement. Liquidation limited to 25% in 6 months and one day and subsequently 25% per year.
During 2020 and 2021 both the Platinum Tax Subsidiary and the Key Tax Subsidiary secured PPP Funding to sustain their respective payrolls.
The Company’s current funding is now concentrated with 3 primary lenders and the Company is currently in discussions with each to convert those outstanding notes to equity to include lockup and leakout agreements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements with any party.
Plan of Operation
At Cardiff Lexington, we acquire or merge with middle market companies in the financial services and healthcare sectors by providing them the ability to have an infusion of equity into their business or providing them the ability to exit out of their company. Our focus is not industry or geographic-specific, but rather proven management, market, and margin - we are opportunity oriented.
We target acquisitions of mature, high growth, niche companies. Our target companies' proven management maintains full operational control, meaning our acquisitions become standalone autonomous subsidiaries that gain the advantages of a public company without losing their operational independence. For investors, our goal is to provide a diversified lower risk platform to protect and safely enhance their investment by continually adding assets and holdings. By employing a merge or acquire and hold strategy, we expect to maximize the value and potential of private, often family run, enterprises while providing diversification and risk mitigation for all shareholders. Our portfolio is comprised of mature, high growth and niche companies with great management, in an identifiable market, which they have penetrated through a significant advantage, and have acceptable margins.
Current Business Operations
Cardiff Lexington Corp (formerly Cardiff International, Inc.), is currently structured as a company with holdings of various companies.
The following milestones are estimates only. The working capital requirements and the projected milestones are approximations only and subject to adjustment based on sales, costs and needs.
CARDIFF LEXINGTON CORP (FORMERLY CARDIFF INTERNATIONAL, INC.) is a publicly-traded holding company utilizing a form of collaborative governance. Cardiff Lexington targets acquisitions of undervalued, niche companies with high growth potential, income-producing businesses, including commercial real estate properties all of which offer high returns for our investors. Our goal is to provide a form of governance enabling businesses to take advantage of the potential access to capital markets of a publicly-traded company without losing management control. Cardiff Lexington seeks to provide companies the ability to raise money and investors a low-risk environment that protects their investment.
WE THREE, LLC (D/B/A AFFORDABLE HOUSING INITIATIVE) (“AHI”): AHI was acquired on May 15, 2014 is located in Maryville, Tennessee. AHI acquires both mobile homes and mobile home parks offering an alternative to traditional housing and sells them or rents the homes or properties to individual families. The acquisition of mobile homes and mobile home parks allows AHI to provide an alternative to traditional housing, which is a popular option for a homeowner wishing to avoid large down payments, expensive maintenance costs, monthly mortgage payments and high property taxes. If bad credit is an issue preventing people from purchasing a traditional house, AHI will provide a financial leasing option with “O” interest on the lease providing a “lease to own” option for their family home. Most homes are 3 bedroom/2bath homes making the dream of owning a home possible.
EDGE VIEW PROPERTIES LLC: Edge View Properties was acquired on July 16, 2014, is a real estate company that owns 30 prime acres of land; 23.5 acres zoned MDR (Medium Density Residential) with 12 lots already platted and 48 lots zoned HDR (High Density Residential), 4 acres of dedicated river front property zoned for recreation on the Salmon River, Idaho’s premier whitewater river and 2.5 acres zoned for commercial use. All land is in the city limits of Salmon and adjacent to the Frank church Wilderness Park (the largest wilderness park in the lower 48 states). Edgeview’s plan is to enter into a joint venture agreement with a planned concept developer to develop the land.
PLATINUM TAX DEFENDERS: Platinum tax was acquired on July 31, 2018 and is a full-service tax resolution firm located in Los Angeles, CA. Since 2011, Platinum Tax has been assisting all types of taxpayers resolve any and all issues with IRS and applicable state tax agencies. Platinum Tax provides fee-based tax resolution services to individuals and companies that have federal and state tax liabilities by assisting its clients to settle outstanding tax debts. Specifically, the Platinum Tax teams tax relief services include but are not limited to, back taxes, offer in compromise, audit representation, amending tax returns, tax preparation, tax resolution, wage garnishment relief, removal of bank levies and liens, bookkeeping, and other financial challenges. Platinum Tax team includes tax attorneys, accountants, and enrolled agents that have an aggregate of more than 90 years of experience in the financial services industry and have resolved tax issues for thousands of clients.
JM ENTERPRISES 1, INC. (DBA) Key Tax Group (“Key Tax”), was acquired on May 13, 2019, is a full-service tax resolution firm located in Jacksonville, FL. Key Tax assists businesses and individuals around the nation with tax debt issues. Key Tax has a team of twelve members, including tax lawyers, enrolled agents, and support staff with an aggregate of more than 35 years of experience in the tax industry, who are well versed in both the accounting portion of tax debt as well as the resolution side with substantial experienced in working successfully with revenue officers and collectors. Among other services, Key Tax offers Tax Audit Representation, IRS Installment Agreements, Sales Tax Representation, 940/941 Payroll Tax, Representation, Foreign Bank Account Report Filings, OIC/Fresh Start Program, Wage Garnishment, Bank Levies, Tax Lien Removal, State Tax Resolution, Audit Reconsideration, and Penalty Abatement.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). GAAP requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that may not be readily apparent from other sources. On an on-going basis, we evaluate the appropriateness of our estimates and we maintain a thorough process to review the application of our accounting policies. Our actual results may differ from these estimates.
We consider our critical accounting estimates to be those that (1) involve significant judgments and uncertainties, (2) require estimates that are more difficult for management to determine, and (3) may produce materially different results when using different assumptions. We have discussed these critical accounting estimates, the basis for their underlying assumptions and estimates and the nature of our related disclosures herein with the audit committee of our Board of Directors. We believe our accounting policies specific to share-based compensation expense and estimation of the fair value of derivative liability involve our most significant judgments and estimates that are material to our consolidated financial statements. They are discussed further below.
Derivative Liability
The Company evaluates its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. For stock-based derivative financial instruments, the Company historically used the probability weighted average Lattice Binomial models to value the derivative instruments at inception and on subsequent valuation dates through the December 31, 2018 reporting date. Subsequently, the Company changed its estimate methodology to use the Black-Scholes Model in 2019 and 2020. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is evaluated at the end of each reporting period. Derivative liabilities are classified as current liabilities as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Share-based compensation expense
The Company accounts for its stock-based compensation in which the Company obtains employee services in share-based payment transactions under the recognition and measurement principles of the fair value recognition provisions of section 718-10-30 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification. Pursuant to paragraph 718-10-30-6 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification, all transactions in which goods or services are the consideration received for the issuance of equity instruments are accounted for based on the fair value of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity instrument issued, whichever is more reliably measurable.
The measurement date used to determine the fair value of the equity instrument issued is the earlier of the date on which the performance is complete or the date on which it is probable that performance will occur.
If the Company is a newly formed corporation or shares of the Company are thinly traded, the use of share prices established in the Company’s most recent private sales to third parties, or weekly or monthly price observations would generally be more appropriate than the use of daily price observations as such shares could be artificially inflated due to a larger spread between the bid and asked quotes and lack of consistent trading in the market.
The fair value of share options and similar instruments is estimated on the date of grant using a lattice-binomial option pricing valuation model. The ranges of assumptions for inputs are as follows:
· Expected term of share options and similar instruments: The expected life of options and similar instruments represents the period of time the option and/or warrant are expected to be outstanding. Pursuant to Paragraph 718-10-50-2(f)(2)(i) of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification the expected term of share options and similar instruments represents the period of time the options and similar instruments are expected to be outstanding taking into consideration of the contractual term of the instruments and employees expected exercise and post vesting employment termination behavior into the fair value (or calculated value) of the instruments. Pursuant to paragraph 718-10-S99-1, it may be appropriate to use the simplified method, i.e., expected term = ((vesting term + original contractual term) / 2), if (i) A company does not have sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate expected term due to the limited period of time its equity shares have been publicly traded; (ii) A company significantly changes the terms of its share option grants or the types of employees that receive share option grants such that its historical exercise data may no longer provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate expected term; or (iii) A company has or expects to have significant structural changes in its business such that its historical exercise data may no longer provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate expected term. The Company uses the simplified method to calculate expected term of share options and similar instruments as the Company does not have sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate expected term.
· Expected volatility of the entity’s shares and the method used to estimate it. Pursuant to ASC Paragraph 718-10-50-2(f) (2)(ii) a thinly traded or nonpublic entity that uses the calculated value method shall disclose the reasons why it is not practicable for the Company to estimate the expected volatility of its share price, the appropriate industry sector index that it has selected, the reasons for selecting that particular index, and how it has calculated historical volatility using that index. The Company uses the average historical volatility of the comparable companies over the expected contractual life of the share options or similar instruments as its expected volatility. If shares of a company are thinly traded the use of weekly or monthly price observations would generally be more appropriate than the use of daily price observations as the volatility calculation using daily observations for such shares could be artificially inflated due to a larger spread between the bid and asked quotes and lack of consistent trading in the market
· Risk-free rate(s). An entity that uses a method that employs different risk-free rates shall disclose the range of risk-free rates used. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant for periods within the expected term of the share options and similar instruments.
Generally, all forms of share-based payments, including stock option grants, warrants and restricted stock grants and stock appreciation rights are measured at their fair value on the awards’ grant date, based on estimated number of awards that are ultimately expected to vest.
The expense resulting from share-based payments is recorded in general and administrative expense in the statements of operations.
Stock Based Compensation - Nonemployees
Equity Instruments Issued to Parties Other Than Employees for Acquiring Goods or Services
The Company accounts for equity instruments issued to parties other than employees for acquiring goods or services under guidance of Subtopic 505-50 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“Subtopic 505-50”).
Pursuant to ASC Section 505-50-30, all transactions in which goods or services are the consideration received for the issuance of equity instruments are accounted for based on the fair value of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity instrument issued, whichever is more reliably measurable. The measurement date used to determine the fair value of the equity instrument issued is the earlier of the date on which the performance is complete or the date on which it is probable that performance will occur. If the Company is a newly formed corporation or shares of the Company are thinly traded the use of share prices established in the Company’s most recent private placement memorandum, or weekly or monthly price observations would generally be more appropriate than the use of daily price observations as such shares could be artificially inflated due to a larger spread between the bid and asked quotes and lack of consistent trading in the market.
The fair value of share options and similar instruments is estimated on the date of grant using a Black-Scholes option pricing valuation model. The ranges of assumptions for inputs are as follows:
· Expected term of share options and similar instruments: Pursuant to Paragraph 718-10-50-2(f)(2)(i) of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification the expected term of share options and similar instruments represents the period of time the options and similar instruments are expected to be outstanding taking into consideration of the contractual term of the instruments and holder’s expected exercise behavior into the fair value (or calculated value) of the instruments. The Company uses historical data to estimate holder’s expected exercise behavior. If the Company is a newly formed corporation or shares of the Company are thinly traded the contractual term of the share options and similar instruments is used as the expected term of share options and similar instruments as the Company does not have sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate expected term.
· Expected volatility of the entity’s shares and the method used to estimate it. Pursuant to ASC Paragraph 718-10-50-2(f) (2)(ii) a thinly traded or nonpublic entity that uses the calculated value method shall disclose the reasons why it is not practicable for the Company to estimate the expected volatility of its share price, the appropriate industry sector index that it has selected, the reasons for selecting that particular index, and how it has calculated historical volatility using that index. The Company uses the average historical volatility of the comparable companies over the expected contractual life of the share options or similar instruments as its expected volatility. If shares of a company are thinly traded the use of weekly or monthly price observations would generally be more appropriate than the use of daily price observations as the volatility calculation using daily observations for such shares could be artificially inflated due to a larger spread between the bid and asked quotes and lack of consistent trading in the market.
· Expected annual rate of quarterly dividends. An entity that uses a method that employs different dividend rates during the contractual term shall disclose the range of expected dividends used and the weighted average expected dividends. The expected dividend yield is based on the Company’s current dividend yield as the best estimate of projected dividend yield for periods within the expected term of the share options and similar instruments.
· Risk-free rate(s). An entity that uses a method that employs different risk-free rates shall disclose the range of risk-free rates used. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant for periods within the expected term of the share options and similar instruments.
Pursuant to ASC paragraph 505-50-257, if fully vested, no forfeitable equity instruments are issued at the date the grantor and grantee enter into an agreement for goods or services (no specific performance is required by the grantee to retain those equity instruments), then, because of the elimination of any obligation on the part of the counterparty to earn the equity instruments, a measurement date has been reached. A grantor shall recognize the equity instruments when they are issued (in most cases, when the agreement is entered into), whether the corresponding cost is an immediate expense or a prepaid asset.
Pursuant to ASC paragraph 505-50-30-S99-1, if the Company receives a right to receive future services in exchange for unvested, forfeitable equity instruments, those equity instruments are treated as unissued for accounting purposes until the future services are received (that is, the instruments are not considered issued until they vest). Consequently, there would be no recognition at the measurement date and no entry should be recorded.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation will negatively impact our business plans.
Seasonality
We do not expect our revenues to be impacted by seasonal demands for our services.