Item 7. Management’s Discussion And Analysis Of Financial Condition And Results Of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with “Item 6 - Selected Financial Data” and our audited Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes thereto set forth in “Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements, including statements regarding the anticipated impact of the ongoing COVID-19 global pandemic on our business operations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors including, but not limited to, those set forth under “Item 1A - Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
For discussion related to changes in financial condition and our results of operations for fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019, refer to “Part II, Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2020, which was filed with the SEC on June 30, 2020.
Overview
We are a dedicated contract development and manufacturing organization (“CDMO”) that provides a comprehensive range of services from process development to Current Good Manufacturing Practices (“CGMP”) clinical and commercial manufacturing, focused on biopharmaceutical drug substances derived from mammalian cell culture. With 28 years of experience producing monoclonal antibodies and recombinant proteins, our services include CGMP clinical and commercial product manufacturing, bulk packaging, release and stability testing and regulatory submissions support. We also provide a variety of process development services, including upstream and downstream development and optimization, analytical methods development, testing and characterization.
Strategic Objectives
We have a growth strategy that seeks to align with the growth of the biopharmaceutical drug substance contract services market. That strategy encompasses the following objectives:
· Invest in additional manufacturing capacity and resources required for us to achieve our long-term growth strategy and meet the growth-demand of our customers’ programs, moving from development through to commercial manufacturing;
· Broaden our market awareness through a diversified yet flexible marketing strategy;
· Continue to expand our customer base and programs with existing customers for both process development and manufacturing service offerings;
· Explore strategic opportunities both within our core business as well as in adjacent and/or synergistic service offerings in order to enhance and/or broaden our capabilities; and
· Increase our operating profit margin to best in class industry standards.
Fiscal Year 2021 Highlights
The following summarizes select highlights from our fiscal year ended April 30, 2021:
· Reported revenues of $95.9 million, an increase of 61%, or $36.2 million, compared to fiscal 2020, representing an all-time high;
· Reported net income attributable to common stockholders of $3.3 million, or $0.06 per basic and diluted share;
· Expanded our customer base and programs with existing customers and ended the year with a backlog of $118 million compared to $65 million at the end of fiscal 2020;
· We took several actions to optimize our capital structure in order to support significant capital investment, allowing us to take advantage of significant positive momentum in the growth of our backlog and strong market growth expectations in our industry, as well as consider expansions of our service offerings:
o Completed an underwritten public offering of 3,833,335 shares of our common stock at the public offering price of $9.00 per share, including 500,000 shares sold pursuant to the underwriters’ full exercise of their option to purchase additional shares. Net proceeds from the offering were $32.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering related expenses. We intend to use these proceeds for the expansion of our manufacturing capabilities;
o Issued $143.8 million in aggregate principal amount of 1.250% convertible senior notes due 2026 (the “Convertible Notes”) in a private offering to qualified institutional buyers, including the $18.8 million issued pursuant to the initial purchasers’ full exercise of their option to purchase additional principal amount of Convertible Notes. Net proceeds from the issuance of Convertible Notes were $138.5 million, after deducting initial purchaser discounts and other debt issuance related expenses;
o Redeemed our outstanding shares of our Series E Preferred Stock utilizing approximately $40.5 million of net proceeds from the issuance of the Convertible Notes to complete such redemption.
· Continued to advance the two-phased expansion of our Myford Facility as further discussed in the “Facility Expansion” section below.
Facility Expansion
During fiscal year 2021, we announced plans for a two-phased expansion of our Myford Facility. The first phase, which was initiated during the second quarter of fiscal 2021 and is anticipated to be online during fiscal 2022, expands the production capacity of our existing Myford North facility by adding a second downstream processing suite. The second phase, which was initiated during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 and anticipated to be online during calendar 2022, is designed to further expand our capacity through the build out of a second manufacturing train, including both upstream and downstream processing suites within our Myford South facility. We estimate that the total cost to complete these two phases of expansion will be approximately $60 to $70 million. Upon completion, we estimate that the first and second phases of this expansion will result in a total revenue generating capacity of up to $270 million annually, depending on the mix of projects.
During December 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 3,833,335 shares of our common stock at the public offering price of $9.00 per share, including 500,000 shares sold pursuant to the underwriters’ full exercise of their option to purchase additional shares. Net proceeds from the offering were $32.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering related expenses. We are using the net proceeds from the offering for these expansions.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) outbreak a global pandemic. To date, the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a significant impact on our operations, as we have been able to continue to operate our manufacturing facilities and provide essential services to our customers. Additionally, in an effort to protect the health and safety of our employees and in compliance with state regulations, we have instituted a work-from-home policy for employees who can perform their job functions offsite, implemented daily temperature checking, social distancing requirements and other measures to allow manufacturing and other personnel essential to production to continue work within our manufacturing facilities, and suspended all non-essential employee travel.
The full extent to which COVID-19 will directly or indirectly impact our business, financial condition, and results of operations will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19, the actions taken to contain it or treat its impact and the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets. We will continue to assess the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. For a further discussion of potential risks to our business from the COVID-19 pandemic, see “Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors” of this Annual Report.
Performance and Financial Measures
In assessing the performance of our business, we consider a variety of performance and financial measures. The key indicators of the financial condition and operating performance of our business are revenues, gross profit, selling, general and administrative expenses and operating income.
We intend for this discussion to provide the reader with information that will assist in understanding our consolidated financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those consolidated financial statements from period to period and the primary factors that accounted for those changes.
Revenues
Revenues are derived from services provided under our customer contracts and are disaggregated into manufacturing and process development revenue streams. The manufacturing revenue stream generally represents revenue from the manufacturing of customer products derived from mammalian cell culture covering clinical through commercial manufacturing runs. The process development revenue stream generally represents revenue from services associated with the custom development of a manufacturing process and analytical methods for a customer’s product.
Gross Profit
Gross profit is equal to revenues less cost of revenues. Cost of revenues reflects the direct cost of labor, overhead and material costs. Direct labor costs include personnel costs within the manufacturing, process and analytical development, quality assurance, quality control, validation, supply chain and facilities functions. Overhead costs include the rent, common area maintenance, utilities, property taxes, security, materials and supplies, software, small equipment and deprecation costs of all manufacturing and laboratory locations.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses are composed of corporate-level expenses, including personnel and support costs of corporate functions such as executive management, finance and accounting, business development, legal, human resources, information technology, project management, and other centralized services. SG&A expenses include corporate legal fees, audit and accounting fees, investor relation expenses, non-employee director fees, corporate facility related expenses, and other expenses relating to our general management, administration, project management, and business development activities. SG&A expenses are generally not directly proportional to revenues, but we expect such expenses to increase over time to support the needs of our growing company.
Results of Operations
The following table compares the operating results from our continuing operations for the fiscal years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Fiscal Year 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year 2020
Revenues
Revenues were $95.9 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $59.7 million in fiscal 2020, an increase of approximately $36.2 million or 61%. The increase in revenues can be attributed to a $31.7 million increase in manufacturing revenues primarily due to an increase in the number and scope of manufacturing runs completed or in-process during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, combined with a $4.5 million increase in process development revenues. In addition, the fiscal 2021 increase in manufacturing revenues includes: (i) $3.1 million in fees recorded during the first quarter of fiscal 2021 from a customer that had reached its inventory requirements with fewer manufacturing runs than expected, therefore not utilizing all their reserved capacity that had been scheduled for the third quarter of fiscal 2021, and (ii) the recognition of $1.1 million from changes in estimated variable revenue consideration as a result of completing performance obligations for certain projects during the second quarter of fiscal 2021, therefore increasing revenue recognized for those projects during the period. The increase in revenues was attributed to the following components of our revenue streams:
Additionally, growth in manufacturing revenues during fiscal 2021 was supplemented by $4.3 million from the completion of certain manufacturing runs during the first quarter of fiscal 2021 that had been postponed during the second half of fiscal 2020 as a result of a previously disclosed production interruption.
Gross Profit
Gross profit was $29.3 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $3.9 million in fiscal 2020, an increase of approximately $25.4 million, and gross margins for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 were 31% and 7%, respectively. The increase in gross profit for fiscal 2021 can primarily be attributed to increased revenues, which includes the aforementioned fees associated with a customer’s unused capacity of $3.1 million and the $1.1 million associated with the change in variable revenue consideration, partially offset by an increase in payroll related costs and increased facility and equipment related costs. Excluding the $3.1 million fees associated with a customer’s unused capacity and the $1.1 million in additional variable revenue consideration, gross margin for fiscal 2021 was approximately 27%. Additionally, fiscal 2020 gross profit was impacted by certain costs associated with the production interruption described above, which costs were not incurred during fiscal 2021.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses were $17.1 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $14.5 million in fiscal 2020, an increase of approximately $2.5 million, or 18%. As a percentage of revenue, SG&A expenses for the fiscal years 2021 and 2020 were 18% and 24%, respectively. The net increase in SG&A expenses was attributed to the following components:
Loss on Lease Termination
In fiscal 2020, we terminated an operating lease for one of our non-manufacturing facilities that was primarily utilized for warehouse space. The lease termination was primarily driven by our efforts to reduce costs by leveraging available warehouse space in our other facilities. In connection with the termination of this lease, we removed the corresponding operating lease right-of-use asset and liability balances from our consolidated balance sheet and recognized a loss of $0.4 million. Additionally, the lease termination released $0.3 million of restricted cash that was pledged as collateral under a letter of credit required by the terminated lease.
Operating Income (Loss)
Operating income was $12.2 million for fiscal 2021, compared to an operating loss of $10.9 million for fiscal 2020. This $23.2 million improvement in year-over-year operating income (loss) was attributable to a $25.4 million increase in gross profit combined with the absence of the loss on lease termination recognized in fiscal 2020, as discussed above, partially offset by an increase in SG&A expense of $2.5 million.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $1.2 million in fiscal 2021 compared to an inconsequential amount in fiscal 2020. The increase of $1.2 million can be attributed to interest expense related to our outstanding Convertible Notes issued in March 2021 (as described in Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements).
Discontinued Operations
In connection with the sale of our PS-targeting and r84 technologies in fiscal 2018 and fiscal 2019, respectively , the abandonment of our remaining research and development assets, and the strategic shift in our corporate direction to focus solely on our CDMO business, the operating results of our former research and development segment have been excluded from continuing operations and reported as income from discontinued operations, net of tax, in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2019. There were no operating results from discontinued operations during the fiscal years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020. For additional information refer to Note 11 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures. We review our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for our judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may vary from what we anticipate and different assumptions or estimates about the future could change our reported results. While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, we believe the following accounting policies to be critical to the assumptions and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
On May 1, 2018, we adopted Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), and its subsequent updates (“ASC 606”), to all contracts that had not been completed as of May 1, 2018 using the modified retrospective method. The cumulative effect of adopting ASC 606 resulted in a one-time adjustment of $2.7 million to the opening balance of accumulated deficit as of May 1, 2018 which is reflected in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2019.
Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue when we transfer promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for contracts with customers we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation.
Revenue recognized from services provided under our customer contracts are disaggregated into manufacturing and process development revenue streams.
Manufacturing revenue
Manufacturing revenue generally represents revenue from the manufacturing of customer products recognized over time utilizing an input method that compares the cost of cumulative work-in-process to date to the most current estimates for the entire cost of the performance obligation. Under a manufacturing contract, a quantity of manufacturing runs are ordered at a specified scale, where the product is manufactured according to the customer’s specifications and typically includes only one performance obligation. Each manufacturing run represents a distinct service that is sold separately and has stand-alone value to the customer. The products are manufactured exclusively for a specific customer and have no alternative use. The customer retains control of its product during the entire manufacturing process and can make changes to the process or specifications at its request. Under these agreements, we are entitled to consideration for progress to date that includes an element of profit margin.
Process development revenue
Process development revenue generally represents revenue from services associated with the custom development of a manufacturing process and analytical methods for a customer’s product. Process development revenue is recognized over time utilizing an input method that compares the cost of cumulative work-in-process to date to the most current estimates for the entire cost of the performance obligation. Under a process development contract, the customer owns the product details and process, which has no alternative use. These process development projects are customized to each customer to meet its specifications and typically includes only one performance obligation. Each process represents a distinct service that is sold separately and has stand-alone value to the customer. The customer also retains control of its product as the product is being created or enhanced by our services and can make changes to its process or specifications upon request. Under these agreements, we are entitled to consideration for progress to date that includes an element of profit margin.
The timing of revenue recognition, billings and cash collections results in billed accounts receivables, contract assets (unbilled receivables), and contract liabilities (customer deposits and deferred revenue). Contract assets are recorded when our right to consideration is conditioned on something other than the passage of time. Contract assets are reclassified to accounts receivable on the consolidated balance sheet when our rights become unconditional. Contract liabilities represent customer deposits and deferred revenue billed and/or received in advance of our fulfillment of performance obligations. Contract liabilities convert to revenue as we perform our obligations under the contract.
The transaction price for services provided under our customer contracts generally reflects our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which we are entitled in exchange for providing goods and services to our customers. In determining the transaction price, we considered the different sources of variable consideration including, but not limited to, discounts, credits, refunds, price concessions or other similar items. We have included in the transaction price some or all of an amount of variable consideration, utilizing the most likely method, only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. The actual amount of consideration ultimately received may differ.
Management may be required to exercise judgement in estimating revenue to be recognized. Judgement is required in identifying performance obligations, estimating the transaction price, estimating the stand-alone selling prices of identified performance obligations, and estimating the progress towards the satisfaction of performance obligations. If actual results in the future vary from our estimates, the estimates will be adjusted, which will affect revenues in the period that such variances become known.
We apply the practical expedient available under ASC 606 that permits us not to disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations for contracts with an original expected length of one year or less. As of April 30, 2021, we do not have any unsatisfied performance obligations for contracts greater than one year.
Stock-based Compensation
We account for stock options, restricted stock units and other stock-based awards granted under our equity compensation plans in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. The estimated fair value of stock options granted to employees in exchange for services is measured at the grant date, using a fair value based method, such as a Black-Scholes option valuation model, and is recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods, which is generally the vesting period. The fair value of restricted stock units is measured at the grant date based on the closing market price of our common stock on the date of grant and is recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the period of vesting. Forfeitures are recognized as a reduction of stock-based compensation expense as they occur. As of April 30, 2021, there were no outstanding stock-based awards with market or performance conditions.
The use of a valuation model requires us to make certain estimates and assumptions with respect to selected model inputs. The expected volatility is based on the daily historical volatility of our common stock covering the estimated expected term. The expected term of options granted reflects actual historical exercise activity and assumptions regarding future exercise activity of unexercised, outstanding options. The risk-free interest rate is based on U.S. Treasury notes with terms within the contractual life of the option at the time of grant. The expected dividend yield assumption is based on our expectation of future dividend payouts. We have never declared or paid any cash dividends on our common stock and currently do not anticipate paying such cash dividends.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash flows from operating activities as well as our cash and cash equivalents on hand.
In addition, during fiscal 2021 we raised additional funds under two separate financing transactions.
During December 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 3,833,335 shares of our common stock at the public offering price of $9.00 per share, including 500,000 shares sold pursuant to the underwriters’ full exercise of their option to purchase additional shares. Net proceeds realized from the offering were $32.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering related expenses. We are using the net proceeds from the offering for the expansion of our Myford Facility.
During March 2021, we issued $143.8 million in aggregate principal amount of 1.250% convertible senior notes due 2026 (the “Convertible Notes”) in a private offering to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under the Securities Act, including the $18.8 million issued pursuant to the initial purchasers’ full exercise of their option to purchase additional principal amount of Convertible Notes. The Convertible Notes accrue interest at a rate of 1.250% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on March 15 and September 15 of each year, beginning on September 15, 2021. The Convertible Notes mature on March 15, 2026, unless earlier redeemed or repurchased by us or converted at the option of the holders. Net proceeds realized from the issuance of Convertible Notes were $138.5 million, after deducting initial purchaser discounts and other debt issuance related expenses.
In connection with the issuance of the Convertible Notes, we entered into privately negotiated capped call transactions (the “Capped Calls”) with certain financial institutions counterparties. We used $12.8 million of the net proceeds from the issuance of the Convertible Notes to pay for the cost of the Capped Calls. Refer to Note 3, Debt, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report for more information related to the Convertible Notes and Capped Calls. In addition, on April 12, 2021, we used approximately $40.5 million of the net proceeds from the issuance of Convertible Debt to redeem our outstanding shares of 10.50% Series E Convertible Preferred Stock. We intend to use the remaining proceeds for the expansion of our Myford Facility, working capital and other general corporate purposes.
As of April 30, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $169.9 million. We believe that our existing cash on hand and our anticipated cash from operating activities will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months from the date of this Annual Report.
We currently expect to finance our operations with our existing cash on hand and our anticipated cash flows from operations. If cash flows from operations are not sufficient to support our operations or capital requirements, including our ongoing two phases of expansion to our Myford Facility, then we may need to obtain additional equity or debt financing to fund our future operations. We may raise these funds at the appropriate time, accessing the form of capital that we determine is most appropriate considering the markets available to us and their respective costs of capital, such as through the issuance of debt or through the public offering of securities. These financings may not be available on acceptable terms, or at all. Our ability to raise additional capital in the equity and debt markets is dependent on a number of factors including, but not limited to, the market demand for our common stock. The market demand or liquidity of our common stock is subject to a number of risks and uncertainties including, but not limited to, our financial results, economic and market conditions, and global financial crises and economic downturns, including those caused by widespread public health crises such as the COVID-19 pandemic, which may cause extreme volatility and disruptions in capital and credit markets. In addition, even if we are able to raise additional capital, it may not be at a price or on terms that are favorable to us.
The following table presents our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the fiscal years ended April 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
_____________
(1) As of April 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019, cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash included $0.4 million, $0.4 million and $1.2 million, respectively, that was restricted from general use, related to cash that was pledged as collateral under letters of credit under the terms of certain facility lease agreements.
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
During fiscal 2021, net cash provided by operating activities increased by $25.4 million to $31.2 million from $5.8 million of net cash provided by operating activities during fiscal 2020.
Net cash provided by operating activities during fiscal 2021 was a result of net income of $11.2 million, combined with non-cash adjustments to net income of $8.2 million related to depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation and amortization of debt discount and issuance costs, and cash flows from the net change in operating assets and liabilities of $11.7 million.
Net cash provided by operating activities during fiscal 2020 was a result of an $10.5 million net loss, as increased to account for non-cash adjustments to net loss of $5.6 million primarily related to depreciation and amortization and stock-based compensation, and cash flows from the net change in operating assets and liabilities of $10.7 million.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
During fiscal 2021, net cash used in investing activities increased by $6.1 million to $9.9 million from $3.8 million of net cash used in investing activities during fiscal 2020.
Net cash used in investing activities during fiscal years 2021 and 2020 consisted of $9.9 million and $3.8 million, respectively, used to acquire property and equipment primarily related to our manufacturing and development operations.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
During fiscal 2021, net cash provided by financing activities increased by $111.2 million to $112.3 million from $1.1 million of net cash provided by financing activities during fiscal 2020.
Net cash provided by financing activities during fiscal 2021 consisted primarily of $138.5 million of net proceeds from the issuance of Convertible Notes, $32.1 million in net proceeds from the issuance of our common stock pursuant to an underwritten public offering completed in December 2020 and $4.0 million of proceeds from the issuance of common stock under our equity compensation plans, offset by $40.5 million of cash used in connection with the full redemption of our Series E Preferred Stock, $12.8 million used for the purchase of Capped Calls related to Convertible Notes, $4.5 million used to pay preferred dividends to holders of our Series E Preferred Stock and $4.4 million used to repay in full a promissory note issued pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program.
Net cash provided by financing activities during fiscal 2020 consisted primarily of $4.4 million of loan proceeds received in April 2020 pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (which loan was subsequently repaid in full in May 2020, as described in Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements) and $1.1 million from the issuance of common stock under our compensation plans, offset by $4.3 million of cash used to pay preferred dividends to holders of our Series E Preferred Stock.
Capital Expenditures
Our capital expenditures were $9.9 million during fiscal 2021, which included laboratory and manufacturing equipment, software and enhancements, and enhancements to our laboratory and manufacturing facilities. We expect our capital expenditures for fiscal 2022 to be approximately $50 to $60 million, primarily related to the expansion of our Myford Facility
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of April 30, 2021 (in thousands):
______________
(1) Primarily represents future minimum lease payments under our facility operating lease agreements as further described in Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(2) The Convertible Notes bear interest at an annual rate of 1.250%, payable semi-annually, in arrears on March 15 and September 15 of year, beginning on September 15, 2021, as further described in Note 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. The amounts presented assumes the Convertible Notes are not redeemed or repurchased by us or converted at the option of the holder prior to the maturity date of March 15, 2026.
(3) Represents future minimum lease payments under a lease agreement to finance certain equipment that did not commence as of April 30, 2021. Such lease shall commence upon the delivery and acceptance of the financed equipment, which is currently expected to occur in the third quarter of fiscal 2022.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements.
As of April 30, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303 of Regulation S-K, that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to us, please see Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.