Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements, including, without limitation, the risks set forth in Part II, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a biotechnology company focused on the discovery, development and commercialization of long-acting therapeutics designed to transform the standard of care for patients facing serious fungal or viral infections. Our lead product candidate is rezafungin acetate, an intravenous formulation of a novel echinocandin. Rezafungin is being developed as a once-weekly, high-exposure therapy for the first-line treatment and prevention of serious, invasive fungal infections.
In addition, we are using our Cloudbreak® antiviral platform to develop Antiviral Conjugates, or AVCs, for the prevention and treatment of influenza and other viral infections, including RSV, HIV and the SARS-CoV-2 strains causing COVID-19.
COVID-19 Update
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains and created significant volatility and disruption of financial markets.
We are closely monitoring the impact of the COVID-19 global pandemic on our business and have implemented measures designed to protect the health and safety of our workforce, including a work-from-home policy in line with state and local requirements for employees who can perform their jobs offsite. We are continuing our essential research and laboratory activities at our facilities and are taking precautionary measures to protect our employees working in our facilities in such capacities, including establishing a written worksite-specific COVID-19 prevention plan.
CIDARA THERAPEUTICS, INC.
We are reliant on our information technology systems, infrastructure and data to conduct our business. Adopting a work-from-home policy during this pandemic has increased the complexity of our computer systems, making them inherently more vulnerable to service interruption or destruction, malicious intrusion and random attack.
While we have not experienced significant disruptions to our manufacturing supply chain or distribution to date, we are currently unable to assess the potential impact that an extended duration of this pandemic would have on our manufacturing or distribution processes in the future.
As we continue to actively advance our rezafungin Phase 3 clinical development program, we remain in close contact with our principal investigators and clinical sites and are assessing the impact of COVID-19 on our trials, expected timelines and costs on an ongoing basis. While the ReSTORE Phase 3 clinical trial for the treatment of candidemia and invasive candidiasis and the ReSPECT Phase 3 clinical trial for prophylaxis remain open for enrollment, we continue to monitor the near- and long-term impact of COVID-19 on the ability of our clinical investigators to recruit patients at each of our global clinical trial sites. In addition, many clinical trial operational activities typically require travel, such as site activation, monitoring, investigators’ meetings and quality audits. These activities are still impacted by travel restrictions.
As the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to spread throughout areas in which we operate, we believe the outbreak is having a negative impact on our operating results and financial condition. The extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, impact on our clinical trials, employees and vendors, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. Given these uncertainties, we remain unable to reasonably estimate the related impact to our business, operating results and financial condition, if any. We will continue to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Rezafungin
Rezafungin is a novel molecule in the echinocandin class of antifungals. We are developing rezafungin for the first-line treatment and prevention of serious, invasive fungal infections which are associated with high mortality rates.
Phase 3 clinical trials
Our Phase 3 clinical development plans for rezafungin are as follows:
•Phase 3 ReSTORE Treatment Trial: A single, global, randomized, double-blind, controlled Phase 3 pivotal clinical trial in patients with candidemia and/or invasive candidiasis. The ReSTORE clinical trial protocol is modeled after our Phase 2 STRIVE clinical trial. Rezafungin, dosed at 400 mg for the first week followed by 200 mg once weekly for up to four weeks in total, is being compared to caspofungin, dosed daily, with an optional step down to oral fluconazole, in a 1:1 randomization regime. The primary efficacy outcome for the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, is all-cause mortality at day 30, and the primary efficacy outcome for the European Medical Agency, or EMA, is global response (clinical, radiological, and mycological response) at day 14. We expect this trial to enroll approximately 184 evaluable patients. Enrollment in the ReSTORE clinical trial remains impacted by the global pandemic to varying degrees by region. Based on recent enrollment trends, we expect the availability of top-line data by the end of 2021; however, the global effect of COVID-19 on enrollment is unpredictable and may change this timing. We expect that the results of the ReSTORE clinical trial, along with the results from the STRIVE clinical trial, will be sufficient to support the submission of marketing approval applications for rezafungin in this indication.
•Phase 3 ReSPECT Prophylaxis (Prevention) Trial: A single, global, randomized, double-blind, controlled Phase 3 pivotal clinical trial in patients undergoing allogeneic blood and marrow transplant to assess rezafungin in a 90-day prophylaxis regimen to prevent infections due to Candida, Aspergillus and Pneumocystis. Rezafungin, dosed at 400 mg for the first week followed by 200 mg once weekly doses out to 90 days, is being compared to a regimen containing two drugs (an azole and Bactrim) dosed once daily for 90 days. The primary efficacy outcome for the FDA and EMA is fungal-free survival at day 90. We expect this trial to enroll approximately 462 patients. While the ReSPECT trial has been impacted by the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 global pandemic, enrollment continues and we are progressing with regulatory and clinical activities so that we may continue activating trial sites. Additionally, commencement of the ReSPECT clinical trial in the United States also remains contingent upon obtaining agreement with the FDA.
CIDARA THERAPEUTICS, INC.
Mundipharma Collaboration
On September 3, 2019, we announced a strategic partnership with Mundipharma to develop and commercialize rezafungin in an intravenous formulation for the treatment and prevention of invasive fungal infections. Under the terms of the collaboration agreement, we granted Mundipharma an exclusive, royalty-bearing license to develop, register and commercialize rezafungin outside the United States and Japan. The total potential transaction value is $568 million, including an equity investment, an up-front payment, global development funding, and certain development, regulatory, and commercial milestones. To date, we have received $9.0 million from the sale of our equity to Mundipharma, $30.0 million in up-front payments and $27.9 million in global development funding, which includes an $11.1 million milestone payment we received in January 2021. We expect to receive an additional $14.4 million in global development funding as we continue to conduct our rezafungin Phase 3 clinical development program.
Cloudbreak Antiviral Platform
We believe our Cloudbreak antiviral platform is a fundamentally new approach to prevent and treat life-threatening infectious disease that provides potent antimicrobial activity and immune system engagement in a single long-acting molecule. The Cloudbreak antiviral platform recognizes that infectious disease often results when a microbial pathogen is able to evade or overcome the host immune system. Our Cloudbreak candidates are designed to counter infection in two ways, by inhibiting pathogen proliferation through direct targeting and by focusing the immune system at the site of infection. We believe this is a potentially transformative approach, distinct from current therapies, monoclonal antibodies and vaccines. Our lead Cloudbreak candidates are Antiviral Conjugates, or AVCs, for the prevention and treatment of influenza.
In July 2019, we nominated our initial development candidate, CD377 for influenza prevention and pandemic preparedness. In September 2020, we nominated a second development candidate, CD388, which is similar to CD377 but provides the potential for longer-lasting protection from influenza. We expect to file an investigational new drug application for CD388 for the influenza program by the end of 2021. The Cloudbreak antiviral platform has also enabled us to expand the development of AVCs to target other life-threatening viruses, including RSV, HIV and the SARS-CoV-2 strains causing COVID-19.
FINANCIAL OPERATIONS OVERVIEW
Revenues
To date, we have generated all of our revenues from our strategic partnership with Mundipharma. In the future, we may generate revenue from a combination of license fees and other upfront payments, other funded research and development agreements, milestone payments, product sales, government and other third-party funding, and royalties in connection with strategic alliances. We expect that any revenue we generate will fluctuate from quarter-to-quarter as a result of the timing of our achievement of nonclinical, clinical, regulatory and commercialization milestones, the timing and amount of payments relating to such milestones and the extent to which any of our products are approved and successfully commercialized. If we are unable to fund our development costs, or we are unable to develop product candidates in a timely manner or obtain regulatory approval for them, our ability to generate future revenues and our results of operations and financial position would be adversely affected.
Research and development expenses
To date, our research and development expenses have related primarily to clinical and nonclinical development of rezafungin acetate, as well as nonclinical development of our CD377 and CD388 product candidates and our Cloudbreak antiviral platform. Research and development expenses consist of wages, benefits and stock-based compensation for research and development employees, as well as the cost of scientific consultants, facilities and overhead expenses, laboratory supplies, manufacturing expenses, and nonclinical and clinical trial costs. We accrue clinical trial expenses based on work performed, which relies on estimates of total costs incurred based on patient enrollment, completion of studies or activities within studies and other events.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred and costs incurred by third parties are expensed as the contracted work is performed. We accrue for costs incurred as the services are being provided by monitoring the status of the study or project and the invoices received from our external service providers. We adjust our accruals as actual costs become known.
We evaluate terms of research and development grants to assess our obligations and the classification of funding received. Amounts received for funded research and development are recognized in the statement of operations as a reduction to research and development expense over the grant period as the related costs are incurred to meet our obligations.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of development, primarily due to the
CIDARA THERAPEUTICS, INC.
increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect our research and development expenses to increase over the next several years as we continue to conduct nonclinical and clinical studies, expand our research and development pipeline and progress our product candidates through clinical trials. However, it is difficult to determine with certainty the duration, costs and timing to complete our current or future nonclinical programs and clinical trials of our product candidates.
The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of our product candidates will depend on a variety of factors that include, but are not limited to, the following:
•per patient trial costs;
•the number of patients that participate in the trials;
•the number of sites included in the trials;
•the countries in which the trials are conducted;
•the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
•the number of doses that patients receive;
•the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
•potential additional safety monitoring or other studies requested by regulatory authorities;
•the duration of patient follow-up;
•the phase of development of the product candidate; and
•the efficacy and safety profile of the product candidates.
Research and development expenses by major program or category were as follows (in thousands):
We typically deploy our employees, consultants and infrastructure resources across our programs. Thus, some of our research and development expenses are not attributable to an individual program but are included in other research and development expenses as shown above.
In addition, the probability of success for each product candidate will depend on numerous factors, including efficacy, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. We will determine which programs to pursue and how much to fund each program in response to the scientific and clinical success of each product candidate, as well as an assessment of each product candidate’s commercial potential.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related benefits, including stock-based compensation, related to our executive, finance, legal, business development, commercial planning and support functions. Other general and administrative expenses include facility and overhead costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, consultant expenses, travel expenses and professional fees for auditing, tax, legal, and other services. We expect that general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we expand our operating activities and incur additional costs associated with operating as a publicly traded company. These increases will likely include legal fees, accounting fees, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance premiums and costs associated with investor relations.
Other income (expense)
Other income (expense) consists primarily of the change in the fair value of the contingent forward purchase obligation and related issuance costs, interest income and expense, and various income or expense items of a non-recurring nature. We earn interest income from interest-bearing accounts and money market funds for cash and cash equivalents and
CIDARA THERAPEUTICS, INC.
marketable securities and for our short-term investments. Interest expense represents interest payable related to term loans and the amortization of debt issuance costs.
Contingent forward purchase obligation
On May 21, 2018, we entered into a subscription agreement with certain investors providing for the purchase and sale of up to an aggregate of $120.0 million of common stock and preferred stock in three closings. The second and optional third closings and warrants related to the optional third closing are triggered by our announcement of topline data from our STRIVE Part B Phase 2 clinical trial of rezafungin. We determined that these closings are classified as liabilities and represent contingent forward purchase obligations. These liabilities are recorded at their estimated fair value initially and on a recurring basis. The liability was initially recorded at $4.3 million on May 21, 2018, and fair value adjustments resulting in a gain of $0.4 million and $3.9 million were recorded during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Because we elected not to consummate the second closing of the offering in August 2019, the contingent forward purchase obligation did not exist as of December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Beneficial conversion feature
In February 2020, we completed a rights offering, pursuant to which we sold 6,639,307 shares of common stock and 531,288 shares of Series X Convertible Preferred Stock for gross proceeds of $30.0 million. Because the effective conversion price of the Series X Convertible Preferred Stock on the commitment date was below the fair value of the common stock at the date of issuance, a beneficial conversion feature with a calculated fair value of $2.8 million existed at the issuance date. As the Series X Convertible Preferred Stock was fully convertible at issuance, the full $2.8 million was recorded at issuance as a deemed dividend on February 12, 2020. This non-cash deemed dividend impacted accumulated deficit and additional paid in capital at December 31, 2020 and net loss attributable to common stockholders and net loss attributable to common stockholders per share for the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, we recognized the fair value of an embedded beneficial conversion feature of $10.3 million on the Series X Convertible Preferred Stock issued in connection with the financing transaction that closed on May 23, 2018.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon financial statements that we have prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses, and related disclosures. On an on-going basis, we evaluate these estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, preclinical and clinical trial accruals and share-based compensation. Estimates are based on historical experience, information received from third parties and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The items in our financial statements requiring significant estimates and judgments are as follows:
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when goods or services are transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for contracts with customers, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligation(s) in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligation(s) in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the performance obligation(s) are satisfied. At contract inception, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract, assess whether each promised good or service is distinct and identify those that are performance obligations. We recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
Collaborative Arrangements
We enter into collaborative arrangements with partners that typically include payment to us of one of more of the following: (i) license fees; (ii) payments related to the achievement of developmental, regulatory, or commercial milestones; (iii) reimbursement for research and development and clinical supply services; and (iv) royalties on net sales of licensed products. Where a portion of non-refundable up-front fees or other payments received are allocated to continuing performance obligations under the terms of a collaborative arrangement, they are recorded as contract liabilities (shown as deferred revenue on the balance sheet) and recognized as revenue when (or as) the underlying performance obligation is satisfied.
CIDARA THERAPEUTICS, INC.
As part of the accounting for these arrangements, we must develop estimates and assumptions that require judgment to determine the underlying stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation which determines how the transaction price is allocated among the performance obligation(s). The stand-alone selling price may include items such as forecasted revenues, development timelines, discount rates, and probabilities of technical and regulatory success. We evaluate each performance obligation to determine if it can be satisfied at a point in time, or over time. In addition, variable consideration must be evaluated to determine if it is constrained and, therefore, excluded from the transaction price.
License Fees
If a license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenues from non-refundable, up-front fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the licensee and the licensee is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other performance obligations, we use judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether it is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Milestone Payments
At the inception of each arrangement that includes milestone payments (variable consideration), we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price. If it is probable that a milestone event would occur at the inception of an arrangement, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are contingent upon the achievement of events that are uncertain or not controllable, such as regulatory approvals, are generally not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received, and therefore not included in the transaction price. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis, for which revenue is recognized as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each reporting period, we evaluate the probability of achievement of such milestones and any related constraint(s), and if necessary, may adjust its estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which could affect license, collaboration or other revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
Royalties
For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and for which the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). To date, we have not recognized any royalty revenue resulting from any of our collaborative arrangements.
Preclinical and Clinical Trial Accruals
We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on the facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Our accrued expenses for preclinical studies and clinical trials are based on estimates of costs incurred and fees that may be associated with services provided by contract research organizations, or CROs, clinical trial investigational sites and other clinical trial-related activities. Payments under certain contracts with such parties depend on factors such as successful enrollment of patients, site initiation and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing for these services, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If possible, we obtain information regarding unbilled services directly from these service providers. However, we may be required to estimate these services based on other information available to us. If we underestimate or overestimate the activities or fees associated with a study or service at a given point in time, adjustments to research and development expenses may be necessary in future periods. Historically, our estimated accrued liabilities have approximated actual expense incurred. Subsequent changes in estimates may result in a material change in our accruals.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation expense related to stock options, Restricted Stock Units, or RSUs, Performance-based RSUs, or PRSUs, and Employee Stock Purchase Plan rights by estimating the fair value on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Forfeitures are recognized as incurred. For awards subject to time-based vesting conditions, including those with a graded vesting schedule, stock-based compensation expense is recognized using the straight-line method. For performance-based awards to employees, (i) the fair value of the award is determined on the grant date, (ii) the probability of the individual performance milestones under the award being achieved
CIDARA THERAPEUTICS, INC.
is assessed and (iii) the fair value of the shares subject to the milestone is expensed over the implicit service period commencing once we believe the performance criteria is probable of being met.
Restricted Stock Units
We estimate the fair value of Restricted Stock Units, or RSUs, and Performance-based RSUs, or PRSUs, based on the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant. For awards subject to time-based vesting conditions, stock-based compensation expense is recognized ratably over the requisite service period of the awards. For awards subject to performance-based vesting conditions, we assess the probability of achievement of the individual milestones under the stock-based awards and recognize stock-based compensation expense over the implicit service period commencing once we believe the performance criteria is probable of achievement.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Collaboration revenue
Collaboration revenue was $12.1 million and $20.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 included $17.9 million of revenue recognized upon transfer of an intellectual property license to Mundipharma. The remaining revenue for both periods relates to ongoing research and development and clinical supply services provided to Mundipharma.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses were $68.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $46.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in research and development expenses is primarily due to higher clinical expenses associated with the rezafungin clinical trials, increased expense associated with our Cloudbreak antiviral platform, and higher personnel costs.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses were $15.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $16.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in general and administrative expenses is primarily due lower commercial planning expenses.
Other income
Other expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of interest expense in connection with our loan from Pacific Western Bank, partially offset by interest income generated from cash and cash equivalents held in interest-bearing investments. Other income for the year ended December 31, 2019 related primarily to changes in the fair value of the contingent forward purchase obligation, income generated from cash held in interest-bearing investments and interest expense in connection with our loan from Pacific Western Bank.
CIDARA THERAPEUTICS, INC.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 (in thousands):
Collaboration revenue
Collaboration revenue was $20.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our collaboration revenue is generated from our ongoing collaboration with Mundipharma, and generally consists of an upfront payment for the license to develop, register and commercialize the rezafungin outside of the United States and Japan and reimbursements for global development expenses.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses were $46.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $49.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease in research and development expenses is primarily due to lower clinical expenses associated with the rezafungin clinical trials.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses were $16.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $14.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in general and administrative expenses is primarily due higher legal and personnel costs.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 related primarily to changes in the fair value of the contingent forward purchase obligation as well as income generated from cash held in interest-bearing investments.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Since our inception, we have primarily funded our operations through equity and debt financings. We have devoted our resources to funding research and development programs, including research, preclinical and clinical development activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $42.9 million in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash. The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (in thousands):
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $54.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $28.5 million and $56.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Net cash used in operating activities was attributable to a net loss of $72.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net losses of $41.1 million and $59.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Net loss for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 includes revenue of $12.1 million and $20.9 million, respectively, recognized under our
CIDARA THERAPEUTICS, INC.
Collaboration Agreement with Mundipharma. For all periods presented, the primary use of cash was to fund increased levels of research and development activities for our product candidates, which activities and uses of cash we expect to continue to increase for the foreseeable future.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the purchase of property and equipment was $0.2 million and $0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2018, respectively. Investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2018 also consisted of purchases and maturities of short-term investments of $14.5 million and $29.0 million, respectively.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of (i) net proceeds of $29.2 million from the sale of 6,639,307 shares of common stock and 531,288 shares of Series X Convertible Preferred Stock pursuant to the exercise of subscription rights issued in our rights offering and (ii) $11.0 million, after deducting placement agent fees, from the sale of 3,430,790 shares of common stock under our controlled equity sales agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., or our Sales Agreement, offset by principal payments of $3.0 million made in connection with our loan from Pacific Western Bank.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of (i) net proceeds of $9.0 million from the sale of 4,781,408 shares of common stock under the Mundipharma Stock Purchase Agreement and (ii) $5.3 million, after deducting placement agent fees, from the sale of 2,095,887 shares of common stock under our Sales Agreement.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2018 consisted of (i) net proceeds of $49.5 million from the sale of 6,185,987 shares of common stock, 445,231 shares of Series X Preferred stock, and warrants to purchase an aggregate of 12,499,997 shares of common stock pursuant to a registered direct offering, and (ii) $6.4 million, after deducting placement agent fees, from the sale of 847,937 shares of common stock under a controlled equity offering sales agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co executed in November 2017.
Operating Capital Requirements
We performed an analysis of our ability to continue as a going concern. We believe, based on our current business plan, that our existing cash and cash equivalents will not be sufficient to fund our obligations for the next twelve months. Our ability to execute our operating plan depends on our ability to obtain additional funding through equity offerings, debt financings or potential licensing and collaboration arrangements. We plan to continue to fund our losses from operations through cash and cash equivalents on hand, as well as through future equity offerings, debt financings, other third party funding, and potential licensing or collaboration arrangements. There can be no assurance that additional funds will be available when needed from any source or, if available, will be available on terms that are acceptable to us. Even if we raise additional capital, we may also be required to modify, delay or abandon some of our plans which could have a material adverse effect on our business, operating results and financial condition and our ability to achieve our intended business objectives. Any of these actions could materially harm our business, results of operations and future prospects.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into, nor do we currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements (as defined under SEC rules).