Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report, which include additional information about our accounting policies, practices, and the transactions underlying our financial results. In addition to historical information, this Annual Report contains forward-looking information that involves risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated by such forward-looking information due to the factors discussed under “Cautionary Statements” appearing elsewhere herein and the risks and uncertainties described or identified in “Item 1A - Risk Factors” in this Annual Report.
Please also refer to “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” discussed elsewhere in this Annual Report.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with Item 1 - Business in this Annual Report, and our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is segregated into four sections, including:
Executive Overview. This section provides a summary of our operating performance and cash flows, industry trends and our strategic initiatives.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates. This section describes the accounting areas where management makes critical estimates to report our financial condition and results of operations.
Results of Operations. This section provides an analysis of our consolidated results of operations for the two comparative periods presented in our consolidated financial statements.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Financial Position. This section provides an analysis of cash flow, contractual obligations, and certain other matters affecting our financial position.
Executive Overview
Our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $8,514,000 compared to $15,224,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $6,710,000, or 44%. Overall, we had a net loss of $1,759,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a net loss of $1,339,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $420,000, or 31%. Our 2020 adjusted net loss was $1,239,000 compared to a 2019 adjusted net income of $92,000. Our adjusted net income (loss) is our GAAP net income (loss) after addback for our non-cash equity compensation expenses, debt-related items and depreciation expense. Historically, one of the most significant financial challenges we face is the inconsistent and unpredictable revenue we generate quarter-over-quarter, and our revenue and cash flow remain difficult to predict.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Business
The impact of the government and the business economic response to the COVID-19 pandemic has affected demand across the majority of our markets and disrupted work on projects. The COVID-19 pandemic is expected to have continued adverse effects on our sales, project implementation, operating margins, and working capital. As of the date of this filing, uncertainty continues to exist concerning the magnitude and duration of the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic and its changing conditions the Company reduced its operational expenses to conserve its cash resources. Many expenses, including travel, marketing, headcount, work hours, and compensation were reduced, deferred, or eliminated while still allowing us to meet our customer obligations and develop new business. As the fiscal year progressed and our sales rebounded, and we were able to obtain additional funds through a forgivable bank loan, we restored our workforce and compensation.
Due to the speed with which the COVID-19 pandemic developed and the resulting uncertainties, including the depth and duration of the disruptions to customers and suppliers, its future effect on our business, on our results of operations, and on our financial condition, cannot be predicted. We expect that the economic disruptions will continue to have an effect on our business over the longer term. Despite this uncertainty, we continue to monitor costs and continue to take actions to reduce costs so as to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic to the best of our ability, although they may not be sufficient in the long-run for us to avoid reduced sales, increased losses and reduced operating cash flows.
Refer to Risk Factors, included in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K above, for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
We have a three-prong growth strategy.
1. Expand our Customer Base. We have a sales and marketing program that generates many prospect relationships. However, our limited range of higher cost products, mostly chilled water systems, reduces the number of customer prospects who can afford to buy from us. This year, we will broaden our product line to include lower- and mid-cost products, such as split systems and packaged roof top units. We believe these new products and services will increase our addressable market and sales, further leveraging our investment in sales and marketing.
One of our key 2019 and 2020 goals was to obtain more business from MFOs, which have greater financial resources, are more sophisticated, buy more and larger systems, and are less prone to project delays and cancellations, compared to the smaller cultivators that had been our primary customers in the past. Although we booked fewer projects with MFOs in 2020 than we did in 2019, we, booked three projects representing $3.5 million in potential future revenue. We recorded $2.9 million in revenue from these projects, or 35% of our total 2020 revenue. However, we still have significant work ahead of us to fill our sales pipeline with MFO customers that we believe will result in more consistent and predictable revenue and cash flow.
2. Sell More Automation and Control Systems. In 2019 we fulfilled a key goal by launching our SentryIQ® sensors, controls and automation (“SCA”) platform-a turnkey, single-vendor HVACD equipment and controls integration solution. We continued the rollout in 2020 and to date we have entered into thirteen contracts with twelve different companies to implement our SentryIQ® SCA platform. This product line is important for tactical and strategic reasons, and we hope to offer this as a standalone offering in the future. These systems provide a steady stream of data that our customers can use to make daily cultivation decisions. Additionally, we can use this data to track trends and apply future enhancements to our products and services, fostering closer relationships with our customers throughout their facilities’ life cycles. This product line is important for tactical and strategic reasons previously discussed.
We plan to continue to develop technology and innovations that provide value-add to our customers. We also intend to seek out “best-in-class” partners to help us automate and control the indoor grow facilities of the future.
3. Engage in Strategic Relationships with other Technology Leaders. During 2019, we identified several business verticals that we believe could be logical and natural complements to our climate control business, including: lighting, fertigation (automated process of delivering nutrients and water to plants), benches (customized systems to optimize use of the growing space), cultivation management technology (software), consumables (growing, packaging, facility and lab supplies), and operational improvement analytics (modeling, data aggregation and artificial intelligence). We intend to work with “best-in-class” vendors to develop more comprehensive, end-to-end, integrated solutions and specialized products and services that can help our cultivators compete in the market, whether through automation, software or operating efficiencies. We hope to establish one or more strategic alliances, such as reseller, distribution, co-marketing or product development agreements, with select companies which are consistent with our strategic direction. In 2020 we were unable to find suitable partners for such strategic relationships, but we continue to pursue this growth initiative.
Over time, if some of these strategic alliances are successful in driving top-line revenue for us and our partners, such relationships could develop into more exclusive arrangements or evolve into possible acquisitions or a source of strategic capital for us. There can be no assurance that we will be able to successfully execute any of these strategic initiatives. Our efforts will be primarily focused on working with new strategic partners to co-market each other’s products and services and possibly jointly develop new and improved products and services with CEA-specific applications, as opposed to seeking acquisitions.
*******
Revenue. Our 2020 revenue was $8,514,000. Our 2020 revenue represents a decrease of 44% compared to 2019. One of our MFO customers accounted for 28% of our 2020 revenue. We believe, among other things, that we need to build a diversified sales pipeline of MFOs, which we believe will increase our consistency and predictability of revenue.
Gross Margin. Our 2020 gross margin was 18.2%, a decrease from 29.9% in 2019. This decrease was primarily due to our fixed cost base, a lower margin on equipment sales, and an increase in variable costs as a percent of revenue as described in Results of Operations below.
Profitability. Our 2020 adjusted net loss was $1,239,000 compared to a 2019 adjusted net income of $92,000. Our adjusted net income (loss) is a key management metric and point of focus for us because it provides a proxy for the cash we generate from operations.
Capital Resources. Our working capital remains negative, and we have limited capital resources, which are impediments to the overall viability of our business as planned. The effect of the COVID-19 response has presented further challenges for us in 2020. Without increasing our current revenue and adding new sources of revenue, we cannot predict our future. As discussed elsewhere in this Annual Report, we have taken steps to reduce costs. We cannot predict how long our cost cutting measures will sustain the Company or how long the current economic situation will last.
Contract Bookings. Our bookings dropped significantly in the first half of 2020 but recovered in the second half, and our backlog at December 31, 2020, was $8,448,000, a decrease of $1,110,000, or 12%, from our December 31, 2019 backlog. During 2020, we had net bookings of $7,404,000, consisting of: (i) $10,343,000 of new sales contracts executed in 2020, (ii) $151,000 net positive changes orders, and (iii) $3,089,000 in project cancellations.
The following table sets forth: (i) our beginning backlog (the remaining contract value of outstanding sales contracts for which we have received an initial deposit as of the previous period), (ii) our net bookings for the period (new sales contracts executed during the period for which we received an initial deposit, net of any adjustments including cancellations and change orders during the period), (iii) our recognized revenue for the period, and (iv) our ending backlog for the period (the sum of the beginning backlog and net bookings, less recognized revenue). Based on the current economic climate and our cost cutting measures, there is no assurance that we will be able to continue to obtain the level of bookings that we have had in the past and or fulfill our current backlog, and we may experience contract cancellations, project scope reductions and project delays.
As has historically been the case at each quarter-end, there remains significant uncertainty regarding the timing of revenue recognition of our backlog as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, $2,643,000 of our backlog, or 31%, was attributable to customer contracts for which we have only received an initial advance payment to cover our engineering services (“engineering only paid contracts”). There are always risks that the equipment portion of our engineering only paid contracts will not be completed or will be delayed, which could occur if the customer is dissatisfied with the quality or timeliness of our engineering services, there is a delay or abandonment of the project due to the customer’s inability to obtain project financing or licensing, or the customer determines not to proceed with the project due to economic factors, such as declining cannabis wholesale prices in the state.
We have provided an estimate in our consolidated financial statements for when we expect to recognize revenue on our remaining performance obligations (i.e., our Q4 2020 backlog), using separate time bands, with respect to engineering only paid contracts and partial equipment paid contracts. However, there continues to be significant uncertainty regarding the timing of our recognition of revenue in our Q4 2020 backlog. Refer to the Revenue Recognition section of Note 2 in our consolidated financial statements, included as part of this Annual Report for additional information on our estimate of future revenue recognition on our remaining performance obligations.
Our backlog, remaining performance obligations and net bookings may not be indicative of future operating results, and our customers may attempt to renegotiate or terminate their contracts for a number of reasons, including delays in or inability to obtain project financing or licensing or abandonment of the project entirely. Accordingly, there can be no assurance that contracts included in backlog or remaining performance obligations will actually generate revenues or when the actual revenues will be generated. Net bookings and backlog are considered non-GAAP financial measures, and therefore, they should be considered in addition to, rather than as a substitute for, our GAAP measures for recognized revenue, deferred revenue and remaining performance obligations. Further, we can provide no assurance as to the profitability of our contracts reflected in remaining performance obligations, backlog and net bookings.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Certain accounting policies are particularly important to the understanding of our financial position and results of operations and require the application of significant judgment by our management or can be materially affected by changes from period to period in economic factors or conditions that are outside of our control. As a result, they are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. In applying these policies, management uses their judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of certain estimates. Those estimates are based on our historical operations, our future business plans and projected financial results, the terms of existing contracts, observance of trends in the industry, information provided by our customers, and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. For information regarding our critical accounting policies as well as recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements.
Our management has discussed the development and selection of critical accounting estimates with the Board of Directors and the Board of Directors has reviewed our disclosure relating to critical accounting estimates in this Annual Report. We believe the following are the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Allowance for accounts receivable. Accounts receivables are recorded at the invoiced amount or based on revenue earned for items not yet invoiced, and generally do not bear interest. An allowance for doubtful accounts is established, as necessary, based on past experience and other factors, which, in management’s judgment, deserve current recognition in estimating bad debts. Based on its review, we establish or adjust the allowance for specific customers and the accounts receivable portfolio as a whole. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, the allowance for doubtful accounts was $165,098 and $151,673, respectively. If the financial condition of our customers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, additional allowances may be required.
Excess and obsolete inventory. Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. The inventory is valued based on a first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) basis. Lower of cost or net realizable value is evaluated by considering obsolescence, excessive levels of inventory, deterioration and other factors. Adjustments to reduce the cost of inventory to its net realizable value, if required, are made for estimated excess, obsolescence or impaired inventory. Excess and obsolete inventory is charged to cost of revenue and a new lower-cost basis for that inventory is established and subsequent changes in facts and circumstances do not result in the restoration or increase in that newly established cost basis. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, the allowance for excess and obsolete inventory was $93,045 and $71,376, respectively.
Goodwill impairment. Goodwill, defined as unidentified asset(s) acquired in conjunction with a business acquisition, is tested for impairment on an annual basis and between annual tests whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. We recorded goodwill in connection with our acquisition of Hydro Innovations in July 2014. We perform a quantitative impairment test annually during the fourth quarter by comparing the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, goodwill is considered not impaired. An impairment charge would be recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value. We completed this assessment as of December 31, 2020 and concluded that no impairment existed.
Product warranty. We warrant the products that we manufacture for a warranty period equal to the lesser of 12 months from start-up or 18 months from shipment. Our warranty provides for the repair, rework, or replacement of products (at our option) that fail to perform within stated specification. Our third-party suppliers also warrant their products under similar terms, which are passed through to our customers. We assess the historical warranty claims on our manufactured products and, since 2016, warranty claims have been approximately 1% of annual revenue generated on these products. We continue to assess the need to record a warranty reserve at the time of sale based on historical claims and other factors. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, we had an accrued warranty reserve amount of $173,365 and $185,234, respectively, which are included in accounts payable and accrued liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets.
Income taxes. We account for deferred tax liabilities and assets for the future consequences of events that have been recognized in our consolidated financial statements or tax returns. Measurement of the deferred items is based on enacted tax laws. In the event the future consequences of differences between financial reporting bases and tax bases of our assets and liabilities result in a deferred tax asset, we perform an evaluation of the probability of being able to realize the future benefits indicated by such asset. A valuation allowance related to a net deferred tax asset is recorded when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the net deferred tax asset will not be realized. Management’s judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and any valuation allowance recorded against the net deferred tax assets. We recorded a full valuation allowance as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. Based on the available evidence, we believe it is more likely than not that we will not be able to utilize our net deferred tax assets in the foreseeable future. We intend to maintain valuation allowances until sufficient evidence exists to support the reversal of such valuation allowances. We make estimates and judgments about our future taxable income that are based on assumptions that are consistent with our plans. Should the actual amounts differ from our estimates, the carrying value of our deferred tax assets could be materially impacted.
Share-based compensation. We recognize the cost resulting from all share-based compensation arrangements, including stock options, restricted stock awards and restricted stock units that we grant under our equity incentive plan in our consolidated financial statements based on their grant date fair value. The expense is recognized over the requisite service period or performance period of the award. The service inception date is typically the grant date, but the service inception date may be prior to the grant date. Awards with a graded vesting period based on service are expensed on a straight-line basis for the entire award. Awards with performance-based vesting conditions which require the achievement of a specific company financial performance goal at the end of the performance period and required service period are recognized over the performance period. Each reporting period, we reassess the probability of achieving the respective performance goal. If the goals are not expected to be met, no compensation cost is recognized, and any previously recognized amount recorded is reversed. If the award contains market-based vesting conditions, the compensation cost is based on the grant date fair value and expected achievement of market condition and is not subsequently reversed if it is later determined that the condition is not likely to be met or is expected to be lower than initially expected. The grant date fair value of stock options is based on the Black-Scholes Model. The Black-Scholes Model requires judgmental assumptions including volatility and expected term, both based on historical experience. The risk-free interest rate is based on U.S. Treasury interest rates whose term is consistent with the expected term of the option.
Allocation of transaction price; standalone selling price. A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. When there are multiple performance obligations within a contract, we allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation based on standalone selling price. When estimating the selling price, we use various observable inputs. The best observable input is our actual selling price for the same good or service, however, this input is generally not available for our contracts containing multiple performance obligations. For engineering services, we estimate the standalone selling price by reference to certain physical characteristics of the project, such as facility size and mechanical systems involved, which are indicative of the scope and complexity of the mechanical engineering services to be provided. For equipment sales, the standalone selling price is determined by forecasting the expected costs of the equipment and then adding an appropriate margin, based on a range of acceptable margins established by management. Depending on the nature of the performance obligations, we may use a combination of different methods and observable inputs if certain performance obligations have highly variable or uncertain standalone selling prices. Once the selling prices are determined, we apply the relative values to the total contract consideration and estimates the amount of the transaction price to be recognized as each promise is fulfilled.
Remaining performance obligations. The revenue standard requires certain quantitative and qualitative disclosures about our remaining performance obligations, which are defined as performance obligations that are unsatisfied (or partially unsatisfied) as of the end of the reporting period, including (i) the aggregate amount of the transaction price allocated to the remaining performance obligations, and (ii) when we expect to recognize as revenue with respect to such amounts on either: (x) a quantitative basis using appropriate time bands for the duration of the remaining performance obligations, or (y) by using qualitative information. Industry uncertainty, project financing concerns, and the licensing and qualification of our prospective customers, which are out of our control, make it difficult for us to predict when we will recognize revenue on our remaining performance obligations. There are risks that we may not realize the full contract value on customer projects in a timely manner or at all, and completion of a customer’s cultivation facility project is dependent upon the customer’s ability to secure funding and real estate, obtain a license and then build their cultivation facility so they can take possession of the equipment. Accordingly, the time it takes for customers to complete a project, which corresponds to when we are able to recognize revenue, is driven by numerous factors including: (i) the large number of first-time participants interested in the indoor cannabis cultivation business; (ii) the complexities and uncertainties involved in obtaining state and local licensure and permitting; (iii) local and state government delays in approving licenses and permits due to lack of staff or the large number of pending applications, especially in states where there is no cap on the number of cultivators; (iv) the customer’s need to obtain cultivation facility financing; (v) the time needed, and coordination required, for our customers to acquire real estate and properly design and build the facility (to the stage when climate control systems can be installed); (vi) the large price tag and technical complexities of the climate control and air sanitation system; (vii) the availability of power; and (viii) delays that are typical in completing any construction project. Further, based on the current economic climate, the uncertainty regarding the COVID-19 virus, and the Company’s recent cost cutting measures, there is no assurance that the Company will be able to fulfill its backlog, and the Company may experience contract cancellations, project scope reductions and project delays.
There is significant uncertainty regarding the timing of our recognition on all remaining performance obligations as of December 31, 2020. Customer contracts for which we have only received an initial advance payment to cover the allocated value of our engineering services (“engineering only paid contracts”) carry enhanced risks that the equipment portion of these contracts will not be completed or will be delayed, which could occur if the customer is dissatisfied with the quality or timeliness of our engineering services or there is a delay or abandonment of the project due to the customer’s inability to obtain project financing or licensing. In contrast, after the customer has made an advance payment for a portion of the equipment to be delivered under the contract (“partial equipment paid contracts”), we are typically better able to estimate the timing of revenue recognition since the risks and delays associated with licensing, permitting and project funding are typically mitigated once the initial equipment payment is received.
Commitments and contingencies. In the normal course of business, we are subject to loss contingencies, such as legal proceedings and claims arising out of our business, that cover a wide range of matters, including, among others, customer disputes, government investigations and tax matters. An accrual for a loss contingency is recognized when it is probable that an asset had been impaired, or a liability had been incurred and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues and Cost of Goods Sold
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $8,514,000 compared to $15,224,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $6,710,000, or 44%. This revenue decrease was partly the result of our decreased net bookings in 2020, which fell from $16,300,000 in 2019 to $7,405,000 in 2020, or 55%. We remain unable to consistently convert our backlog into revenue on a quarter-over-quarter basis. Our revenue conversion is largely dependent on customer-centric factors-outside of our control-such as industry uncertainty, project financing concerns, the licensing and qualification of our prospective customers, and other reasons such as a challenging business climate including an overall post-COVID-19 economic downturn, which makes it difficult for us to predict when we will recognize revenue on our backlog.
Cost of revenue decreased by $3,714,000 from $10,676,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $6,961,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1,553,000 compared to $4,549,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Gross profit margin decreased by approximately twelve percentage points from 29.9% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 18.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily due to our fixed cost base, a lower margin on equipment sales, and an increase in variable costs as a percent of revenue as described below.
Our revenue cost structure is comprised of both fixed and variable components. The fixed cost component represents engineering, manufacturing and project management salaries and benefits and manufacturing overhead that totaled $1,167,000, or 13.7% of total revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $1,426,000, or 9.4% of total revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $259,000 was primarily due to a decrease in salaries and benefits (including stock-based compensation) of $277,000, offset by an increase of $18,000 in fixed overhead. The variable cost component, which represents our cost of equipment, outside engineering costs, shipping and handling, travel and warranty costs, totaled $5,795,000, or 68.1% of total revenue, in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $9,250,000, or 60.8% of total revenue, in the year ended December 31, 2019. In the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year, our cost of equipment decreased by $3,331,000 primarily due to the decrease in revenue and a decrease in our equipment margin of 3.5 percentage points. Additionally in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019: (i) our warranty costs increased by $144,000, (ii) our excess and obsolete inventory and other variable overheads increased by $45,000, which were offset by (iii) a reduction in outside engineering costs of $156,000, (iv) a reduction in shipping and handling costs of $89,000 and, (v) decreased travel of $69,000.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses decreased by 33% from $5,859,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $3,916,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $1,944,000. The operating expense decrease consisted primarily of: (i) a decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A expenses”) of $1,567,000, (ii) a decrease in advertising and marketing expenses of $246,000 and, (iii) a decrease in product development expenses of $131,000.
The decrease in SG&A expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was due primarily to: (i) a decrease of $762,000 in stock-based compensation, (ii) a decrease of $191,000 in commissions, (iii) a decrease in travel of $122,000, (iv) a decrease of $138,000 in accounting and other professional fees, (v) a decrease of $111,000 in loss on asset disposal, (vi) a decrease of $69,000 in board fees, (vii) a decrease of $57,000 in salaries, benefits and other employee related costs, (viii) a decrease of $44,000 in bad debt expense, (ix) a decrease in depreciation of $40,000, (x) a decrease of $17,000 in facilities, insurance and office supplies and, (xi) a decrease in investor relations costs of $15,000.
The decrease in marketing expenses were due primarily to: (i) a decrease of $205,000 for industry trade shows and events, (ii) a decrease in stock-based compensation of $26,000, (iii) a decrease of $17,000 in travel, (iv) a decrease of $15,000 in collateral and other marketing expenses, offset by (v) an increase of $20,000 for web development.
The decrease in product development costs was due to (i) a decrease in materials costs of $88,000, (ii) a decrease in stock-based compensation of $23,000, (iii) a decrease in salaries and benefits of $12,000 and, (iv) a decrease in travel of $7,000.
Operating Loss
We had an operating loss of $2,363,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to an operating loss of $1,311,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $1,052,000, or 80%. The operating loss included $406,000 of non-cash, stock-based compensation expenses and $114,000 for depreciation and amortization in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $1,277,000 for stock-based compensation and $154,000 of depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 31, 2019. Excluding these non-cash items, our operating loss increased by $1,964,000.
Other Income (Expense)
Our other income (net) increased by $632,000 from other expense (net) of $28,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to other income (net) of $604,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. This change is primarily due to loan forgiveness of $557,000 and income from a legal judgement of $35,000.
Net Loss
Overall, we had a net loss of $1,759,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a net loss of $1,339,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $420,000. The net loss included $406,000 of non-cash, stock-based compensation costs and depreciation and amortization expense of $114,000 in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to non-cash, stock-based compensation expense of $1,277,000 and depreciation and amortization of $154,000 in the year ended December 31, 2019. Excluding these non-cash items, our net loss increased by $1,332,000.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Financial Position
Cash and Cash Equivalents
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $2,285,000, compared to cash and cash equivalents of $922,000 as of December 31, 2019, an increase of 148%. The $1,363,000 increase in cash and cash equivalents during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily the result of cash provided by our operating and financing activities. Our cash is held in bank depository accounts in certain financial institutions. We currently have deposits in financial institutions that exceed the federally insured amount.
As of December 31, 2020, we had accounts receivable (net of allowance for doubtful accounts) of $33,000, inventory (net of excess and obsolete allowance) of $327,000, and prepaid expenses and other of $1,038,000 (including $916,000 in advance payments on inventory purchases). While we typically require advance payment before we commence engineering services or ship equipment to our customers, we have made exceptions requiring us to record accounts receivable, which carry a risk of non-collectability especially since most of our customers are funded on an as-needed basis to complete facility construction. We expect our exposure to accounts receivable risk to increase as we pursue larger projects.
As of December 31, 2020, we had no indebtedness, total accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $1,785,000, deferred revenue of $3,724,000, accrued equity compensation of $128,000, and the current portion of operating lease liability of $266,000. As of December 31, 2020, we had a working capital deficit of $2,220,000, compared to a working capital deficit of $1,437,000 as of December 31, 2019.
We have never declared or paid any cash dividends on our common stock. We currently intend to retain all available funds and any future earnings for use in the operation and expansion of our business and do not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
Because of the economic situation that developed during 2020, we cannot predict the continuing level of working capital that we will have in the future. Additionally, we cannot predict that our future financial position will not deteriorate due to cancelled or delayed contract fulfillment, reduced sales and our ability to perform our contracts.
Summary of Cash Flows
The following summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Operating Activities
We incurred a net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $1,759,000 compared to a net loss for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $1,339,000. We had an accumulated deficit of $27,444,000 as of December 31, 2020.
Cash provided by operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $818,000 compared to cash provided by operations of $672,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $146,000. The increase was primarily attributable to: (i) an increase in cash from working capital of $1,370,000, offset by, (ii) a decrease in non-cash operating charges of $804,000, and (iii) an increase in net loss of $420,000. Significant non-cash items included: (i) a gain on note payable forgiveness of $557,000, (ii) stock-related compensation of $277,000, (iii) $190,000 for amortization of ROU asset, and (iv) depreciation and amortization expense of $120,000.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $9,000, compared to cash used in investing activities of $3,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change related to purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, cash from financing activities was $554,000 and $0, respectively. The cash from financing activities was the result of a loan received from our bank on April 22, 2020 which was subsequently forgiven on December 11, 2020. See Note 9 - Note Payable and Accrued Interest.
Going Concern
Our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, have been presented on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. Our independent registered public accounting firm included in its audit opinion on our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, a statement that there is substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern, and our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 were prepared assuming that we would continue as a going concern. We have determined that our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent on raising additional capital to fund our operations and ultimately on generating future profitable operations. There can be no assurance that we will be able to raise sufficient additional capital or eventually have positive cash flow from operations to address all of our cash flow needs. If we are not able to generate positive cash flow from operations or find alternative sources of cash, our business and shareholders will be materially and adversely affected. The foregoing factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for a period of one year from the date our condensed consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, are issued. Our condensed consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustment that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
The Company is subject to a number of risks similar to those of other similar stage and situated companies, including general economic conditions, its customers’ operations and prospects for and ability to obtain project financing, and market and business disruptions, that include the outbreak of COVID-19, dependence on key individuals, successful development, marketing and branding of products; uncertainty of product development and generation of revenues; dependence on outside sources of financing; risks associated with research, development; dependence on third-party suppliers and collaborators; protection of intellectual property; and competition with larger, better-capitalized companies. Ultimately, the attainment of profitable operations is dependent on future events, including obtaining adequate financing to fulfill its development activities and generating a level of revenues adequate to support the Company’s cost structure.
The Company also will be affected by constraints on the availability of capital to its customers and prospects who have commenced, or are contemplating, new or expanded cultivation facilities and the overall impact of the Covid-19 pandemic. The extent to which COVID-19 will impact the Company’s business and financial results will depend on future developments, which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. See Note 16. The duration and likelihood of operational success going forward resulting from the fiscal year 2020 measures of adjusting the workforce reductions and cost-cutting measures are uncertain. If these actions do not meet management’s expectations, or additional capital is not available, there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. Other factors that will impact the Company’s ability to continue operations include the market demand for the Company’s products and services, the ability to service its customers and prospects, potential contract cancellations, project scope reductions and project delays, the Company’s ability to fulfill its backlog, the management of working capital, and the continuation of normal payment terms and conditions for purchase of the Company’s products. The Company believes its cash balances and cash flow from operations will be insufficient to fund its operations for the next twelve months. If the Company is unable to increase revenues, or otherwise generate cash flows from operations, there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a period of one year from the date the financial statements are issued. These consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustment that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Capital Raising
We believe our cash balances and cash flow from operations will be insufficient to fund our operations for the next 12 months. If we are unable to increase revenues or otherwise generate cash flows from operations, we will need to raise additional funding to continue as a going concern. Based on management’s estimate for our operational cash requirements, during the first quarter of 2020, we took steps to downsize and reorient our operations to reduce costs. We will need to obtain financing in order to continue our operations and achieve our growth strategies. There can be no assurance that we will be able to raise the necessary financing, when and if needed, on acceptable terms or at all. If our operating results do not meet management’s expectations, or additional capital is not available, management believes it can downsize or reorient operations to reduce certain expenditures. The precise amount and timing of our financing needs cannot be determined accurately at this time, and will depend on a number of factors, including the market demand for our products and services, management of working capital, and continuation of normal payment terms and conditions for purchase of our products and services.
There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to raise debt or equity financing in sufficient amounts, when and if needed, on acceptable terms or at all. The Company’s ability to raise equity capital is also limited by the Company’s stock price, and any such issuance could be highly dilutive to existing shareholders.
Inflation
In the opinion of management, inflation has not and will not have a material effect on our operations in the immediate future. Management will continue to monitor inflation and evaluate the possible future effects of inflation on our business and operations.
Contractual Payment Obligations
Refer to Note 4 - Leases of our consolidated financial statements, which are included as part of this Annual Report for the further details on our obligations under a lease for our manufacturing and office space.
Commitments and Contingencies
Litigation
As of December 31, 2019, there were 6,750,000 restricted stock units that had not been settled due to a dispute with a former employee over the required withholding taxes to be paid to the Company for remittance to the appropriate tax authorities. The Company commenced an arbitration action against the former employee regarding the dispute. The former employee also made claims in the arbitration action against the Company for unpaid wages. As stated in a pleading in the arbitration, on March 9, 2020, the Company issued the former employee 6,750,000 shares of the Company’s common stock in settlement of these restricted stock units after taking measures to mitigate the Company’s exposure to penalties and liability for the failure to properly withhold income taxes. The Arbitrator issued an interim award of approximately $10,000 in the Company’s favor and a finding against the former employee. Effective June 9, 2020, the Arbitrator issued his final award in the Company’s favor in the Colorado arbitration. The Arbitrator found against the former employee and awarded the Company costs of $33,985, with interest at 8% per year. Effective July 22, 2020, the Colorado Court confirmed the Arbitration award and entered a final judgement in favor of the Company and against the former employee. The Company pursued collection of this debt and has now collected the debt owed. This former employee is continuing to pursue separate litigation against the Company for recovery of alleged consulting fees owed to him for the 2015 calendar year prior to his appointment as an executive officer of the Company. The Company strongly disputes the ongoing litigation and in the remote event of an adverse outcome, the amount of any settlement loss for this case is not reasonably estimable as of the date of the issuance of these financial statements.
From time to time, in the normal course of our operations, we are subject to litigation matters and claims. Litigation can be expensive and disruptive to normal business operations. Moreover, the results of complex legal proceedings are difficult to predict and our view of these matters may change in the future as the litigation and events related thereto unfold. An unfavorable outcome to any legal matter, if material, could have an adverse effect on our operations or our financial position, liquidity or results of operations.
Other Commitments
In the ordinary course of business, we may provide indemnifications of varying scope and terms to customers, vendors, lessors, business partners, and other parties with respect to certain matters, including, but not limited to, losses arising out of our breach of such agreements, services to be provided by us, or from intellectual property infringement claims made by third parties. In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and certain of our officers and employees that will require us to, among other things, indemnify them against certain liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors, officers, or employees. We maintain director and officer insurance, which may cover certain liabilities arising from our obligation to indemnify our directors and certain of our officers and employees, and former officers, directors, and employees of acquired companies, in certain circumstances.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are required to disclose any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources that are material to investors. As of December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements. During 2020 and 2019, we did not engage in any off-balance sheet financing activities.
Recent Developments
Refer to Note 16 - Subsequent Events of our consolidated financial statements, included as part of this Annual Report, for the more significant events occurring since December 31, 2020.