ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and expected financial results, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Risk Factors” discussed in Item 1A of Part I of this Annual Report.
OVERVIEW
We are developing companion diagnostic tests designed to expand the eligible patient populations for targeted therapies by discovering new cancer sub-types molecular-based approaches cannot detect. Our proprietary CELsignia diagnostic platform is the only commercially ready technology we are aware of that uses a patient’s living tumor cells to identify the specific abnormal cellular process driving a patient’s cancer and the targeted therapy that best treats it. We believe our CELsignia platform provides two important improvements over traditional molecular diagnostics. First, molecular diagnostics can only provide a snapshot of the genetic mutations present in a patient’s tumor because they analyze cell fragments. Using cell fragments prevents molecular diagnostics from analyzing the dynamic cellular activities, known as cell signaling, that regulate cell proliferation or survival. Cancer can develop when certain cell signaling activity becomes abnormal, or dysregulated. Since genetic mutations are often only weakly correlated to the dysregulated signaling activity driving a patient’s cancer, a molecular diagnostic is prone to providing an incomplete diagnosis. CELsignia tests overcome this limitation by measuring dynamic cell signaling activity in a patient’s living tumor cells. When a CELsignia test detects abnormal signaling activity, a more accurate diagnosis of the patient’s cancer driver is obtained. Second, molecular diagnostics can only estimate the probability of a patient’s potential drug response based on a statistical analysis of the drug’s clinical trial results. Instead of this indirect estimate of drug response, CELsignia tests directly measure the effectiveness of a targeted therapy in a patient’s living tumor cells. This enables physicians to confirm that the therapeutic matching the patient’s cancer driver is functional in the patient’s tumor cells before prescribing it, which significantly increases the likelihood of a positive clinical outcome.
Our first analytically validated and commercially ready test using our CELsignia platform, the CELsignia HER2 Pathway Activity Test for breast cancer, diagnoses two new sub-types of HER2-negative breast cancer that traditional molecular diagnostics cannot detect. Our internal studies show that approximately 15-20% of HER2-negative breast cancer patients have abnormal HER2 signaling activity similar to levels found in HER2-positive breast cancer cells. As a result, these HER2-negative patients have undiagnosed HER2-driven breast cancer and would be likely to respond to the same anti-HER2 targeted therapies only HER2-positive patients receive today. We have three interventional clinical trials underway to evaluate the efficacy of HER2 targeted therapies in breast cancer patients selected with our CELsignia HER2 Pathway Activity Test.
Our second CELsignia test for breast cancer evaluates independent c-Met signaling activity and its involvement with HER family signaling in HER2-negative breast cancer tumor cells. Our internal studies show that approximately 20%-25% of HER2-negative breast cancer patients have abnormal c-Met signaling activity that is co-activated with abnormal HER family signaling. These studies suggest that this sub-group of HER2-negative breast cancer patients may best respond to treatment with a combination of HER family and c-Met inhibitors.
Our third CELsignia test for breast cancer evaluates PI3K signaling in HER2-negative breast cancer tumor cells. Our internal studies demonstrate how measurement of PI3K-involved signaling may provide a more sensitive and specific method of identifying patients most likely to benefit from PI3K inhibitors than current genetic tests that measure PI3K mutations.
We intend to combine these three tests to create the CELsignia Multi-Pathway Activity Test, or CELsignia MP Test. With this next generation CELsignia test, we plan to provide an analysis of EGFR/HER1, HER2, HER3, c-MET, and PI3K-node involved signaling activity for each patient tumor specimen received.
We completed development of our first CELsignia test for ovarian cancer in 2020. This test identifies a new sub-group of ovarian cancer patients with tumors that have abnormal c-Met and HER2 signaling activity. These findings suggest that a significant sub-group of ovarian cancer patients may respond to treatment with a combination of ErbB and c-Met inhibitors. Nearly 15,000 women a year die from ovarian cancer, a disease that has less than a 50% five-year survival rate and a limited range of targeted therapy options. There is thus a significant unmet need for additional therapeutic options for ovarian cancer patients. As a companion diagnostic, our CELsignia test for ovarian cancer will be intended to help pharmaceutical companies obtain new drug indications and expand treatment options for this challenging tumor type. We initiated discussions with pharmaceutical companies about collaborating on clinical trials in late 2020.
We also made significant progress in 2020 developing a new CELsignia test intended to diagnose cancers driven by dysregulated RAS signaling. Dysregulation of RAS signaling, which includes the RAF/MEK/ERK and PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways, is estimated to drive 30%-40% of all cancers. Pharmaceutical companies have developed numerous drugs that target RAS-involved pathways. However, the number of interactions amongst RAS-regulated pathways has made it extremely difficult to use molecular tests to identify patients with dysregulated RAS signaling tumors. The challenge of diagnosing a cancer driven by a dysregulated RAS signaling network is magnified because two or more different pathways are typically involved. Recent research has also found that RAS mutations play a much less important role in dysregulated RAS signaling than previously thought. Our CELsignia platform is uniquely suited to untangle the complexity of dysregulated RAS signaling tumors and identify the targeted therapy combination capable of treating it.
Once development of the new RAS test is completed, we intend to add it to our current CELsignia Multi-Pathway Activity test for breast and ovarian cancer. This next generation CELsignia test would provide an analysis of EGFR/HER1, HER2, HER3, c-MET, PI3K, and RAS-involved signaling activity for each patient tumor specimen received. Our current CELsignia test has the potential to diagnose oncogenic signaling activity undetectable by molecular tests in up to one in three HER2-negative breast cancer patients. If our efforts to develop a RAS dynamic signaling test are successful, the percentage of cancer patients who could benefit from a CELsignia test would further increase.
In addition to our CELsignia tests for HER2-negative breast cancer and ovarian cancer, we expect to develop CELsignia tests to diagnose eight new potential cancer sub-types we have discovered in lung, ovarian, kidney, and bladder cancers. Approved or investigational drugs are currently available to treat these new potential cancer sub-types. We expect to launch these additional tests on a staggered basis over the next few years while continuing our research to identify additional new cancer sub-types. Our overall commercialization strategy is to develop diagnostics that expand the patient population eligible for targeted therapies. We have four collaborations underway that rely on the CELsignia test for breast cancer to select breast cancer patients for treatment with HER2 or a combination of pan-HER and c-Met targeted therapies. For the first one of these collaborations, we are fielding a prospective clinical trial with Genentech and NSABP (FACT-1) to evaluate the efficacy of Genentech’s HER2 targeted therapies in patients with abnormal HER2 signaling. For the second of these collaborations, we are fielding a prospective clinical trial with Puma and West Cancer Center (FACT-2) to evaluate the efficacy and safety of Puma’s drug, Nerlynx, and chemotherapy, in breast cancer patients selected with our CELsignia test. For our third collaboration, we are fielding a prospective open-label Phase II clinical trial with Puma Massachusetts General Hospital, the UCLA Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center and the Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center to evaluate the efficacy of Puma’s drug, Nerlynx, and Faslodex, an AstraZeneca drug, in previously treated metastatic HR-positive, HER2-negative breast cancer patients selected with our CELsignia HER2 Pathway Activity Test. For our fourth collaboration, we are fielding a prospective open-label Phase II clinical trial with Pfizer Inc. and Sarah Cannon Research Institute to evaluate the efficacy of two Pfizer targeted therapies, Vizimpro, a pan-HER inhibitor, and Xalkori, a c-Met inhibitor, in previously treated metastatic HER2-negative breast cancer patients selected with our CELsignia Multi-Pathway Activity Test.
An additional collaboration to evaluate tissue samples from a Phase II study evaluating Puma’s pan-HER inhibitor, Nerlynx, Genentech’s HER2 antibody, Herceptin, and Bristol-Myers Squibb’s EGFR inhibitor, Erbitux, in metastatic colorectal cancer patients is expected to be completed in late 2022. Unlike the four clinical trial collaborations, our CELsignia test will be used solely to evaluate tissue samples after they have been enrolled in this trial. We will not receive payment for the testing we perform. We expect our CELsignia test will provide critical insight after the trial is completed about the patient characteristics most correlative to drug response.
In conjunction with the development of our CELsignia tests, we will seek collaborations with pharmaceutical companies to field clinical trials to advance the clinical development of their targeted therapies with the eventual goal of obtaining U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) approval of a new drug indication. Collaborations are expected to involve initially Phase I or Phase II interventional clinical trials to evaluate the efficacy of our collaboration partners’ targeted therapies patients selected with one of our CELsignia tests. We are currently evaluating, or expect to evaluate, a variety of targeted therapies in combination with other targeted therapies, hormonal therapies, or chemotherapies, including: i) pan-HER and c-Met inhibitors; ii) pan-HER inhibitors and endocrine therapy; iii) pan-HER inhibitors and chemotherapies; and iv) PI3K inhibitors and endocrine therapy. The FDA has approved three c-Met inhibitors, six HER-family inhibitors, and four PI3K inhibitors for cancer treatment. Additional c-Met, HER-family, and PI3K inhibitors are being evaluated in on-going clinical trials.
We have not generated any revenue from sales to date, and we continue to incur significant research and development and other expenses related to our ongoing operations. As a result, we are not and have never been profitable and have incurred losses in each period since we began operations in 2012. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we reported a net loss of approximately $9.5 million and $7.4 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had a combined accumulated deficit of approximately $12.6 million under Celcuity LLC and $26.3 million under Celcuity Inc. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $11.6 million.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
A novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) was first identified in Wuhan, China in December 2019, and subsequently declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business is discussed in further detail below:
Health and Safety
To help protect the health and safety of our employees, suppliers and collaborators, we took proactive, aggressive action from the earliest signs of the outbreak. We enacted rigorous safety measures in our laboratory and administrative offices, including implementing social distancing protocols, allowing working from home for those employees that do not need to be physically present in a lab to perform their work, suspending travel, implementing temperature checks at the entrances to our facilities, extensively and frequently disinfecting our workspaces and providing masks to those employees who must be physically present. We expect to continue with these measures until the COVID-19 pandemic is contained and we may take further actions as government authorities require or recommend or as we determine to be in the best interests of our employees, suppliers, and collaborators.
Clinical Trials and Collaborations
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, governmental authorities have implemented and are continuing to implement numerous and constantly evolving measures to try to contain the virus, such as travel bans and restrictions, limits on gatherings, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, and business shutdowns. As we continue to advance our clinical trial collaborations, we are in close contact with our current clinical sponsors, and principal investigators, as well as prospective pharmaceutical company and clinical collaborators, to assess the impact of COVID-19 on our trial enrollment timelines and collaboration discussions. In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, the focus of healthcare providers and hospitals on fighting the virus, and consistent with the FDA’s updated industry guidance for conducting clinical trials issued on March 18, 2020, we are experiencing delays in the enrollment of patients in our ongoing clinical trials. We now expect interim results from the FACT-1 and FACT-2 trials to be delayed until the fourth quarter of 2021 or first quarter of 2022 and final results approximately nine months later. As the impact of COVID-19 on our industry becomes clearer, we may need to reassess the timing of our anticipated clinical milestones. Prospective clinical trial collaborations with pharmaceutical companies and sponsors may also be delayed but the impact on the timing of finalizing agreements is not yet known.
Research and Development
While our facility currently remains operational, the evolving measures to try to contain the virus have impacted and may further impact our workforce and operations, as well as those of our vendors and suppliers. Our laboratory remains operational as of this date, but, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have implemented protective policies that reduce the number of research and development staff operating in our laboratory at any one time. While governmental measures may be modified or extended, we expect that our research and development and clinical laboratory will remain operational. However, in light of the focus of healthcare providers and hospitals on fighting the virus, several of the clinical sites that provide us tumor tissue for research have halted this service, reducing the number of new tumor tissue specimens we would typically expect to receive. These various constraints may slow or diminish our research and development activities. In addition, cancer research-related industry meetings, such as the American Association for Cancer Research (AACR), were delayed for several months. Our submissions to present research results at these meetings were accepted, but the release of the results was postponed in conjunction with the delayed meeting schedules.
Liquidity
Although there is uncertainty related to the anticipated impact of the recent COVID-19 outbreak on our future results, we believe our existing balance of cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our cash needs arising in the ordinary course of business for at least the next twelve months. We continue to monitor the rapidly evolving situation and guidance from federal, state and local public health authorities and may take additional actions based on their recommendations. In these circumstances, there may be developments outside our control requiring us to adjust our operating plan. In addition, see Item 1A of Part I of this Annual Report for additional information on risks associated with pandemics in general and COVID-19 specifically and how those risks may impact our business and operations.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Components of Operating Results
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue. Initially, our ability to generate revenue will depend primarily upon our ability to obtain partnership agreements with pharmaceutical companies to provide companion diagnostics for such pharmaceutical partners’ existing or investigational targeted therapies. We expect these partnerships to generate significant revenue from the sale of tests to identify patients eligible for clinical trials, from milestone payments, and, potentially, from royalties on the incremental drug revenues our tests enable. Once a new drug indication is received that requires use of our companion diagnostic to identify eligible patients, we expect to generate revenues from sales of tests to treating physicians.
Research and Development
Since our inception, we have primarily focused on research and development of our CELsignia platform, development and validation of our CELsignia tests, and research related to the discovery of new cancer sub-types. Research and development expenses primarily include:
·
employee-related expenses related to our research and development activities, including salaries, benefits, recruiting, travel and stock-based compensation expenses;
·
laboratory supplies;
·
consulting fees paid to third parties;
·
clinical trial costs;
·
facilities expenses; and
·
legal costs associated with patent applications.
Internal and external research and development costs are expensed as they are incurred. As we continue to expand clinical trials to evaluate efficacy of targeted therapies in cancer patients selected with one of our CELsignia tests, the proportion of research and development expenses allocated to external spending will grow at a faster rate than expenses allocated to internal expenses.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation related to our executive, finance and support functions. Other general and administrative expenses include professional fees for auditing, tax, and legal services associated with being a public company, director and officer insurance and travel expenses for our general and administrative personnel.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of professional and consulting fees related to these functions. To date, we have incurred immaterial sales and marketing expenses as we continue to focus primarily on the development of our CELsignia platform and corresponding CELsignia tests. We expect to begin to incur increased selling and marketing expenses in anticipation of the commercialization of our first CELsignia tests. These increased expenses are expected to include payroll-related costs as we add employees in the commercial departments, costs related to the initiation and operation of our sales and distribution network and marketing related costs.
Interest Expense
Interest expense is the result of finance lease obligations.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Research and Development
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our total research and development expenses increased approximately $1.41 million, or 23%, to approximately $7.68 million from $6.27 million for the prior year. The increase primarily resulted from a $1.15 million increase in compensation related expenses, including approximately $0.49 million in non-cash stock-based compensation to support development of our CELsignia platform. In addition, other research and development expenses increased $0.26 million due to clinical validation and laboratory studies, and operational and business development activities.
Conducting a significant amount of research and development is central to our business model. We plan to increase our research and development expenses for the foreseeable future as we seek to discover new cancer sub-types and to develop and validate additional CELsignia tests to diagnose such sub-types. We also expect to incur increased expenses to support companion diagnostic business development activities with pharmaceutical companies as we develop additional CELsignia tests.
General and Administrative
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our total general and administrative expenses increased approximately $0.34 million, or 22%, to approximately $1.87 million from $1.53 million for the prior year. The increase primarily resulted from a $0.28 million increase in compensation related expenses, including approximately $0.24 million of non-cash stock-based compensation. In addition, other general and administrative expenses increased $0.06 million primarily due to professional fees associated with being a public company.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in future periods, reflecting both increased costs in connection with the potential future commercialization of CELsignia tests, an expanding infrastructure, and increased professional fees associated with being a public company.
Interest Expense
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, interest expense is related to finance lease liabilities.
Interest Income
For the year ended December 31, 2020, interest income decreased approximately $0.36 million, or 82%, to $0.08 million from $0.44 million for the prior year. The decrease was primarily the result of lower market interest rates.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Since our inception, we have incurred losses and cumulative negative cash flows from operations. Through December 31, 2020, we raised capital of approximately $13.7 million and $7.5 million through private placements of common equity and unsecured convertible notes, respectively. On September 22, 2017, we closed on the IPO of our common stock, which generated approximately $23.3 million of additional cash after taking into account underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. On June 5, 2020, we entered into an At Market Issuance Sales Agreement with B. Riley, FBR, Inc (the “ATM Agreement”). The ATM Agreement allows us to sell shares of common stock up to an aggregate offering price of $10.0 million. Through December 31, 2020, we generated approximately $0.08 million of additional cash through sales pursuant to the ATM Agreement, after taking into account commissions and offering expenses. Cash from these capital raising activities has been our primary source of funds for our operations since inception. As of December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents were approximately $11.6 million, and we had a combined accumulated deficit of approximately $12.6 million under Celcuity LLC and $26.3 million under Celcuity Inc.
We expect that our research and development and general and administrative expenses will increase as we continue to develop our CELsignia platform and additional CELsignia tests, conduct research related to the discovery of new cancer sub-types, conduct clinical trials, and pursue other business development activities. We will also start to incur sales and marketing expenses as we commercialize our CELsignia tests. We expect to use cash on hand to fund our research and development expenses, capital expenditures, working capital, sales and marketing expenses, and general corporate expenses, as well as for the increased costs associated with being a public company.
Based on our current business plan, we believe that our current cash on hand will provide sufficient cash to finance operations and pay obligations when due for at least the next twelve months.
We may seek to raise additional capital to expand our business, pursue strategic investments, and take advantage of financing or other opportunities that we believe to be in the best interests of the Company and our stockholders. Additional capital may be raised through the sale of common or preferred equity or convertible debt securities, entry into debt facilities or other third-party funding arrangements. The sale of equity and convertible debt securities may result in dilution to our stockholders and those securities may have rights senior to those of our common shares. Agreements entered into in connection with such capital raising activities could contain covenants that would restrict our operations or require us to relinquish certain rights. Additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, or at all.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $7.14 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of a net loss of approximately $9.47 million, adjusted for working capital changes of approximately $0.18 million and non-cash items of approximately $2.15 million. The working capital change was primarily due to approximately $0.19 million increase in accrued expenses. Non-cash expense items of approximately $2.15 million consisted of depreciation of approximately $0.39 million and stock-based compensation expense of approximately $1.76 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $6.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and consisted primarily of a net loss of approximately $7.36 million and working capital changes of approximately $0.06 million, adjusted for non-cash items of approximately $1.42 million. The working capital change was primarily due to approximately $0.19 million increase in payroll tax receivable, offset by a $0.11 million increase in accrued expenses. Non-cash expense items of approximately $1.42 million consisted of depreciation of approximately $0.34 million, stock-based compensation expense of approximately $1.04 million and interest income of approximately $0.04 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $0.09 million and consisted of purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was approximately $8.53 million and consisted of approximately $8.91 million of net proceeds from investments in certificates of deposit and government securities (U.S. Treasury Notes and U.S. government agency securities), adjusted by approximately $0.38 million in purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $0.14 million and primarily reflects net proceeds from the sale of shares of our common stock through the ATM Agreement and employee stock purchases.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was approximately $0.26 million and consisted of proceeds from the exercise of common stock warrants and stock options, and employee stock purchases.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We do not currently have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
From time to time new accounting pronouncements are issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, or other standard setting bodies and adopted by us as of the specified effective date. Unless otherwise discussed in Note 2 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the impact of recently issued standards that are not yet effective will not have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations upon adoption.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND USE OF ESTIMATES
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or Generally Accepted Accounted Principles (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses during the reporting periods. These items are monitored and analyzed by us for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances; the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results for the period in which they become known. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates.
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Of our significant accounting policies, we believe that the following is the most critical:
Stock-Based Compensation
Our stock-based compensation consists of common stock options and restricted stock issued to certain employees and nonemployees and our Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”). We recognize compensation expense based on an estimated grant date fair value using the Black-Scholes option-pricing method. We have elected to account for forfeitures as they occur.
The inputs for the Black-Scholes valuation model require management’s significant assumptions. Prior to our IPO, the price per share of common stock was determined by our board based on recent prices of common stock sold in private offerings. Subsequent to the IPO, the price per share of common stock is determined by using the closing market price on the Nasdaq Capital Market on the grant date. The risk-free interest rates are based on the rate for U.S. Treasury securities at the date of grant with maturity dates approximately equal to the expected life at the grant date. The expected life was based on the simplified method in accordance with SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Nos. 107 and 110. The expected volatility was estimated based on historical volatility information of peer companies that are publicly available in combination with our calculated volatility since being publicly traded.
All assumptions used to calculate the grant date fair value of nonemployee options are generally consistent with the assumptions used for options granted to employees. In the event we terminate any of our consulting agreements, the unvested options issued in connection with such agreements would also be cancelled.
For grants of restricted stock, we record compensation expense based on the quoted fair value of the shares on the grant date over the requisite service period. Compensation expense for ESPP rights is recorded in line with each respective offering period.