Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is provided as a supplement to and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this 2020 Form 10-K to enhance the understanding of our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
The comparison of 2019 to 2018 results has been omitted from this Form 10-K, but can be referenced in our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019-“Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” filed on February 24, 2020.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Bristol-Myers Squibb Company is a global biopharmaceutical company whose mission is to discover, develop and deliver innovative medicines that help patients prevail over serious diseases. Refer to the Summary of Abbreviated Terms at the end of this 2020 Form 10-K for terms used throughout the document.
We completed the Celgene transaction on November 20, 2019. Our consolidated financial statements for 2020 include a full year of Celgene operations. On November 17, 2020, we completed our acquisition of MyoKardia for approximately $13.1 billion in cash. We expect that our acquisitions of Celgene and MyoKardia will further position us as a leading biopharmaceutical company, expanding our oncology, hematology, immunology and cardiovascular portfolios with several near-term assets and additional external partnerships. Refer to “-Acquisitions, Divestitures, Licensing and Other Arrangements” for further information.
The COVID-19 pandemic is resulting in significant risks and disruptions to the health and welfare of the global population and economy. Although the pandemic has not had a significant impact on our results of operations, it remains difficult to reasonably assess or predict the full extent of the negative impact that the COVID-19 pandemic may have on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. The impact will depend on future developments such as the ultimate duration and recovery from the pandemic, government actions, impact on the U.S. and global economies, customer behavior changes and timing for resumption to our normal operations, among others. Refer to “-Economic and Market Factors” for further information.
In 2020, we received 13 approvals for new medicines and additional indications and formulations of currently marketed medicines in major markets (the U.S., EU and Japan), including multiple regulatory milestone achievements for Opdivo and Opdivo+Yervoy combinations and have over 50 unique compounds in clinical development. We are investigating Opdivo alone and in combination with Yervoy and other anti-cancer agents for a wide array of tumor types. We continue to expand in the field of hematology, where we have the leading presence, through in-line assets Revlimid and Pomalyst. In 2020, we received regulatory approvals for Zeposia and Onureg and received EMA validation for liso-cel for the treatment of large B-cell lymphoma. Additionally, our pipeline shows significant added promise in hematology malignancies through our CELMoD agents (iberdomide and CC-92480), multiple modalities targeting B-Cell Maturation Antigen (“BCMA”) and the next generation of cell therapy agents. We are expanding our portfolio in immunology with a near term launch opportunity for deucravacitinib, our TYK2 inhibitor. Additionally in the cardiovascular space, Eliquis is a leading oral anti-coagulant drug, and we continue to experience growth in both the Eliquis brand and market while also advancing our Factor XIa inhibitor program. With the acquisition of MyoKardia, we bolstered our leading cardiovascular franchise and added exceptional scientific capabilities, mavacamten a potentially transformative new medicine with significant commercial potential and a promising pipeline of candidates.
In 2020, our revenues increased 63% as a result of the Celgene acquisition, which contributed $15.7 billion of revenues or 60% of the growth, and higher demand for Eliquis. The GAAP loss per share of $3.99 in 2020 as compared to the GAAP EPS of $2.01 in 2019 was primarily due to the IPRD charge resulting from the MyoKardia asset acquisition and charges relating to the Celgene acquisition including (i) amortization of acquired intangible assets, (ii) the unwinding of inventory fair value adjustments and (iii) tax charges resulting from an internal transfer of certain intangible assets and the Otezla* divestiture, partially offset by higher revenues and fair value adjustments to contingent value rights and equity investments. After adjusting for specified items, non-GAAP EPS increased $1.75 as result of the Celgene acquisition.
Highlights
The following table summarizes our financial information:
Our non-GAAP financial measures, including non-GAAP earnings and related EPS information, are adjusted to exclude specified items that represent certain costs, expenses, gains and losses and other items impacting the comparability of financial results. For a detailed listing of all specified items and further information and reconciliations of non-GAAP financial measures refer to “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
Economic and Market Factors
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to affect global healthcare systems as well as major economic and financial markets. Virtually all industries are facing challenges associated with the economic conditions resulting from efforts to address this pandemic. For example, many entities in certain industries have seen sharp declines in revenues due to regulatory and organizational mandates (e.g., “shelter in place” mandates, non-essential business and school closures) and voluntary changes in consumer behavior (e.g., “physical distancing”). Many entities continue to experience conditions often associated with a sudden and severe economic downturn. Such conditions may include financial market volatility, erosion of market value, deteriorating credit, liquidity concerns, further increases in government intervention, increasing unemployment, broad declines in consumer discretionary spending, increasing inventory levels, reductions in production because of decreased demand and supply constraints, layoffs and furloughs and other restructuring activities.
We continue to monitor the impact on our business resulting from wider restrictions in select states and non-U.S. countries. This is a dynamically changing environment and we continue to react to outbreaks throughout the world by re-enforcing our directives to keep our workforce safe in order to provide our patients with life-sustaining medicines. Continued escalating infection rates could negatively affect our planned recovery, pressuring demand from less patient visits and channel mix if unemployment data trends remain unfavorable.
We have not incurred and do not anticipate disruptions to the supply of our medicines for patients due to the COVID-19 pandemic. However, we are experiencing scarcity of certain raw materials and components as a result of the influx of COVID-19 vaccine orders receiving priority treatment from vendors. All of our internal manufacturing facilities and key contract manufacturers are operating with proper measures taken to help ensure employee safety. We have increased the number of our lab workers where it is safe to do so. We have implemented a number of measures to protect the health and safety of our workforce, including, where needed, a mandatory work-from-home policy for our global workforce who can perform their jobs from home as well as restrictions on business travel, and workplace and in-person meetings. Depending on local conditions, field-based personnel began in-person customer interactions in healthcare settings where it is safe to do so and approved by the government. The remote engagement model has continued to support healthcare professionals, patient care and access to our medicines. Although certain field-based sales teams have begun in person engagement in selected states and non-U.S. regions, the majority of interactions remain remote.
The situation remains dynamic and challenging to assess the potential impact on our operations such as the ability and willingness of patients to access treatment centers or obtain a prescription and changes in prescribing patterns that may potentially affect our operations in the long-term. Certain changes in buying patterns have occurred, including payers implementing policies to encourage larger prescription sizes and earlier refills to help patients avoid trips to the pharmacy. However, fewer patient office visits are resulting in lower than previously expected new patient starts. Although it is difficult to estimate the impact of these factors, we do not believe that they had a significant impact on our revenues during 2020.
The timing of specific product launches depends on the relevant facts and circumstances for each situation. For example, we delayed the commercialization of Zeposia in the U.S. based on the best health interest of our patients, customers and workforce. In contrast, Reblozyl was available for MDS patients following its approval for this additional indication in April 2020 and Onureg was available for patients with AML in September 2020. Our expanded U.S. patient assistance programs provided certain covered BMS medicines free to eligible patients that lost employment and health insurance due to COVID-19. It is uncertain what the aggregate impact of the above factors and potential changes in channel mix will have on our revenues and expenses during 2021.
We restarted clinical development activities after pausing the opening of additional sites during the first months of the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, we experienced a slight slowdown of our clinical studies again in the fourth quarter. In addition, certain delays have occurred due to slower enrollment. Patient enrollment for certain new clinical studies and ongoing studies at new sites are carefully being started when the safety of study participants, our employees and staff at clinical trial sites, regulatory compliance and scientific integrity of trial data can be assured. We expect many new studies to start through the first quarter of 2021 following the completion of feasibility assessments, rigorous planning and selected protocol simplifications. Previously suspended research and early development activities performed in laboratories recommenced in all major sites in the U.S. although close monitoring of the situation continues.
The COVID-19 pandemic has increased the volatility of the financial markets, foreign currency exchanges and interest rates. Although we incurred downward adjustments to our equity investment fair values in the first quarter of 2020, the fair values have subsequently recovered. Lower interest rates and changes of the U.S. Dollar relative to foreign currencies have not had a material impact to our operations. The carrying value of our intangible assets was approximately $53 billion at December 31, 2020. Significant charges might occur in future periods due to a decline in previously expected cash flows as a direct or indirect result of the pandemic. This may occur due to delays in the enrollment or timely completion of clinical programs, FDA site inspections and other interactions with regulatory bodies in general, regulatory approvals, launches of newly approved products or lower demand in general. See risk factor on the Company’s risk factors resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic included under “Part I-Item 1A. Risk Factors-The COVID-19 pandemic is affecting our business and could have a material adverse effect on us.”
Governmental Actions
Additional regulations in the U.S. may occur in the future, including healthcare reform initiatives, further changes to tax laws and pricing laws and potential importation restrictions, that may reduce our results of operations, operating cash flow, liquidity and financial flexibility. For example, in November 2020 the U.S. federal government issued regulations regarding U.S. drug prices and payment for pharmaceutical products, including regulations that: (1) would reduce physician reimbursement for certain Medicare Part B drugs administered in doctors’ offices or hospitals to a “most favored nation price” drawn from the lowest price paid by certain countries in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, which would apply to many cancer medications; (2) would authorize states and private parties to develop and implement programs to import certain prescription drugs from Canada and sell them in the U.S.; and (3) would reform the use of rebates in Medicare Part D. The outcome of these regulations remains uncertain as a result of ongoing litigation and other factors. See risk factor on the Company’s risk factors on the executive orders included under “Part I-Item 1A. Risk Factors-Increased pricing pressure and other restrictions in the U.S. and abroad continue to negatively affect our revenues and profit margins.”
We continue to monitor the potential impact of the economic conditions in certain European and other countries and the related impact on prescription trends, pricing discounts and creditworthiness of our customers. We believe these economic conditions will not have a material impact on our liquidity, cash flow or financial flexibility.
The UK departed from the EU on January 31, 2020. The departure began a transition period that ended on December 31, 2020 with a signature of a Trade and Cooperation Agreement between the UK and the EU. Similar to other companies in our industry, certain regulatory, trade, labor and other aspects of our business have been affected during the transition period and will over time. These matters and other related financial effects did not have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or liquidity. Our sales in the UK represent less than 3% of our total revenues. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors-Adverse changes in U.S. and global economic and political conditions could adversely affect our profitability” for more information on the impact on the Company of the exit of the UK from the EU.
Significant Product and Pipeline Approvals
The following is a summary of the significant approvals received in 2020:
Product Date Approval
Opdivo November 2020 EC approval of Opdivo for the treatment of adults with unresectable advanced, recurrent or metastatic ESCC after prior fluoropyrimidine- and platinum-based combination chemotherapy.
Opdivo+Yervoy November 2020 EC approval of Opdivo plus Yervoy with two cycles of platinum-based chemotherapy for the first-line treatment of adult patients with metastatic NSCLC whose tumors have no sensitizing epidermal growth factor receptor mutation or anaplastic lymphoma kinase translocation.
Opdivo+Yervoy October 2020 FDA approval of Opdivo+Yervoy for the first-line treatment of adult patients with unresectable MPM.
Onureg September 2020 FDA approval of Onureg (azacitidine) for the continued treatment of adult patients with AML who achieved first complete remission or complete remission with incomplete blood count recovery following intensive induction chemotherapy and who are not able to complete intensive curative therapy.
Reblozyl June 2020 EC approval of Reblozyl for the treatment of adult patients with transfusion-dependent anemia due to very low-, low- and intermediate-risk MDS with ring sideroblasts, who had an unsatisfactory response or are ineligible for erythropoietin-based therapy, or beta thalassemia.
Opdivo June 2020 FDA approval of Opdivo for the treatment of patients with unresectable advanced, recurrent or metastic ESCC after prior fluoropyrimidine- and platinum-based chemotherapy.
Zeposia May 2020 EC approval of Zeposia for the treatment of adult patients with RRMS with active disease as defined by clinical or imaging features.
Opdivo+Yervoy May 2020 FDA approval of Opdivo+Yervoy given with two cycles of platinum-doublet chemotherapy for the first-line treatment of adult patients with metastatic or recurrent NSCLC with no EGFR or ALK genomic tumor aberrations. The therapy is approved for patients with squamous or non-squamous disease and regardless of PD-L1 expression.
Opdivo+Yervoy May 2020 FDA approval of Opdivo+Yervoy for the first-line treatment of adult patients with metastatic NSCLC whose tumors express PD-L1 (≥1%) with no EGFR or ALK genomic tumor aberrations.
Pomalyst May 2020 FDA approval of Pomalyst for patients with AIDS-related Kaposi sarcoma whose disease has become resistant to highly active antiretroviral therapy, or in patients with Kaposi sarcoma who are HIV-negative.
Reblozyl April 2020 FDA approval of Reblozyl for the treatment of anemia failing an erythropoiesis stimulating agent in adult patients with very low- to intermediate-risk MDS who have ring sideroblasts and require RBC transfusions.
Zeposia March 2020 FDA approval of Zeposia (ozanimod) for the treatment of adults with RMS, including clinically isolated syndrome, relapsing-remitting disease, and active secondary progressive disease.
Opdivo+Yervoy March 2020 FDA approval of Opdivo+Yervoy combination for the treatment of HCC in patients who have been previously treated with sorafenib.
The FDA has indicated it is undertaking an industry-wide review of indications that received accelerated approval and for which the confirmatory studies did not meet their primary endpoints. This is not specific to BMS, but we have two Opdivo indications that are subject to this review by the FDA in the third-line treatment of SCLC and second-line treatment of HCC. On December 29, 2020, in consultation with the FDA, we made the decision to withdraw the Opdivo indication in the third-line treatment of SCLC from the U.S. market. The second-line treatment of HCC is being reviewed by the FDA.
The following is a summary of the significant approvals received in 2021:
•In January 2021, the FDA approved the use of Opdivo in combination with Cabometyx* for the first-line treatment of patients with advanced RCC.
•In February 2021, the FDA approved Breyanzi (lisocabtagene maraleucel; liso-cel) for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory large B-cell lymphoma after two or more lines of systemic therapy.
•In February 2021, the EC approved Inrebic for the treatment of disease-related splenomegaly or symptoms in adult patients with primary myelofibrosis, post-polycythaemia vera myelofibrosis or post-essential thrombocythaemia myelofibrosis, who are Janus Associated Kinase inhibitor naïve or have been treated with ruxolitinib.
Refer to “-Product and Pipeline Developments” for all of the developments in our marketed products and late-stage pipeline in 2020 and in early 2021.
Strategy
Our principal strategy is to combine the resources, scale and capability of a pharmaceutical company with the speed and focus on innovation of the biotech industry. Our focus as a biopharmaceutical company is on discovering, developing and delivering transformational medicines for patients facing serious diseases in areas where we believe that we have an opportunity to make a meaningful difference: oncology (both solid tumors and hematology), immunology, cardiovascular and fibrosis. Our four strategic priorities are to drive enterprise performance, maximize the value of our commercial portfolio, ensure the long-term sustainability of our pipeline through combined internal and external innovation and establish our new culture and embed our people strategy.
We are developing new medicines in the following core therapeutic areas: (i) oncology with a priority in certain tumor types; (ii) hematology with opportunities to broaden our franchise and potentially sustain a leadership position in multiple myeloma; (iii) immunology with priorities in relapsing multiple sclerosis, psoriasis, lupus, RA and inflammatory bowel disease; (iv) cardiovascular disease and; (v) fibrotic disease with priorities in lung and liver. We continue to advance the next wave of innovative medicines by investing significantly in our pipeline both internally and through business development activities. We have expanded our oncology, hematology and immunology portfolios with several near-term assets and additional external partnerships. We have invested in our oncology portfolio by pursuing both monotherapy and combination approaches and advancing our next wave of early assets and to explore new collaboration opportunities across our therapeutic areas of focus. We remain focused and well-resourced in our cancer development programs and seek to broaden the use of Opdivo in earlier lines of therapy, expand into new tumors, accelerate next wave oncology mechanisms and develop treatment options for refractory oncology patients. For hematology, we have opportunities to launch several new medicines in the near-term with additional pipeline opportunities in the longer term. There is a broad effort to continue to address the unmet medical need in multiple myeloma and we are working across multiple modalities and mechanisms of action such as cereblon modulator (“CELMoD”), T-cell Engager and CAR T-cell therapy. Beyond cancer, we continue to advance our early stage portfolio in immunology, cardiovascular and fibrotic diseases and strengthen our partnerships with a diverse group of companies and academic institutions in new and expanded research activities. We believe our differentiated internal and external focus contributes to the advancing of our pipeline of potentially transformational medicines.
Our commercial model has been successful with revenues from our prioritized brands continuing to grow, which demonstrates strong execution of our strategy. We continue to drive adoption of Opdivo by expanding into additional indications and tumor types both as a monotherapy and in combination with Yervoy and other anti-cancer agents. Eliquis continues to grow, leveraging its best in class clinical profile and extensive real world data and is now the number one novel oral anticoagulant in total prescriptions globally. Revlimid and Pomalyst have transformed the treatment of multiple myeloma, where we have a leading presence, and we continue to seek opportunities to leverage the significant medical and commercial expertise to address areas of high unmet medical need. We are building on the continued success of our other prioritized brands and remain strongly committed to Orencia and Sprycel. We are also optimistic on the future growth and near-term opportunities of Reblozyl, a first-in-class medicine, Inrebic, Zeposia and Onureg. Through our operating model transformation, our commercial infrastructure is leveraged for potential growth.
Our operating model continues to evolve and we have been successful in focusing commercial, R&D and manufacturing resources on prioritized brands and markets, strengthening our R&D capabilities in tumor biology, patient selection and new biomarkers, delivering leaner administrative functions and streamlining our manufacturing network to reflect the importance of biologics in our current and future portfolio. The evolution in our operating model, which focuses on maintaining a disciplined approach in marketing, selling and administrative expenses, will enable us to deliver the necessary strategic, financial and operational flexibility to invest in the highest priority opportunities within our portfolio. We will continue to make progress towards integrating the companies on the commercial and research and development area. Through our Celgene acquisition restructuring activities, we expect to realize $3.0 billion of synergies resulting from cost savings and avoidance through 2022 and our integration efforts across general and administrative, manufacturing, R&D, procurement and streamlining the Company's pricing and information technology infrastructure.
Looking ahead, we will continue to implement our biopharma strategy by driving the growth of prioritized brands, executing product launches, investing in our diverse and innovative pipeline, aided by strategic business development, focusing on prioritized markets, increasing investments in our biologics manufacturing capabilities and maintaining a culture of continuous improvement.
Acquisitions, Divestitures, Licensing and Other Arrangements
Significant acquisitions, divestitures, licensing and other arrangements during 2020 are summarized below. Refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data -Note 3. Alliances” and “-Note 4. Acquisitions, Divestitures, Licensing and Other Arrangements” for further information.
MyoKardia - We acquired MyoKardia, a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company pioneering a precision medicine approach to discover, develop and commercialize targeted therapies for the treatment of serious cardiovascular diseases. The acquisition provides us with rights to MyoKardia’s lead asset, mavacamten, a potential first-in-class cardiovascular medicine for the treatment of obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy that has completed Phase III development with an anticipated NDA submission in the first quarter of 2021.
Dragonfly - We obtained a global exclusive license to Dragonfly’s interleukin-12 (IL-12) investigational immunotherapy program, including its extended half-life cytokine DF6002.
Forbius - We acquired Forbius, a privately held, clinical-stage protein engineering company that designs and develops biotherapeutics for the treatment of cancer and fibrotic diseases. The acquisition provides us with full rights to Forbius’s TGF-beta program, including the program’s lead investigational asset, AVID200, which is in Phase I development.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Regional Revenues
The composition of the changes in revenues was as follows:
(a) Other revenues include royalties and alliance-related revenues for products not sold by our regional commercial organizations.
(b) Foreign exchange impacts were derived by applying the prior period average currency rates to the current period revenues.
United States
•U.S. revenues in 2020 were impacted by an increase from Revlimid, Pomalyst/Imnovid and other Celgene products of $10.7 billion, which contributed 69% of the growth, and higher demand for Eliquis, partially offset by lower demand for Opdivo. Average net selling prices increased by 1% in 2020.
Europe
•Europe revenues in 2020 were impacted by an increase in Celgene products of $3.3 billion, which contributed 52% of the growth and higher demand for Eliquis and Opdivo, partially offset by lower demand for established brands. Average net selling prices were lower in 2020.
Rest of the World
•Rest of the World revenues in 2020 were impacted by an increase in Celgene products of $1.7 billion, which contributed approximately 43% of the growth, and higher demand for Eliquis, partially offset by lower demand for established brands. Average net selling prices were lower in 2020.
No single country outside the U.S. contributed more than 10% of total revenues in 2020 and 2019. Our business is typically not seasonal.
GTN Adjustments
We recognize revenue net of GTN adjustments that are further described in “-Critical Accounting Policies.”
The activities and ending reserve balances for each significant category of GTN adjustments were as follows:
The reconciliation of gross product sales to net product sales by each significant category of GTN adjustments was as follows:
Reductions to provisions for product sales made in prior periods resulting from changes in estimates were $106 million and $132 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. GTN adjustments are primarily a function of product sales volume, regional and payer channel mix, contractual or legislative discounts and rebates. U.S. GTN adjustments percentage decreased primarily due to the addition of Celgene hematology brands, which have lower GTN adjustment percentages, partially offset by higher U.S. Eliquis gross product sales, which have higher U.S. GTN adjustment percentages.
Product Revenues
** Change in excess of 100%.
(a) Includes BMS and Celgene products in 2019.
Revlimid (lenalidomide) - an oral immunomodulatory drug that in combination with dexamethasone is indicated for the treatment of patients with multiple myeloma. Revlimid as a single agent is also indicated as a maintenance therapy in patients with multiple myeloma following autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplant.
•U.S. and International revenues increased due to the inclusion of a full year of Celgene product revenues in 2020.
Eliquis (apixaban) - an oral Factor Xa inhibitor, indicated for the reduction in risk of stroke/systemic embolism in NVAF and for the treatment of DVT/PE and reduction in risk of recurrence following initial therapy.
•U.S. revenues increased 15% in 2020 due to higher demand, partially offset by lower average net selling prices of approximately 10%. The lower average net selling price is primarily due to unfavorable channel mix, increase in the Medicare Part D coverage gap per patient in 2020, and to a lesser extent, higher contractual rebates.
•International revenues increased 16% in 2020 due to higher demand, partially offset by lower average net selling prices.
Opdivo (nivolumab) - a fully human monoclonal antibody that binds to the PD-1 on T and NKT cells that has been approved for several anti-cancer indications including bladder, blood, colon, head and neck, kidney, liver, lung, melanoma and stomach. The Opdivo+Yervoy regimen also is approved in multiple markets for the treatment of NSCLC, melanoma, RCC, and CRC. There are several ongoing potentially registrational studies for Opdivo across other tumor types and disease areas, in monotherapy and in combination with Yervoy and various anti-cancer agents.
•U.S. revenues decreased 9% in 2020 due to lower demand caused by declining second-line eligibility across tumor indications, increased competition for adjuvant melanoma and lower demand from COVID-19 (primarily lower new patient starts and patient visits), partially offset by higher demand due to the launch of the Opdivo+Yervoy combination for NSCLC and continued growth from RCC indication.
•International revenues increased 7% in 2020 due to higher demand as a result of additional indication launches in new countries.
Orencia (abatacept) - a fusion protein indicated for adult patients with moderately to severely active RA and PsA and is also indicated for reducing signs and symptoms in certain pediatric patients with moderately to severely active polyarticular JIA.
•U.S. revenues increased 6% in 2020 due to higher demand.
•International revenues increased 7% in 2020 due to higher demand.
Pomalyst/Imnovid (pomalidomide) - a proprietary, distinct, small molecule that is administered orally and modulates the immune system and other biologically important targets. Pomalyst/Imnovid is indicated for patients with multiple myeloma who have received at least two prior therapies including lenalidomide and a proteasome inhibitor and have demonstrated disease progression on or within 60 days of completion of the last therapy.
•U.S. and International revenues increased due to the inclusion of a full year of Celgene product revenues in 2020.
Sprycel (dasatinib) - an oral inhibitor of multiple tyrosine kinase indicated for the first-line treatment of patients with Philadelphia chromosome-positive CML in chronic phase and the treatment of adults with chronic, accelerated, or myeloid or lymphoid blast phase CML with resistance or intolerance to prior therapy, including Gleevec* (imatinib mesylate) and the treatment of children and adolescents aged 1 year to 18 years with chronic phase Philadelphia chromosome-positive CML.
•U.S. revenues increased 9% in 2020 due to higher demand and higher average net selling prices.
•International revenues decreased 8% in 2020 due to lower demand as a result of increased generic competition.
Yervoy (ipilimumab) - a monoclonal antibody for the treatment of patients with unresectable or metastatic melanoma.
•U.S. revenues increased 12% in 2020 due to the launch of the Opdivo+Yervoy combination for NSCLC.
•International revenues increased 15% in 2020 due to higher demand as a result of approvals for additional indications and launches primarily in Europe, partially offset by lower average net selling prices.
Abraxane (paclitaxel albumin-bound particles for injectable suspension) - a solvent-free protein-bound chemotherapy product that combines paclitaxel with albumin using our proprietary Nab® technology platform, and is used to treat breast cancer, NSCLC and pancreatic cancer, among others.
•U.S. and International revenues increased due to the inclusion of a full year of Celgene product revenues in 2020.
Reblozyl (luspatercept-aamt) - an erythroid maturation agent indicated for the treatment of anemia in adult patients with beta thalassemia who require regular red blood cell transfusions. In November 2019, the FDA approved Reblozyl for the treatment of anemia in adult patients with beta thalassemia who require RBC transfusions and in April 2020, the FDA approved Reblozyl for the treatment of anemia failing an erythropoiesis stimulating agent in adult patients with very low- to intermediate-risk MDS who have ring sideroblasts and require RBC transfusions. Reblozyl was launched in April 2020.
Inrebic (fedratinib) - an oral kinase inhibitor indicated for the treatment of adult patients with intermediate-2 or high-risk primary or secondary (post-polycythemia vera or post-essential thrombocythemia) myelofibrosis.
Onureg (azacitidine) - is an oral hypomethylating agent that incorporates into DNA and RNA, indicated for continued treatment of adult patients with AML who achieved first complete remission or complete remission with incomplete blood count recovery following intensive induction chemotherapy and are not able to complete intensive curative therapy. Onureg was launched in September 2020.
Zeposia (ozanimod) - an oral immunomodulatory drug used to treat relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis, to include clinically isolated syndrome, relapsing-remitting disease, and active secondary progressive disease, in adults. Zeposia was launched in June 2020.
Vidaza (azacitidine for injection) - is a pyrimidine nucleoside analog that has been shown to reverse the effects of deoxyribonucleic acid hypermethylation and promote subsequent gene re-expression and is indicated for treatment of patients with the following myelodysplastic syndrome subtypes: refractory anemia or refractory anemia with ringed sideroblasts (if accompanied by neutropenia or thrombocytopenia or requiring transfusions), refractory anemia with excess blasts, refractory anemia with excess blasts in transformation, and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMMoL).
•International revenues increased due to the inclusion of a full year of Celgene product revenues in 2020.
Baraclude (entecavir) - an oral antiviral agent for the treatment of chronic hepatitis B.
•International revenues decreased 19% in 2020 due to lower demand and average net selling prices resulting from generic competition.
Other Brands - includes all other brands, including those which have lost exclusivity in major markets, OTC brands and royalty revenue.
•U.S. revenues include $295 million and $27 million from Celgene products in the 2020 and 2019, respectively.
•International revenues decreased primarily due to divestiture of the UPSA business in 2019 and certain other brands and continued generic erosion.
Estimated End-User Demand
Pursuant to the SEC Consent Order described under “-SEC Consent Order”, we monitor the level of inventory on hand in the U.S. wholesaler distribution channel and outside of the U.S. in the direct customer distribution channel. We are obligated to disclose products with levels of inventory in excess of one month on hand or expected demand, subject to a de minimis exception. Estimated levels of inventory in the distribution channel in excess of one month on hand for the following products were not material to our results of operations as of the dates indicated.
Onureg had 1.5 months of inventory on hand at December 31, 2020 in the U.S. to support the product launch. The inventory is expected to be worked down as demand increases post launch.
Zeposia had 2.2 months of inventory on hand internationally in the distribution channel at September 30, 2020 to support the product launch in Germany. The inventory is expected to be worked down as demand increases post launch.
In the U.S., we generally determine our months on hand estimates using inventory levels of product on hand and the amount of out-movement provided by our three largest wholesalers, which account for approximately 75% of total gross sales of U.S. products for the year ended December 31, 2020. Factors that may influence our estimates include generic competition, seasonality of products, wholesaler purchases in light of increases in wholesaler list prices, new product launches, new warehouse openings by wholesalers and new customer stockings by wholesalers. In addition, these estimates are calculated using third-party data, which may be impacted by their recordkeeping processes.
Revlimid and Pomalyst are distributed in the U.S. primarily through contracted pharmacies under the Revlimid REMS and Pomalyst REMS programs, respectively. These are proprietary risk-management distribution programs tailored specifically to provide for the safe and appropriate distribution and use of Revlimid and Pomalyst. Internationally, Revlimid and Imnovid are distributed under mandatory risk-management distribution programs tailored to meet local authorities’ specifications to provide for the products’ safe and appropriate distribution and use. These programs may vary by country and, depending upon the country and the design of the risk-management program, the product may be sold through hospitals or retail pharmacies.
Our non-U.S. businesses have significantly more direct customers. Information on available direct customer product level inventory and corresponding out-movement information and the reliability of third-party demand information varies widely. We limit our direct customer sales channel inventory reporting to where we can influence demand. When this information does not exist or is otherwise not available, we have developed a variety of methodologies to estimate such data, including using historical sales made to direct customers and third-party market research data related to prescription trends and end-user demand. Given the difficulties inherent in estimating third-party demand information, we evaluate our methodologies to estimate direct customer product level inventory and to calculate months on hand on an ongoing basis and make changes as necessary. Factors that may affect our estimates include generic competition, seasonality of products, price increases, new product launches, new warehouse openings by direct customers, new customer stockings by direct customers and expected direct customer purchases for governmental bidding situations. As such, all of the information required to estimate months on hand in the direct customer distribution channel for non-U.S. business for the year ended December 31, 2020 is not available prior to the filing of this 2020 Form 10-K. We will disclose any product with levels of inventory in excess of one month on hand or expected demand, subject to a de minimis exception, in the next quarterly report on Form 10-Q.
Expenses
** In excess of +/- 100%.
(a) Excludes amortization of acquired intangible assets.
Cost of products sold
Cost of products sold include material, internal labor and overhead costs from our owned manufacturing sites, third-party product supply costs and other supply chain costs managed by our global manufacturing and supply organization. Cost of products sold also includes royalties and profit sharing, certain excise taxes, foreign currency hedge settlement gains and losses and impairment charges. Cost of products sold typically vary between periods as a result of product mix and volume (particularly royalties and profit sharing), and to a lesser extent changes in foreign currency, price, inflation, costs attributed to manufacturing site exits and impairment charges. Cost of products sold excludes amortization from acquired intangible assets.
•Cost of products sold increased by $3.7 billion in 2020, primarily due to unwinding of inventory fair value adjustments ($2.0 billion), higher royalties and Eliquis profit sharing ($650 million), higher Celgene product costs (approximately $600 million) and an impairment charge related to Inrebic marketed product rights ($575 million).
Marketing, selling and administrative
Marketing, selling and administrative expenses primarily include salary and benefit costs, third-party professional and marketing fees, outsourcing fees, shipping and handling costs, advertising and product promotion costs. Expenses are managed through regional commercialization organizations or global enabling functions such as finance, legal, information technology and human resources. Certain expenses are shared with alliance partners based upon contractual agreements.
•Marketing, selling and administrative expenses increased by $2.8 billion in 2020, primarily due to costs associated with the broader portfolio resulting from the Celgene acquisition (approximately $2.0 billion), higher advertising and promotion expenses and a cash settlement of MyoKardia unvested stock awards ($241 million).
Research and development
Research and development activities include discovery research, preclinical and clinical development, drug formulation and medical support of marketed products. Expenses include salary and benefit costs, third-party grants and fees paid to clinical research organizations, supplies, upfront and contingent milestone payments for licensing and asset acquisitions of investigational compounds, IPRD impairment charges and proportionate allocations of enterprise-wide costs. The allocations include facilities, information technology, employee stock compensation costs and other appropriate costs. Certain expenses are shared with alliance partners based upon contractual agreements. Expenses typically vary between periods for a number of reasons, including the timing of license and asset acquisition charges and IPRD impairment charges.
•Research and development expense increased by $5.0 billion in 2020, primarily due to costs associated with the broader portfolio resulting from the Celgene acquisition (approximately $3.3 billion, excluding bluebird and Dragonfly charges), license and asset acquisition charges of $1.0 billion relating to Dragonfly, bluebird, Forbius, Cormorant and Nektar, an IPRD impairment charge resulting from the decision to discontinue further development of the orva-cel program ($470 million) and a cash settlement of MyoKardia unvested stock awards ($241 million).
IPRD charge - MyoKardia acquisition
IPRD charges represents the costs of IPRD assets acquired in a transaction other than a business combination.
•The MyoKardia acquisition was accounted for as an asset acquisition because substantially all of the fair value of the gross assets acquired (excluding cash and deferred taxes) was allocated to a single asset, mavacamten. The IPRD charge related to the MyoKardia transaction is presented separately due to the significance of the charge.
Amortization of Acquired Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets acquired as a result of business combinations.
•Amortization of acquired intangible assets increased by $8.6 billion in 2020 due to a full year amortization of Revlimid, Pomalyst/Imnovid and other marketed product rights obtained in the Celgene acquisition.
Other (income)/expense, net
•Other (income)/expense, net changed by $3.3 billion in 2020, primarily due to fair value adjustments to contingent value rights and equity investments in 2020 and other items discussed below.
Components of Other (income)/expense, net were as follows:
•Interest expense increased due to $19.0 billion of notes issued in May 2019 and $19.9 billion of Celgene debt assumed in the acquisition.
•Contingent consideration primarily includes fair value adjustments resulting from the change in the traded price of contingent value rights issued with the Celgene acquisition. The contractual obligation to pay the contingent value rights terminated in January 2021 because the FDA did not approve liso-cel (JCAR017) by December 31, 2020.
•Royalties and licensing income includes diabetes business royalties, Keytruda* and Tecentriq* royalties, and up-front and milestone licensing fees for products that have not obtained commercial approval. Refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 4. Acquisitions, Divestitures, Licensing and Other Arrangements” for further information.
•Equity investment gains includes fair value adjustments on equity investments that have readily determinable fair value and other observable price changes on equity investments without readily determinable fair values. Refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 9. Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measurements” for more information. Our share of income from equity method investments was $72 million in 2020. A termination fee related to our Europe and Asia partnership with Sanofi of $80 million was included in 2019.
•Integration expenses include consulting fees incurred primarily in connection with Celgene integration activities.
•Provision for restructuring includes exit and other costs primarily related to the Celgene acquisition plans. We have achieved approximately $1.4 billion of annualized pre-tax cost savings in 2020 related to the Celgene Acquisition Plan and are on track to achieve the annualized pre-tax cost savings of approximately $3.0 billion through 2022 as detailed in the restructuring activities. Refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 6. Restructuring” for further information.
•Transition and other service fees primarily includes Otezla* divestiture related fees in 2020.
•Investment income includes $197 million of interest income earned on the net proceeds of the notes issued in May 2019 to fund a portion of the Celgene acquisition in 2019.
•Reversion excise tax resulted from the transfer of the retiree medical plan assets back to the Company. Refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 17. Retirement Benefits” for further information.
•Divestiture gains includes a $1.2 billion gain on sale of the UPSA business in 2019.
•Pension and postretirement includes a special termination benefits charge of $1.5 billion in 2019 relating to the termination of the Bristol-Myers Squibb Retirement Income Plan.
•Acquisition expenses include the following items related to the Celgene transaction in 2019: (1) upfront bridge facility commitment fee, (2) acquisition financing hedge losses and (3) financial advisory, legal, proxy filing and other regulatory fees.
Income Taxes
The tax impact attributed to specified items was primarily due to the unwinding of inventory fair value adjustments and intangible asset amortization resulting from the Celgene acquisition, a non-deductible MyoKardia IPRD charge and non-taxable fair value adjustments to contingent value rights in the current year. In addition, a $853 million deferred tax charge resulting from an internal transfer of certain intangible assets and an additional $266 million GILTI tax charge upon finalization of the Otezla* divestiture tax consequences with tax authorities were included in 2020. The tax impact attributed to specified items including the Otezla* divestiture, pension settlement charges, gain on sale of the UPSA business divestiture and other specified items increased the effective tax rate in the prior year. The effective tax rate excluding specified items includes a tax reserve release due to lapse of statue of $81 million in 2019. Other favorable discrete tax adjustments were approximately $140 million in 2020 and $170 million in 2019 primarily resulting from finalization of prior year tax returns and the impact of the Swiss tax reform (2019 only). Refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 7. Income Taxes” for further information.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Our non-GAAP financial measures, such as non-GAAP earnings and related EPS information, are adjusted to exclude certain costs, expenses, gains and losses and other specified items that are evaluated on an individual basis. These items are adjusted after considering their quantitative and qualitative aspects and typically have one or more of the following characteristics, such as being highly variable, difficult to project, unusual in nature, significant to the results of a particular period or not indicative of future operating results. Similar charges or gains were recognized in prior periods and will likely reoccur in future periods including (i) amortization of acquired intangible assets beginning in the fourth quarter of 2019, including product rights that generate a significant portion of our ongoing revenue and will recur until the intangible assets are fully amortized, (ii) unwind of inventory fair value adjustments, (iii) acquisition and integration expenses, (iv) restructuring costs, (v) accelerated depreciation and impairment of property, plant and equipment and intangible assets, (vi) R&D charges or other income resulting from upfront or contingent milestone payments in connection with the acquisition or licensing of third-party intellectual property rights, (vii) costs of acquiring a priority review voucher, (viii) IPRD charge resulting from the MyoKardia acquisition, (ix) divestiture gains or losses, (x) stock compensation resulting from accelerated vesting of Celgene awards and certain retention-related employee compensation charges related to the Celgene transaction, (xi) pension, legal and other contractual settlement charges, (xii) interest expense on the notes issued in May 2019 incurred prior to our Celgene transaction and interest income earned on the net proceeds of those notes, (xiii) equity investment and contingent value rights fair value adjustments and (xiv) amortization of fair value adjustments of debt acquired from Celgene in our 2019 exchange offer, among other items. Deferred and current income taxes attributed to these items are also adjusted for considering their individual impact to the overall tax expense, deductibility and jurisdictional tax rates. Certain other significant tax items are also excluded such as the impact resulting from internal transfer of intangible assets and the Otezla* divestiture. We also provide international revenues for our priority products excluding the impact of foreign exchange. Reconciliations of these non-GAAP measures to the most comparable GAAP measures are included in Exhibit 99.2 to our Form 8-K filed on February 4, 2021 and are incorporated herein by reference.
Non-GAAP information is intended to portray the results of our baseline performance, supplement or enhance management, analysts and investors’ overall understanding of our underlying financial performance and facilitate comparisons among current, past and future periods. For example, non-GAAP earnings and EPS information is an indication of our baseline performance before items that are considered by us to not be reflective of our ongoing results. In addition, this information is among the primary indicators that we use as a basis for evaluating performance, allocating resources, setting incentive compensation targets and planning and forecasting for future periods. This information is not intended to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for net earnings or diluted EPS prepared in accordance with GAAP and may not be the same as or comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies due to possible differences in method and in the items being adjusted. We encourage investors to review our financial statements and publicly-filed reports in their entirety and not to rely on any single financial measure.
Specified items were as follows:
(a) Includes amortization of purchase price adjustments to Celgene debt.
The reconciliations from GAAP to Non-GAAP were as follows:
Financial Position, Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our net debt position was as follows:
We regularly assess our anticipated working capital needs, debt and leverage levels, debt maturities, capital expenditure requirements, dividend payouts, potential share repurchases and future investments or acquisitions in order to maximize shareholder return, efficiently finance our ongoing operations and maintain flexibility for future strategic transactions. We also regularly evaluate our capital structure to ensure financial risks, adequate liquidity access and lower cost of capital are efficiently managed, which may lead to the issuance of additional debt securities or the repurchase of debt securities prior to maturity or common stock. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable debt securities together with cash generated from operations and, if required, from the issuance of commercial paper will be sufficient to satisfy our anticipated cash needs for at least the next few years, including dividends, capital expenditures, milestone payments, working capital, restructuring initiatives, business development, approximately $15.8 billion of debt maturing through 2024 as well as any debt repurchases through redemptions or tender offers.
We have a share repurchase program authorized by our Board of Directors allowing for repurchases of our shares. The specific timing and number of shares repurchased will be determined by our management at its discretion and will vary based on market conditions, securities law limitations and other factors. The share repurchase program does not obligate us to repurchase any specific number of shares, does not have a specific expiration date and may be suspended or discontinued at any time. The repurchases may be effected through a combination of one or more open market repurchases, privately negotiated transactions, transactions structured through investment banking institutions and other derivative transactions, relying on Rule 10b-18 and Rule 10b5-1 under the Exchange Act. The remaining share repurchase authority authorization under the program was $1.0 billion as of December 31, 2019. Our Board of Directors approved an increase of $5.0 billion to the share repurchase authorization for our common stock in February 2020, increasing the total outstanding share repurchase authorization to approximately $6.0 billion. In 2020, the ASR agreements that we executed in 2019 to repurchase an aggregate $7 billion of common stock were settled. We also repurchased approximately 27 million shares of its common stock for $1.6 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020. The remaining share repurchase capacity under the share repurchase program was approximately $4.4 billion as of December 31, 2020. Refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 16. Equity” for additional information. In January 2021, our Board of Directors approved an increase of $2.0 billion to the share repurchase authorization for our common stock.
Dividend payments were $4.1 billion in 2020, $2.7 billion in 2019 and $2.6 billion in 2018. Dividend decisions are made on a quarterly basis by our Board of Directors.
Annual capital expenditures were approximately $750 million in 2020, $800 million in 2019 and $1.0 billion in 2018 and are expected to be approximately $1.3 billion in 2021 and $1.2 billion in 2022. We continue to make capital expenditures in connection with the expansion of our manufacturing capabilities, research and development and other facility-related activities.
Under our commercial paper program, we may issue a maximum of $5 billion unsecured notes that have maturities of not more than 366 days from the date of issuance. There were no commercial paper borrowings outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, we had four revolving credit facilities totaling $6.0 billion, which consisted of a 364-day $2.0 billion facility that expired in January 2021, a three-year $1.0 billion facility expiring in January 2022 and two five-year $1.5 billion facilities that were extended in January 2021 to September 2024 and July 2025, respectively. The facilities provide for customary terms and conditions with no financial covenants and may be used to provide backup liquidity for our commercial paper borrowings. Our $1.0 billion facility and our two $1.5 billion revolving facilities are extendable annually by one year on the anniversary date with the consent of the lenders. No borrowings were outstanding under revolving credit facilities at December 31, 2020 and 2019. In January 2021, we entered into a 364-day $2.0 billion facility expiring in January 2022, which is extendable annually by one year on the anniversary date with the consent of the lenders.
In November 2020, we entered into a $4.0 billion delayed draw term loan credit agreement consisting of a $2.0 billion 364-day tranche and a $2.0 billion two-year tranche. The term facility provides for customary terms and conditions with no financial covenants and may be used for general corporate purposes. Any unused credit expires on April 9, 2021. No borrowings were outstanding under the term loan as of December 31, 2020. In February 2021, we terminated the delayed draw term loan credit agreement.
Also in November 2020, we issued an aggregate principal amount of $7.0 billion of fixed rate unsecured senior notes at maturities ranging from 3 years to 30 years. The net proceeds were used to fund a portion of the aggregate cash consideration payable to MyoKardia shareholders in connection with our acquisition of MyoKardia and to pay related fees and expenses. Interest is payable semi-annually. The notes rank equally in right of payment with all of our existing and future senior unsecured indebtedness and are redeemable at any time, in whole, or in part, at varying specified redemption prices plus accrued and unpaid interest.
Our investment portfolio includes non-current marketable securities, which are subject to changes in fair value as a result of interest rate fluctuations and other market factors. Our investment policy establishes limits on the amount and time to maturity of investments with any institution. The policy also requires that investments are only entered into with corporate and financial institutions that meet high credit quality standards. Refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 9. Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measurements” for further information.
Credit Ratings
Our current long-term and short-term credit ratings assigned by Moody’s Investors Service are A2 and Prime-1, respectively, with a stable long-term credit outlook, and our current long-term and short-term credit ratings assigned by Standard & Poor’s are A+ and A-1, respectively with a negative long-term credit outlook. The long-term ratings reflect the agencies’ opinion that we have a low default risk but are somewhat susceptible to adverse effects of changes in circumstances and economic conditions. The short-term ratings reflect the agencies’ opinion that we have good to extremely strong capacity for timely repayment. Any credit rating downgrade may affect the interest rate of any debt we may incur, the fair market value of existing debt and our ability to access the capital markets generally.
Cash Flows
The following is a discussion of cash flow activities:
Operating Activities
Cash flow from operating activities represents the cash receipts and disbursements from all of our activities other than investing and financing activities. Operating cash flow is derived by adjusting net earnings for noncontrolling interest, non-cash operating items, gains and losses attributed to investing and financing activities and changes in operating assets and liabilities resulting from timing differences between the receipts and payments of cash and when the transactions are recognized in our results of operations. As a result, changes in cash from operating activities reflect the timing of cash collections from customers and alliance partners; payments to suppliers, alliance partners and employees; customer discounts and rebates; and tax payments in the ordinary course of business. For example, annual employee bonuses are typically paid in the first quarter of the subsequent year. In addition, cash collections continue to be impacted by longer payment terms for certain biologic products in the U.S., primarily our newer oncology products including Opdivo, Yervoy and Empliciti (75 days in 2020 and 90 days in 2019). The longer payment terms are used to more closely align with the insurance reimbursement timing for physicians and cancer centers following administration to the patients.
The $5.8 billion change in cash flow from operating activities compared to 2019 was primarily due to the Celgene acquisition, including higher collection and payments in the ordinary course of business, partially offset by higher interest payments of $1.2 billion and income tax payments of $1.9 billion (including $1.1 billion attributed to the Otezla* divestiture) and the cash settlement of unvested MyoKardia stock awards of approximately $500 million.
Investing Activities
Cash requirements from investing activities include cash used for acquisitions, manufacturing and facility-related capital expenditures and purchases of marketable securities with original maturities greater than 90 days at the time of purchase, proceeds from business divestitures (including royalties), the sale and maturity of marketable securities and upfront and contingent milestones from licensing arrangements.
The $946 million change in cash flow from investing activities compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to:
•Lower business divestiture proceeds of approximately $15.0 billion primarily due to the divestitures of Otezla* and UPSA consumer health business in 2019.
Partially offset by:
•Lower net acquisition and other payments of approximately $11.7 billion primarily due to the acquisitions of Celgene in 2019 and MyoKardia in 2020; and
•Changes in the amount of marketable debt securities held of $2.3 billion.
Financing Activities
Cash requirements from financing activities include cash used to pay dividends, repurchase common stock and repay long-term debt and other borrowings reduced by proceeds from the exercise of stock options and issuance of long-term debt and other borrowings.
The $8.8 billion change in cash flow from financing activities compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to:
•Lower net borrowing activity of $13.3 billion primarily resulting from the issuance of notes to fund the acquisitions of Celgene in 2019 and MyoKardia in 2020 and lower repayments of debt maturities in 2020; and
•Higher dividend payments of approximately $1.4 billion.
Partially offset by:
•Lower stock repurchase of $5.8 billion primarily resulting from the accelerated stock repurchase cash payment of $7.0 billion in 2019.
Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Payments due by period for our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020 were as follows:
(a) Includes estimated future interest payments and periodic cash settlements of derivatives.
(b) Refer to "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 13. Leases” for further information regarding our leases.
(c) Includes only short-term uncertain tax benefits because of uncertainties regarding the timing of resolution.
(d) Excludes other non-current liabilities because of uncertainties regarding the timing of resolution.
We are committed to an aggregate $22.0 billion of potential future research and development milestone payments to third parties for in-licensing, asset acquisitions and development programs including early-stage milestones of $8.1 billion (milestones achieved through Phase III clinical studies) and late-stage milestones of $13.9 billion (milestones achieved post Phase III clinical studies). Payments generally are due and payable only upon achievement of certain developmental and regulatory milestones for which the specific timing cannot be predicted. Certain agreements also provide for sales-based milestones aggregating to $14.7 billion that we would be obligated to pay to alliance partners upon achievement of certain sales levels in addition to royalties. We also have certain manufacturing, development and commercialization obligations in connection with alliance arrangements. It is not practicable to estimate the amount of these obligations. Refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 3. Alliances” for further information regarding our alliances.
Contingent value rights were issued in connection with the Celgene acquisition. These rights were measured at fair value and payments were contingent upon the achievement of future regulatory milestones. Each CVR right entitled the shareholder to receive a one-time potential payment of $9.00 in cash only upon FDA approval of all three of the following milestones: (i) ozanimod by December 31, 2020, (ii) liso-cel (JCAR017) by December 31, 2020, and (iii) ide-cel (bb2121) by March 31, 2021. The contractual obligation to pay the contingent value rights terminated in January 2021 because the FDA did not approve liso-cel (JCAR017) by December 31, 2020.
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are material or reasonably likely to become material to our financial condition or results of operations.
SEC Consent Order / FCPA Settlement
As previously disclosed, on August 4, 2004, we entered into a final settlement with the SEC, concluding an investigation concerning certain wholesaler inventory and accounting matters. The settlement was reached through a Consent, a copy of which was attached as Exhibit 10 to our quarterly report on Form 10-Q for the period ended September 30, 2004.
Under the terms of the Consent, we agreed, subject to certain defined exceptions, to limit sales of all products sold to our direct customers (including wholesalers, distributors, hospitals, retail outlets, pharmacies and government purchasers) based on expected demand or on amounts that do not exceed approximately one month of inventory on hand, without making a timely public disclosure of any change in practice. We also agreed in the Consent to certain measures that we have implemented including: (a) establishing a formal review and certification process of our annual and quarterly reports filed with the SEC; (b) establishing a business risk and disclosure group; (c) retaining an outside consultant to comprehensively study and help re-engineer our accounting and financial reporting processes; (d) publicly disclosing any sales incentives offered to direct customers for the purpose of inducing them to purchase products in excess of expected demand; and (e) ensuring that our budget process gives appropriate weight to inputs that come from the bottom to the top, and not just from the top to the bottom, and adequately documenting that process.
We have established a company-wide policy concerning our sales to direct customers for the purpose of complying with the Consent, which includes the adoption of various procedures to monitor and limit sales to direct customers in accordance with the terms of the Consent. These procedures include a governance process to escalate to appropriate management levels potential questions or concerns regarding compliance with the policy and timely resolution of such questions or concerns. In addition, compliance with the policy is monitored on a regular basis.
We maintain DSAs with our U.S. pharmaceutical wholesalers, which account for nearly 100% of our gross U.S. revenues. Under the current terms of the DSAs, our wholesaler customers provide us with weekly information with respect to months on hand product-level inventories and the amount of out-movement of products. The three largest wholesalers currently account for approximately 75% of our gross U.S. revenues. The inventory information received from our wholesalers, together with our internal information, is used to estimate months on hand product level inventories at these wholesalers. We estimate months on hand product inventory levels for our U.S. business’s wholesaler customers other than the three largest wholesalers by extrapolating from the months on hand calculated for the three largest wholesalers. In contrast, our non-U.S. business has significantly more direct customers, limited information on direct customer product level inventory and corresponding out-movement information and the reliability of third-party demand information, where available, varies widely. Accordingly, we rely on a variety of methods to estimate months on hand product level inventories for these business units.
We believe the above-described procedures provide a reasonable basis to ensure compliance with the Consent.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
For recently issued accounting standards, refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 1. Accounting Policies and Recently Issued Accounting Standards.”
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements requires the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses. Our critical accounting policies are those that significantly affect our financial condition and results of operations and require the most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often because of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Because of this uncertainty, actual results may vary from these estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Our accounting policy for revenue recognition has a substantial impact on reported results and relies on certain estimates. Revenue is recognized following a five-step model: (i) identify the customer contract; (ii) identify the contract’s performance obligation; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligation; and (v) recognize revenue when or as a performance obligation is satisfied. Revenue is also reduced for GTN sales adjustments discussed below, all of which involve significant estimates and judgment after considering legal interpretations of applicable laws and regulations, historical experience, payer channel mix (e.g. Medicare or Medicaid), current contract prices under applicable programs, unbilled claims and processing time lags and inventory levels in the distribution channel. Estimates are assessed each period and adjusted as required to revise information or actual experience.
The following categories of GTN adjustments involve significant estimates, judgments and information obtained from external sources. Refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 2. Revenue.” for further discussion and analysis of each significant category of GTN sales adjustments.
Charge-backs and cash discounts
Our U.S. business participates in programs with government entities, the most significant of which are the U.S. Department of Defense and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, and other parties, including covered entities under the 340B Drug Pricing Program, whereby pricing on products is extended below wholesaler list price to participating entities. These entities purchase products through wholesalers at the lower program price and the wholesalers then charge us the difference between their acquisition cost and the lower program price. Accounts receivable is reduced for the estimated amount of unprocessed charge-back claims attributable to a sale (typically within a two to four week time lag).
In the U.S. and certain other countries, customers are offered cash discounts as an incentive for prompt payment, generally approximating 2% of the invoiced sales price. Accounts receivable is reduced for the estimated amount of cash discount at the time of sale and the discount is typically taken by the customer within one month.
Medicaid and Medicare rebates
Our U.S. business participates in state government Medicaid programs and other qualifying Federal and state government programs requiring discounts and rebates to participating state and local government entities. All discounts and rebates provided through these programs are included in our Medicaid rebate accrual. Medicaid rebates have also been extended to drugs used in managed Medicaid plans. The estimated amount of unpaid or unbilled rebates is presented as a liability.
Rebates and discounts are offered to managed healthcare organizations in the U.S. managing prescription drug programs and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans covering the Medicare Part D drug benefit. We also pay a 70% point of service discount to the CMS when the Medicare Part D beneficiaries are in the coverage gap (“donut hole”). The estimated amount of unpaid or unbilled rebates and discounts is presented as a liability.
Other rebates, returns, discounts and adjustments
Other GTN sales adjustments include sales returns and all other programs based on applicable laws and regulations for individual non-U.S. countries as well as rebates offered to managed healthcare organizations in the U.S. to a lesser extent. The non-U.S. programs include several different pricing schemes such as cost caps, volume discounts, outcome-based pricing schemes and pricing claw-backs that are based on sales of individual companies or an aggregation of all companies participating in a specific market. The estimated amount of unpaid or unbilled rebates and discounts is presented as a liability.
Estimated returns for established products are determined after considering historical experience and other factors including levels of inventory in the distribution channel, estimated shelf life, product recalls, product discontinuances, price changes of competitive products, introductions of generic products, introductions of competitive new products and lower demand following the LOE. Estimated returns for new products are determined after considering historical sales return experience of similar products, such as those within the same product line, similar therapeutic area and/or similar distribution model and estimated levels of inventory in the distribution channel and projected demand. The estimated amount for product returns is presented as a liability.
Use of information from external sources
Information from external sources is used to estimate GTN adjustments. Our estimate of inventory at the wholesalers is based on the projected prescription demand-based sales for our products and historical inventory experience, as well as our analysis of third-party information, including written and oral information obtained from certain wholesalers with respect to their inventory levels and sell-through to customers and third-party market research data, and our internal information. The inventory information received from wholesalers is a product of their recordkeeping process and excludes inventory held by intermediaries to whom they sell, such as retailers and hospitals.
We have also continued the practice of combining retail and mail prescription volume on a retail-equivalent basis. We use this methodology for internal demand forecasts. We also use information from external sources to identify prescription trends, patient demand and average selling prices. Our estimates are subject to inherent limitations of estimates that rely on third-party information, as certain third-party information was itself in the form of estimates, and reflect other limitations including lags between the date as of which third-party information is generated and the date on which we receive third-party information.
Long-lived Assets
Intangible Assets Valuations
A significant amount of the purchase price for the Celgene acquisition was allocated to intangible assets, including commercially marketed products and IPRD assets. Our intangible assets were $53.2 billion as of December 31, 2020 and $64.0 billion as of December 31, 2019.
Identifiable intangible assets are measured at their respective fair values as of the acquisition date. We engaged an independent third-party valuation firm to assist in determining the fair values of these assets as of the acquisition date. The fair value of these assets were estimated using discounted cash flow models. These models required the use of the following significant estimates and assumptions among others:
•Identification of product candidates with sufficient substance requiring separate recognition;
•Estimates of revenues and operating profits related to commercial products or product candidates;
•Eligible patients, pricing and market share used in estimating future revenues;
•Probability of success for unapproved product candidates and additional indications for commercial products;
•Resources required to complete the development and approval of product candidates;
•Timing of regulatory approvals and exclusivity;
•Appropriate discount rate by products;
•Market participant income tax rates; and
•Allocation of expected synergies to products.
We believe the estimated and preliminary fair value assigned to intangible assets acquired used reasonable estimates and assumptions considering the facts and circumstances as of the acquisition date.
Impairment and Amortization of Long-lived Assets, including Intangible Assets
Long-lived assets include intangible assets and property, plant and equipment and are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable or at least annually for IPRD. Intangible assets are highly vulnerable to impairment charges, particularly newly acquired assets for recently launched products or IPRD. These assets are initially measured at fair value and therefore any reduction in expectations used in the valuations could potentially lead to impairment. Some of the more common potential risks leading to impairment include competition, earlier than expected LOE, pricing reductions, adverse regulatory changes or clinical study results, delay or failure to obtain regulatory approval for initial or follow on indications and unanticipated development costs, inability to achieve expected synergies resulting from cost savings and avoidance, higher operating costs, changes in tax laws and other macro-economic changes. The complexity in estimating the fair value of intangible assets in connection with an impairment test is similar to the initial valuation. If the carrying value of long-lived assets exceeds its fair value, then the asset is written-down to its fair value. Expectations of future cash flows are subject to change based upon the near and long-term production volumes and margins generated by the asset as well as any potential alternative future use. The estimated useful lives of long-lived assets is subjective and requires significant judgment regarding patent lives, future plans and external market factors. Long-lived assets are also periodically reviewed for changes in facts or circumstances resulting in a reduction to the estimated useful life of the asset, requiring the acceleration of depreciation. In 2020, a $575 million impairment charge was recorded in Cost of products sold resulting from lower cash flow projections reflecting revised commercial forecasts for Inrebic, resulting in the full impairment of the asset. Additionally, a $470 million impairment charge was recorded in Research and development expense resulting from the decision to discontinue further development of the orva-cel program. Inrebic and orva-cel were obtained in connection with the acquisition of Celgene.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the consideration transferred over the estimated fair values of net assets acquired in a business combination. Goodwill was $20.5 billion and $22.5 billion as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We assess the goodwill balance within our single reporting unit annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable to determine whether any impairment in this asset may exist and, if so, the extent of such impairment. Goodwill is reviewed for impairment by assessing qualitative factors, including comparing our market capitalization to the carrying value of our assets. Events or circumstances that might require an interim evaluation include unexpected adverse business conditions, economic factors, unanticipated technological changes or competitive activities and acts by governments and courts.
Income Taxes
Valuation allowances are recognized to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will not be realized. The assessment of whether or not a valuation allowance is required often requires significant judgment including long-range forecasts of future taxable income and evaluation of tax planning initiatives. Adjustments to the deferred tax valuation allowances are made to earnings in the period when such assessments are made. Our deferred tax assets were $3.5 billion at December 31, 2020 (net of valuation allowances of $2.8 billion) and $2.1 billion at December 31, 2019 (net of valuation allowances of $2.8 billion).
The U.S. federal net operating loss carryforwards were $1.5 billion at December 31, 2020. These carryforwards were acquired as a result of certain acquisitions and are subject to limitations under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code. The net operating loss carryforwards expire in varying amounts beginning in 2022. The foreign and state net operating loss carryforwards expire in varying amounts beginning in 2021 (certain amounts have unlimited lives).
Prior to the Mead Johnson split-off in 2009, the following transactions occurred: (i) an internal spin-off of Mead Johnson shares while still owned by us; (ii) conversion of Mead Johnson Class B shares to Class A shares; and (iii) conversion of Mead Johnson & Company to a limited liability company. These transactions as well as the split-off of Mead Johnson through the exchange offer should qualify as tax-exempt transactions under the Internal Revenue Code based upon a private letter ruling received from the Internal Revenue Service related to the conversion of Mead Johnson Class B shares to Class A shares, and outside legal opinions.
Certain assumptions, representations and covenants by Mead Johnson were relied upon regarding the future conduct of its business and other matters which could affect the tax treatment of the exchange. For example, the current tax law generally creates a presumption that the exchange would be taxable to us, if Mead Johnson or its shareholders were to engage in transactions that result in a 50% or greater change in its stock ownership during a four year period beginning two years before the exchange offer, unless it is established that the exchange offer were not part of a plan or series of related transactions to effect such a change in ownership. If the internal spin-off or exchange offer were determined not to qualify as a tax exempt transaction, the transaction could be subject to tax as if the exchange was a taxable sale by us at market value.
In addition, a negative basis or excess loss account (“ELA”) existed in our investment in stock of Mead Johnson prior to these transactions. We received an opinion from outside legal counsel to the effect that it is more likely than not that we eliminated the ELA as part of these transactions and do not have taxable income with respect to the ELA. The tax law in this area is complex and it is possible that even if the internal spin-off and the exchange offer is tax exempt under the Internal Revenue Code, the Internal Revenue Service could assert that we have additional taxable income for the period with respect to the ELA. We could be exposed to additional taxes if this were to occur. Based upon our understanding of the Internal Revenue Code and opinion from outside legal counsel, a tax reserve of $244 million was established reducing the gain on disposal of Mead Johnson included in discontinued operations in 2009.
We agreed to certain tax related indemnities with Mead Johnson as set forth in the tax sharing agreement, including certain taxes related to its business prior to the completion of the initial public offering and created as part of the restructuring to facilitate the IPO. Mead Johnson has also agreed to indemnify us for potential tax effects resulting from the breach of certain representations discussed above as well as certain transactions related to the acquisition of Mead Johnson’s stock or assets.
Liabilities are established for possible assessments by tax authorities resulting from known tax exposures including, but not limited to, transfer pricing matters, tax credits and deductibility of certain expenses. Such liabilities represent a reasonable provision for taxes ultimately expected to be paid and may need to be adjusted over time as more information becomes known.
For discussions on income taxes, refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 1. Accounting Policies and Recently Issued Accounting Standards-Income Taxes” and “-Note 7. Income Taxes.”
Contingencies
In the normal course of business, we are subject to contingencies, such as legal proceedings and claims arising out of our business, that cover a wide range of matters, including, among others, government investigations, shareholder lawsuits, product and environmental liability, contractual claims and tax matters. We recognize accruals for such contingencies when it is probable that a liability will be incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. These estimates are subject to uncertainties that are difficult to predict and, as such, actual results could vary from these estimates.
For discussions on contingencies, refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 1. Accounting Policies and Recently Issued Accounting Standards-Contingencies,” “-Note 7. Income Taxes” and “-Note 19. Legal Proceedings and Contingencies.”
Product and Pipeline Developments
Our R&D programs are managed on a portfolio basis from early discovery through late-stage development and include a balance of early-stage and late-stage programs to support future growth. Our late stage R&D programs in Phase III development include both investigational compounds for initial indications and additional indications or formulations for marketed products. Spending on these programs represent approximately 40% of our annual R&D expenses in the last three years. Opdivo was the only investigational compound or marketed product that represented greater than 10% of our R&D expenses in the last three years. Our late-stage development programs could potentially have an impact on our revenue and earnings within the next few years if regulatory approvals are obtained and products are successfully commercialized. The following are the developments in our marketed products and our late-stage pipeline:
Product Indication Date Developments
Revlimid Lymphoma February 2020 Received supplemental Japan NDA approval for Revlimid in relapsed or refractory follicular lymphoma and marginal zone lymphoma.
Product Indication Date Developments
Opdivo NSCLC October 2020 Announced that the Phase III CheckMate-816 trial met a primary endpoint of pathologic complete response in resectable NSCLC.
August 2020 Ono, our alliance partner for Opdivo in Japan, announced top-line results from the Phase III clinical study TASUKI-52 evaluating Opdivo in combination with bevacizumab and chemotherapy versus placebo in combination with bevacizumab and chemotherapy in chemotherapy-naive patients with stage IIIB/IV or recurrent non-squamous NSCLC. The Opdivo combination group demonstrated a statistically significant improvement in the primary endpoint of progression-free survival in a pre-specified interim analysis.
February 2020 Ono, our alliance partner for Opdivo in Japan, announced the submission of a supplemental application in Japan for Opdivo to expand the use for the treatment of unresectable advanced or recurrent NSCLC, in combination treatment with platinum-doublet chemotherapy, for a partial change in approved items of the manufacturing and marketing approval.
RCC January 2021 Announced FDA approval of Opdivo in combination with Cabometyx* for the first-line treatment of patients with advanced RCC. The approval is based on the Phase III CheckMate-9ER trial.
October 2020 Ono, our alliance partner for Opdivo in Japan, announced that the companies have submitted a supplemental application for combination therapy of Opdivo and Cabometyx* for development and commercialization in Japan, to expand the use for the combination therapy for the treatment of unresectable or metastatic RCC, for a partial change in approved items of the manufacturing and marketing approval.
April 2020 Announced with Exelixis, that CheckMate -9ER, a pivotal Phase III trial evaluating Opdivo in combination with Cabometyx* compared to sunitinib in previously untreated advanced or metastatic RCC, met its primary endpoint of progression-free survival at final analysis, as well as the secondary endpoints of overall survival at a pre-specified interim analysis, and objective response rate.
February 2020 Announced five-year follow-up results from the Phase III CheckMate-025 study, which continue to demonstrate that treatment with Opdivo delivers superior overall survival and objective response rates in patients with previously treated advanced or metastatic RCC compared to those treated with everolimus.
Gastric and Esophageal Cancers January 2021 Announced that the FDA has accepted the sBLA for Opdivo for the treatment of patients with resected esophageal or gastroesophageal junction cancer in the adjuvant setting, after neoadjuvant chemoradiation therapy. The FDA granted the application Priority Review and assigned a PDUFA goal date of May 20, 2021. The application is based on results from the Phase III CheckMate-577 trial.
January 2021 Announced that the EMA validated its MAA for Opdivo as an adjuvant treatment for esophageal or gastroesophageal junction cancer in adult patients with residual pathologic disease after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy and resection. The application is based on results from the Phase III CheckMate-577 trial.
January 2021 Announced that the FDA has accepted the sBLA for Opdivo, in combination with fluoropyrimidine- and platinum-containing chemotherapy, for the treatment of patients with advanced or metastatic gastric cancer, gastroesophageal junction cancer or esophageal adenocarcinoma, based on results from the CheckMate -649 trial. The FDA granted the application Priority Review and assigned a PDUFA goal date of May 25, 2021. The application is based on results from the pivotal Phase III Checkmate-649 trial.
January 2021 Announced that the EMA validated the Type II Variation MAA for Opdivo in combination with fluoropyrimidine- and platinum-based combination chemotherapy for the first-line treatment of adult patients with advanced or metastatic gastric cancer, gastroesophageal junction cancer or esophageal adenocarcinoma. The application is based on results from the pivotal Phase III Checkmate-649 trial.
December 2020 Ono, our alliance partner for Opdivo in Japan, announced the submission of a supplemental application for Opdivo to expand the use for the treatment of unresectable advanced or recurrent gastric cancer, for a partial change in approved items of the manufacturing and marketing approval.
November 2020 Announced EC approval of Opdivo for the treatment of adults with unresectable advanced, recurrent or metastatic esophageal squamous cell carcinoma after prior fluoropyrimidine- and platinum-based combination chemotherapy.
September 2020 Ono, our alliance partner for Opdivo in Japan, announced that the results from Phase II/III clinical study evaluating Opdivo in combination with chemotherapy versus placebo in combination with chemotherapy in patients with unresectable advanced or recurrent gastric cancer who are negative for human epidermal growth factor receptor 2, and previously untreated with the first-line therapy in Japan, South Korea and Taiwan that the Opdivo combination group demonstrated a statistically significant improvement in one of the two primary endpoints of progression-free survival, but did not show a statistically significant improvement in overall survival, the other primary endpoint versus control combination group.
Product Indication Date Developments
Opdivo Gastric and Esophageal Cancers August 2020 Announced that CheckMate-649, a pivotal Phase III trial evaluating Opdivo plus chemotherapy compared to chemotherapy alone as a first-line treatment for metastatic gastric cancer, gastroesophageal junction cancer or esophageal adenocarcinoma, met both primary endpoints of overall survival at a pre-specified interim analysis and progression-free survival at final analysis in patients whose tumors express PD-L1 with a combined positive score ≥ 5. The overall survival benefit was also observed in the all-randomized population.
August 2020 Announced that the Phase III CheckMate-577 trial evaluating Opdivo as an adjuvant therapy for patients with resected esophageal or gastroesophageal junction cancer met its primary endpoint of disease-free survival at a pre-specified interim analysis.
June 2020 Announced that Opdivo was approved by the FDA for the treatment of patients with unresectable advanced, recurrent or metastatic ESCC after prior fluoropyrimidine- and platinum-based chemotherapy. This application was granted Priority Review Designation by the FDA, and Opdivo is the first approved immunotherapy in this setting regardless of tumor PD-L1 expression level.
May 2020 Ono, our alliance partner for Opdivo in Japan, announced the submission of a supplemental application for Opdivo to expand the use for the treatment of patients with unresectable advanced or recurrent gastric cancer who have not been previously treated, for a partial change in approved items of the manufacturing and marketing approval.
March 2020 Received NMPA approval for Opdivo in 3L gastric cancer in China. The approval was supported by the ONO-4538-12 Phase III study.
February 2020 Ono, our alliance partner for Opdivo in Japan, announced that Japan’s MHLW approved Opdivo for the treatment of patients with unresectable advanced or recurrent ESCC that has progressed following chemotherapy. The approval was based on the Phase III ATTRACTION-3 trial conducted by Ono in collaboration with BMS, which evaluated Opdivo versus chemotherapy (docetaxel or paclitaxel) for the treatment of patients with unresectable advanced or recurrent ESCC refractory or intolerant to combination therapy with fluoropyrimidine and platinum-based drugs.
SCLC December 2020 Announced that in consultation with the FDA, we withdrew the U.S. indication for Opdivo in SCLC following platinum-based chemotherapy and at least one other line of therapy. Opdivo was granted accelerated approval for SCLC in 2018 based on surrogate endpoints from the Phase I/II CheckMate-032 trial in advanced or metastatic solid tumors, which demonstrated encouraging response rates and duration of response in SCLC. However, subsequent confirmatory studies in different treatment settings, CheckMate-451 and CheckMate-331, did not meet their primary endpoints of overall survival.
CRC February 2020 Ono, our alliance partner for Opdivo in Japan, announced that Japan's MHLW approved Opdivo for the treatment of patients with MSI-H unresectable advanced or recurrent CRC that has progressed following chemotherapy. The approval was based on the the result from Opdivo monotherapy cohort of a multi-center, open-label Phase II CheckMate-142 study conducted by BMS, evaluating Opdivo in patients with HSI-H or mismatch repair deficient recurrent or metastatic CRC that has progressed on or after, or been intolerant of prior treatment with chemotherapy including fluoropyrimidine anticancer drugs.
Glioblastoma December 2020 Following a routine review by an independent data monitoring commitee (DMC), BMS was informed that the Phase III CheckMate-548 trial, evaluating Opdivo plus standard of care (temozolomide and radiation therapy) in newly diagnosed glioblastoma multiforme with O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase promoter methylation following surgical resection of the tumor, will not meet its primary endpoint of overall survival in patients with no baseline corticosteroid use or in the overall randomized population. Based on the DMC recommendation, investigators will be unblinded to treatment assignments, and patients currently deriving benefit from Opdivo permitted to continue treatment if agreed to with their physician.
Bladder February 2021 Announced results from the Phase III CheckMate-274 trial, which showed that Opdivo significantly improved disease-free survival as an adjuvant treatment across all randomized patients with surgically resected, high-risk muscle-invasive urothelial carcinoma and in the subgroup of patients whose tumors express PD-L1 ≥1%, meeting both of the study’s primary endpoints.
Ovarian Cancer January 2020 Ono, our alliance partner for Opdivo in Japan, announced that Opdivo did not demonstrate a significant improvement in overall survival, a primary endpoint, versus chemotherapy in patients with platinum-refractory advanced or recurrent ovarian cancer in the final analysis of a multi-center, randomized, open-label Phase III clinical study (ONO-4538-23) conducted in Japan.
Product Indication Date Developments
Opdivo+Yervoy NSCLC November 2020 Announced EC approval of Opdivo plus Yervoy with two cycles of platinum-based chemotherapy for the first-line treatment of adult patients with metastatic NSCLC whose tumors have no sensitizing epidermal growth factor receptor mutation or anaplastic lymphoma kinase translocation.
November 2020 Ono, our alliance partner for Opdivo in Japan, announced that the companies received approval in Japan for the following combination therapies of Opdivo and Yervoy for the first-line treatment of unresectable, advanced or recurrent NSCLC for a partial change in approved items of the manufacturing and marketing approval in Japan: (i) combination therapy with Opdivo and Yervoy, (ii) combination therapy with Opdivo, Yervoy plus chemotherapy and (iii) combination therapy with Opdivo and chemotherapy
May 2020 Announced FDA approval of Opdivo+Yervoy given with two cycles of platinum-doublet chemotherapy for the first-line treatment of adult patients with metastatic or recurrent NSCLC with no EGFR or ALK genomic tumor aberrations. The therapy is approved for patients with squamous or non-squamous disease and regardless of PD-L1 expression.
May 2020 Announced FDA approval of Opdivo+Yervoy for the first-line treatment of adult patients with metastatic NSCLC whose tumors express PD-L1 (≥1%) as determined by an FDA-approved test, with no EGFR or ALK genomic tumor aberrations.
May 2020 Announced three-year follow-up results from Part 1 of the Phase III CheckMate-227 trial in metastic NSCLC, demonstrating that Opdivo+Yervoy provided sustained improvements in overall survival and additional efficacy measures as a first-line treatment compared to chemotherapy among patients whose tumors expressed PD-L1 ≥1%.
January 2020 Announced voluntary withdrawal of the Company's application in the EU for the combination of Opdivo and Yervoy for the treatment of advanced NSCLC based on data from CheckMate-227. The application was originally filed in 2018 for patients with first-line NSCLC who have tumor mutational burden ≥10 mutations/megabase, based on the final analysis of progression-free survival, a co-primary endpoint in the trial. The application was subsequently amended to include the statistically significant result of overall survival, a co-primary endpoint, from CheckMate-227 Part 1a evaluating Opdivo+Yervoy versus chemotherapy in patients whose tumors expressed PD-L1 ≥1%.
Though the CHMP acknowledged the integrity of the patient level data, the CHMP determined a full assessment of the application was not possible following multiple protocol changes the company made in response to rapidly evolving science and data. The company has no plans to refile this application in the EU.
Melanoma October 2020 Announced results for the co-primary endpoint for CheckMate-915, a randomized Phase III study evaluating Opdivo plus Yervoy versus Opdivo for patients who have had a complete surgical removal of stage IIIb/c/d or stage IV melanoma. The addition of Yervoy to Opdivo in this trial did not result in a statistically significant improvement in recurrence-free survival in the all-comer (intent-to-treat) population.
MPM October 2020 Announced FDA approval of Opdivo+Yervoy for the first-line treatment of adult patients with unresectable MPM. This approval is based on a pre-specified interim analysis from the Phase III CheckMate-743 trial in which Opdivo+Yervoy demonstrated superior overall survival versus the platinum-based standard of care chemotherapy.
October 2020 Ono, our alliance partner for Opdivo in Japan announced that the companies have submitted supplemental applications in Japan for Opdivo and Yervoy in combination treatment to expand the use for first-line treatment of unresectable advanced or recurrent MPM, for a partial change in aprpoved items of the manufacturing and marketing approval.
September 2020 Announced that the EMA validated the type II variation application for Opdivo plus Yervoy for treatment of patients with previously untreated, unresectable MPM.
April 2020 Announced that CheckMate-743, a pivotal Phase III trial evaluating Opdivo in combination with Yervoy in previously untreated MPM met its primary endpoint of overall survival. Based on a pre-specified interim analysis conducted by the independent data monitoring committee, Opdivo in combination with Yervoy resulted in a statistically significant and clinically meaningful improvement in overall survival compared to chemotherapy (pemetrexed and cisplatin or carboplatin).
Product Indication Date Developments
Opdivo+Yervoy RCC September 2020 Announced that more than half of advanced RCC patients treated with the Opdivo plus Yervoy combination were alive after four years across the entire study population of the Phase III CheckMate-214 clinical trial, with the combination continuing to show superior, long-term overall survival and durable responses compared to sunitinib.
February 2020 Announced updated results from the Phase III CheckMate-214 study evaluating the combination of Opdivo+Yervoy versus sunitinib in patients with previously untreated advanced or metastatic RCC. With a minimum follow-up of 42 months, the combination of Opdivo+Yervoy continues to show superior overall survival, objective response rates, duration of response and complete response rates. The safety profile for Opdivo+Yervoy was consistent with prior findings and no new safety signals or drug-related death occurred with extended follow-up. The data were presented at the American Society of Clinical Oncology 2020 Genitourinary Cancers Symposium in San Francisco.
CRC September 2020 Ono, our alliance partner for Opdivo in Japan announced that the companies received approval for combination therapy of Opdivo and Yervoy in Japan to expand the combination use for the treatment of microsatellite instability high unresectable advanced or recurrent CRC that has progressed following chemotherapy, for a partial change in approved items of the manufacturing and marketing approval.
HCC March 2020 Announced that Opdivo 1mg/kg plus Yervoy 3 mg/kg (injections for intravenous use) was approved by the FDA to treat HCC in patients who have been previously treated with sorafenib. Approval for this indication has been granted under accelerated approval based on overall response rate and duration of response seen in the Opdivo+Yervoy cohort of the Phase I/II CheckMate-040 trial. Continued approval for this indication may be contingent upon verification and description of clinical benefit in confirmatory trials.
Orencia RA June 2020 Announced results from the open-label switch period of Early AMPLE, a Phase IV exploratory biomarker study assessing the differences by which Orencia and adalimumab interfere with disease progression in moderate-to-severe early RA patients seropositive for certain autoantibodies. Early seropositive RA patients treated with Orencia demonstrated substantial clinical improvements at week 48, sustaining the level of responses achieved at week 24 compared to adalimumab. In seropositive patients switching from adalimumab to Orencia, the efficacy responses generally increased over the open-label period to week 48.
February 2020 Ono, our alliance partner for Orencia in Japan, announced that the Companies have received an approval of “Orencia for Intravenous Infusion 250mg,” “Orencia for Subcutaneous Injection 125mg Syringe 1mL” and “Orencia for Subcutaneous Injection 125mg Auto-injector 1mL” (“Orencia”) to include the description of “prevention of the structural damage of the joints” in the currently approved indication of RA for a partial change in approved items of the manufacturing and marketing approval in Japan.
Pomalyst Kaposi sarcoma May 2020 Announced FDA approval of Pomalyst for patients with AIDS-related Kaposi sarcoma whose disease has become resistant to highly active antiretroviral therapy, or in patients with Kaposi sarcoma who are HIV-negative. Pomalyst was granted accelerated approval, Breakthrough Therapy designation and Orphan Drug designation in these indications.
Empliciti+
Revlimid Multiple Myeloma March 2020 Announced topline results from the Phase III ELOQUENT-1 trial evaluating the combination of Empliciti plus Revlimid and dexamethasone, versus Revlimid and dexamethasone alone, in patients with newly diagnosed, previously untreated multiple myeloma who are transplant ineligible. At final analysis, the addition of Empliciti did not show a statistically significant improvement in progression-free survival, the study’s primary endpoint.
Reblozyl MDS June 2020 Announced EC approval of Reblozyl for the treatment of adult patients with transfusion-dependent anemia due to very low-, low- and intermediate-risk MDS with ring sideroblasts, who had an unsatisfactory response or are ineligible for erythropoietin-based therapy.
April 2020 Announced FDA approval of Reblozyl for the treatment of anemia failing an erythropoiesis stimulating agent and requiring 2 or more red blood cell units over 8 weeks in adult patients with very low- to intermediate-risk MDS with ring sideroblasts or with myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neoplasm with ring sideroblasts and thrombocytosis.
Beta Thalassemia June 2020 Announced EC approval of Reblozyl for adult patients with transfusion-dependent anemia associated with beta thalassemia.
Product Indication Date Developments
Zeposia UC February 2021 Announced that the FDA has accepted the sNDA for Zeposia for the treatment of adults with moderately to severely active UC. The FDA granted the application Priority Review and assigned a PDUFA goal date of May 30, 2021.
December 2020 Announced that the EMA validated the MAA for Zeposia for the treatment of adults with moderately to severely active UC.
June 2020 Announced that the pivotal Phase III trial True North, evaluating oral Zeposia as an induction and maintenance therapy for adult patients with moderate to severe UC, met both primary endpoints of induction of clinical remission at Week 10 and in maintenance at Week 52 (p-value < 0.0001). The study also met key secondary endpoints of clinical response and endoscopic improvement in induction at these timepoints, with a safety profile consistent with that observed in previously reported trials.
RMS September 2020 Announced interim results from the Phase III open-label extension trial DAYBREAK, demonstrating the long-term efficacy and safety profile of Zeposia in patients with RMS. The trial included 2,494 patients who had previously completed a Phase I, II or III Zeposia clinical trial and who had an average treatment time of 35.4 months while in DAYBREAK and no new safety concerns emerged with long-term use of Zeposia.
May 2020 Announced EC approval of Zeposia for the treatment of adult patients with RRMS with active disease as defined by clinical or imaging features. With the EC marketing authorization, Zeposia, an oral medication taken once daily, becomes the only approved sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor modulator for RRMS patients with active disease.
March 2020 Announced that the FDA approved Zeposia (ozanimod) 0.92 mg for the treatment of adults with RMS, including clinically isolated syndrome, relapsing-remitting disease, and active secondary progressive disease. Zeposia, an oral medication taken once daily, is the only approved sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor modulator that offers RMS patients an initiation with no genetic test and no label-based first-dose observation required for patients. An up-titration scheme should be used to reach the maintenance dosage of Zeposia, as a transient decrease in heart rate and atrioventricular conduction delays may occur.
Inrebic Myelofibrosis February 2021 Announced EC approval for Inrebic for the treatment of disease-related splenomegaly (enlarged spleen) or symptoms in adult patients with primary myelofibrosis, post-polycythaemia vera myelofibrosis or post-essential thrombocythaemia myelofibrosis, who are JAK inhibitor naïve or have been treated with ruxolitinib.
Onureg AML September 2020 Announced FDA approval of Onureg (azacitidine) for the continued treatment of adult patients with AML who achieved first complete remission or complete remission with incomplete blood count recovery following intensive induction chemotherapy and who are not able to complete intensive curative therapy.
May 2020 Announced that the EMA validated the MAA for CC-486 (Onureg) for the maintenance treatment of adult patients with AML, who achieved complete remission or complete remission with incomplete blood count recovery, following induction therapy with or without consolidation treatment, and who are not candidates for, or who choose not to proceed to, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
Breyanzi
(liso-cel)
Lymphoma February 2021 Announced that the FDA approved Breyanzi (lisocabtagene maraleucel; liso-cel), for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory large B-cell lymphoma after two or more lines of systemic therapy, including diffuse large B-cell lymphoma not otherwise specified (including DLBCL arising from indolent lymphoma), high-grade B-cell lymphoma, primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma, and follicular lymphoma grade 3B.
July 2020 Announced that the EMA validated the MAA for liso-cel, an investigational CD19-directed CAR T cell therapy, for the treatment of adults with relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma and follicular lymphoma grade 3B after at least two prior therapies.
ide-cel; bb2121 Multiple Myeloma September 2020 Announced with bluebird bio that the FDA has accepted for Priority Review the BLA for ide-cel for the treatment of adult patients with multiple myeloma who have received at least three prior therapies, including an immunomodulatory agent, a proteasome inhibitor and an anti-CD38 antibody. The FDA has set a PDUFA goal date of March 27, 2021.
May 2020 Announced that the EMA validated the MAA for ide-cel (bb2121) for the treatment of adult patients with multiple myeloma who have received at least three prior therapies, including an immunomodulatory agent, a proteasome inhibitor and an anti-CD38 antibody. Ide-cel was granted Accelerated Assessment status by the EMA in March 2020, reducing the maximum timeframe for review of the application to 150 days.
May 2020 With bluebird, announced updated results from the pivotal, Phase II KarMMa study evaluating the efficacy and safety of ide-cel (bb2121) in RRMM. Patients with heavily pretreated RRMM who were exposed to at least three prior therapies and were refractory to their last regimen were treated with ide-cel across a range of target dose levels. ORR was 73% across all dose levels, including 33% of patients who had a complete remission or stringent complete remission. Clinically meaningful benefit was consistently observed across subgroups, and nearly all subgroups had an ORR of 50% or greater, including older and high-risk patients.
deucravacitinib
(BMS-986165)
Plaque Psoriasis February 2021 Announced positive results from POETYK PSO-2, the second pivotal Phase III trial evaluating deucravacitinib, a novel, oral, selective tyrosine kinase 2 inhibitor, for the treatment of patients with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis. POETYK PSO-2 evaluated deucravacitinib 6 mg once daily and met both co-primary endpoints versus placebo, with significantly more patients achieving Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI 75), defined as at least a 75 percent improvement of baseline PASI, and a static Physician's Global Assessment (sPGA) score of clear or almost clear (sPGA 0/1) after 16 weeks of treatment with deucravacitinib.
November 2020 Announced results from the Phase III POETYK PSO-1 trial evaluating deucravacitinib (BMS-986165), a novel, oral, selective tyrosine kinase 2 inhibitor, for the treatment of patients with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis. POETYK PSO-1 met both co-primary endpoints versus placebo, with more patients achieving Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) 75, defined as at least a 75 percent improvement in PASI, and a static Physician’s Global Assessment (sPGA) score of clear or almost clear (sPGA 0/1) after 16 weeks of treatment. The trial also met multiple key secondary endpoints, including showing deucravacitinib was superior to Otezla* in the proportion of patients reaching a PASI 75 response and sPGA 0/1 at Week 16.
Idhifa AML August 2020 Announced that the Phase III IDHENTIFY study evaluating Idhifa plus best supportive care (BSC) versus conventional care regimens, which include BSC only, azacitidine plus BSC, low-dose cytarabine plus BSC or intermediate-dose cytarabine plus BSC, did not meet the primary endpoint of overall survival in patients with relapsed or refractory AML with an isocitrate dehydrogenase-2 mutation.
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This 2020 Form 10-K (including documents incorporated by reference) and other written and oral statements we make from time to time contain certain “forward-looking” statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. You can identify these forward-looking statements by the fact they use words such as “should,” “could,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “target,” “may,” “project,” “guidance,” “intend,” “plan,” “believe,” “will” and other words and terms of similar meaning and expression in connection with any discussion of future operating or financial performance. One can also identify forward-looking statements by the fact that they do not relate strictly to historical or current facts. Such forward-looking statements are based on historical performance and current expectations and projections about our future financial results, goals, plans and objectives and involve inherent risks, assumptions and uncertainties, including internal or external factors that could delay, divert or change any of them in the next several years, and could cause our future financial results, goals, plans and objectives to differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by, the statements. These statements are likely to relate to, among other things, our goals, plans and objectives regarding our financial position, results of operations, cash flows, market position, product development, product approvals, sales efforts, expenses, performance or results of current and anticipated products, our business development strategy generally and in relation to our ability to realize the projected benefits of our acquisitions of Celgene and MyoKardia, the full extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations and the development and commercialization of our products, potential laws and regulations to lower drug costs, market actions taken by private and government payers to manage drug utilization and contain costs, the expiration of patents or data protection on certain products, including assumptions about our ability to retain patent exclusivity of certain products, and the outcome of contingencies such as legal proceedings and financial results. No forward-looking statement can be guaranteed. We have included important factors in the cautionary statements included in this 2020 Form 10-K, particularly under “Item 1A. Risk Factors,” that we believe could cause actual results to differ materially from any forward-looking statement.
Although we believe we have been prudent in our plans and assumptions, no assurance can be given that any goal or plan set forth in forward-looking statements can be achieved and readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such statements, which speak only as of the date made. Additional risks that we may currently deem immaterial or that are not presently known to us could also cause the forward-looking events discussed in this 2020 Form 10-K not to occur. Except as otherwise required by federal securities law, we undertake no obligation to release publicly any updates or revisions to any forward-looking statements as a result of new information, future events, changed circumstances or otherwise after the date of this 2020 Form 10-K.