ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on August 24, 2018 for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our securities, debt or a combination of cash, securities and debt. Our efforts to identify a prospective target business will not be limited to a particular geographic region or industry.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our Business Combination with Celularity or any other Business Combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our Business Combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On January 8, 2021, we entered into the Merger Agreement with First Merger Sub, Second Merger Sub and Celularity.
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, at the Closing, and in accordance with the DGCL, (i) First Merger Sub will merge with and into Celularity, with Celularity surviving the First Merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company; and (ii) immediately following the First Merger and as part of the same overall transaction as the First Merger, the Surviving Corporation will merge with and into Second Merger Sub, with Second Merger Sub being the surviving entity of the Second Merger.
The aggregate merger consideration payable to stockholders of Celularity upon the Closing consists of up to 147,327,224 newly issued shares of the GX Class A Common Stock valued at approximately $10.15 per share.
Immediately prior to Effective Time, Celularity will cause each share of Celularity Preferred Stock that is issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time to be automatically converted into a number of shares Celularity Common Stock at the then-effective conversion rate as calculated pursuant to the Celularity Charter.
Upon the consummation of the Celularity Business Combination, the Company intends to change its name to “Celularity Inc.”
The Celularity Business Combination will be consummated subject to certain conditions as further described in the Merger Agreement.
For additional information regarding Celularity, the Merger Agreement and related agreements and the Celularity Business Combination, see the S-4 Registration Statement.
The Celularity Business Combination will be accounted for as a reverse recapitalization in accordance with GAAP. Under this method of accounting, we will be treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes. For accounting purposes, Celularity will be deemed to be the accounting acquirer in the transaction and, consequently, the transaction will be treated as a recapitalization of Celularity (i.e., a capital transaction involving the issuance of our stock for the stock of Celularity). Accordingly, the consolidated assets, liabilities and results of operations of Celularity will become our historical financial statements after the Celularity Business Combination, and our assets, liabilities and results of operations will be consolidated with Celularity beginning on the acquisition date.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and, after our Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $2,630,297, which consisted of operating costs of $4,219,960 and a provision for income taxes of $191,644 offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $1,779,071 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $2,236.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we had net income of $2,512,971, which consisted of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $3,753,411, offset by unrealized loss on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $7,871, operating costs of $564,339 and a provision for income taxes of $668,230.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On May 23, 2019, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 28,750,000 Units, which includes the full exercise by the underwriter of the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 3,750,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $287,500,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 7,000,000 Private Placement Warrants, at $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, to our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $7,000,000.
Transaction costs amounted to $16,473,117, consisting of $5,000,000 of underwriting fees, $10,812,500 of deferred underwriting fees and $660,617 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $1,181,014, which consisted of our net loss of $2,630,297, interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $1,779,071, an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $2,236 and a deferred income tax provision of $2,255. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $3,228,335 of cash.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $1,097,833. Net income of $2,512,971 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $3,753,411, an unrealized loss on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $7,871 and a deferred income tax provision of $1,653. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $136,389 of cash.
As of December 31, 2020, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $291,797,144 (including approximately $4,297,000 of interest income and unrealized gains) consisting of U.S. Treasury Bills with a maturity of 180 days or less. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less deferred underwriting commissions) to complete a Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2020, we withdrew $1,367,203 of interest earned on the Trust Account to pay our franchise and income taxes, of which $716,203 was withdrawn during the year ended December 31, 2020 and $137,500 was returned due to a reduction in our estimated tax liability for the year ended December 31, 2020. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $314,696 held outside the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate prospective acquisition candidates, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, select the target business to acquire and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our initial stockholders, officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds from time to time or at any time, as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used to repay such loaned amounts. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into private warrants at a price of $1.00 per private warrant at the option of the lender. The private warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
Liquidity and Going Concern
We will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our Sponsor, stockholders, officers, directors, or third parties. Our officers, directors and Sponsor may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through May 23, 2021, the date that we will be required to cease all operations, except for the purpose of winding up, if a Business Combination is not consummated. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative services. We began incurring these fees on May 20, 2019 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of a Business Combination and the Company’s liquidation.
In June 2019, we entered into a consulting arrangement for services to help identify and introduce us to potential targets and provide assistance with the negotiations in connection with a Business Combination. The agreement provides for a monthly fee of $12,500.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we entered into an agreement with a service provider, pursuant to which the service provider will serve as the placement agent for us in connection with a proposed private placement (the “Transaction”) of our equity or equity-linked securities (the “Securities”). We agreed to pay the service provider a cash fee equal to the greater of (i) $3 million (the “Minimum Fee”) and (ii) 3% of the gross proceeds of the total Securities sold in the Transaction and 3% of the gross proceeds of the total Securities sold in the Transaction. The fee will not be payable in the event we do not consummate the Transaction.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we entered into an agreement with the same service provider, pursuant to which the service provider will provide us with capital markets advisory services for a potential Business Combination. We agreed to pay the service provider a transaction fee (the “Transaction Fee”), payable upon the closing in connection with a Transaction, equal to $5 million. In addition to the Transaction Fee, we agreed to reimburse the service provider all reasonable expenses relating to due diligence not to exceed $75,000 in the aggregate.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our consolidated balance sheets.
Net Income Per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Shares of common stock subject to possible redemption, which are not currently redeemable and are not redeemable at fair value, have been excluded from the calculation of basic net loss per common share since such shares, if redeemed, only participate in their pro rata share of the Trust Account earnings. Our net income is adjusted for the portion of income that is attributable to common stock subject to possible redemption, as these shares only participate in the earnings of the Trust Account and not our income or losses.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.