ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
We develop, manufacture and commercialize point-of-care tests for the detection and diagnosis of infectious diseases, including COVID 19, sexually transmitted disease, and fever and tropical disease.
Our product portfolio is based upon our proprietary DPP technology, a diagnostic platform that provides high-quality, cost-effective results in 15 to 20 minutes using fingertip blood, nasal swabs and other sample types. The DPP technology platform addresses the rapid diagnostic test market, which includes infectious diseases, cardiac markers, cholesterol and lipids, pregnancy and fertility, and drugs of abuse. Compared with traditional lateral flow technology, the DPP technology platform can provide enhanced sensitivity and specificity, advanced multiplexing capabilities and, with the DPP Micro Reader, quantitative results.
We target the market for rapid diagnostic test solutions for infectious diseases, which is driven by the high prevalence of infectious diseases globally, an increase in the geriatric population, growing demand for rapid test results, and advancements in multiplexing. We have a broad portfolio of infectious disease products, which prior to 2020 were focused principally on sexually transmitted disease and fever and tropical disease. In February 2020 we began the process of shifting substantially all of our resources to leverage the DPP technology platform to address the acute and escalating need for diagnostic testing for COVID-19.
Our products are sold globally, directly and through distributors, to medical laboratories and hospitals, governmental and public health entities, non-governmental organizations, medical professionals, and retail establishments. We continue to seek to expand our commercial distribution channels.
In 2020 we continued to invest in automating our test manufacturing processes, all of which are now based in the United States. Among other actions, we expanded our manufacturing capabilities by validating and implementing automated lines. Our transition from manual to automated assembly is intended to add capacity, reduce variable costs and improve product margins. In order to address challenging economic conditions and implement our business strategy, we continued to execute a program to reduce operating expenses and better align our costs with revenues, including by eliminating positions that were no longer aligned with our strategy.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
Percentages in the table reflect the percent of total revenues.
Total Revenues
Total revenues during 2020 were $32.5 million, a decrease of $2.0 million, or 5.8%, compared to 2019. The decrease in total revenues reflected a $4.1 million, or 14%, decrease in net product sales, which was principally comprised of (a) lower sales in Africa, Latin America, and the United States associated with diminished funding and the closure of clinics for HIV testing due to the COVID-19 pandemic, offset in part by (b) The Company’s success in achieving regulatory approvals for and selling the COVID-19 IgM/IgG Systems in Latin America and gains in Europe associated with our long term agreement with UNICEF for our DPP Zika IgM/IgG and DPP ZCD IgM/IgG multiplex tests and Micro Readers. The decrease in net product sales was offset in part by a $2.2 million, or 31.9%, increase in research and development and grant revenues relating to new government grants for the development, and submission for U.S. regulatory approval, of DPP SARS-CoV-2 Antigen and DPP Respiratory Panel test systems.
Gross Product Margin
Cost of product sales is primarily comprised of material, labor, manufacturing overhead, depreciation and amortization, and freight and distribution costs. Gross product margin is net product sales less cost of product sales, and gross product margin percentage is gross product margin as a percentage of net product sales.
Gross product margin decreased by $5.6 million, or 86.2% compared to 2019. The following schedule calculates gross product margin:
In 2020 we invested in developing and offering products to address the COVID-19 pandemic, which we expect will have average selling prices greater than those of our legacy products. We also continued to invest in automation in order to reduce our reliance on manual labor and improve our product margins (see Q1’21 Restructuring Charge). The $5.6 million decrease in gross product margin was comprised of (a) $4.7 million from unfavorable product margins and (b) $0.9 million from unfavorable product sales volume as described under “-Total Revenues” above. The $4.6 million decrease from unfavorable product margins principally reflected the following:
● We incurred the cost of product sales for COVID-19 IgM/IgG Systems that were returned by customers following the Revocation.
● The Revocation precluded planned sales of COVID-19 IgM/IgG Systems to customers in the United States in the last three quarters of 2020 and resulted in the deferral ,of certain customer opportunities for sales of COVID-19 IgM/IgG Systems outside the United States, which negatively impacted our sales mix as we experienced (a) significantly lower sales in the United States, where we have our highest average selling prices, and (b) outside the United States, a higher mix of sales in geographic regions with lower average selling prices.
● We experienced operational inefficiencies, including those triggered by the Revocation and activities related to qualifying automated lines for production of certain products, which resulted in increased cost of product sales as we substantially shifted our production from COVID-19 products back to legacy products.
Research and Development
This category includes costs incurred for clinical and regulatory affairs and other research and development, as follows:
The decrease in clinical and regulatory affairs costs for 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily associated with reduced clinical trial costs following the FDA’s granting of premarket approval for the DPP HIV-Syphilis test during 2020, offset in part by expenditures related to the DPP SARS-CoV-2 Systems. The increase in other research and development costs was primarily related to costs associated with the development of the DPP SARS-CoV-2 Systems.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expenses include administrative expenses, sales and marketing costs (including commissions), and other corporate items. The $4.9 million, or 30%, increase in selling, general and administrative expenses for 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily reflected legal costs arising subsequent to the Revocation, costs from expanding our U.S. commercial organization, a full year of our Brazilian facility (which was acquired during the fourth quarter of 2019), and facility costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic, offset in part by cost savings from retrenching our Malaysia facility and other restructuring actions taken during the first quarter of 2020.
Severance, Restructuring and other related costs
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized $0.7 million in net severance expenses related to the departure of Chembio’s former chief executive officer and the elimination of certain positions as part of its multi-faceted expense reduction program to reduce operating expenses. The Company undertook actions to adjust the size and composition of the organization, including by removing positions that were non-essential in light of its new business strategy, and to remove other expenses, all of which the Company expects will provide savings throughout, and after, 2020.
In light of market dynamics, the Company retrenched its Malaysian operations, including the termination of employment of its Malaysian workforce. The Company will maintain its Malaysian subsidiary and sustain the product registrations that were obtained throughout southeast Asia, with the benefit of having that entity and the WHO prequalification certified facility.
Based on these activities, the Company took restructuring actions totaling $0.4 million to realign and resize its production capacity and cost structure. All expenses have been paid as of December 31, 2020.
Acquisition Costs
Acquisition costs include legal, due diligence, audit, and related costs associated with acquisitions. The $0.7 million decrease in acquisition costs for 2020 as compared to 2019 reflected the fact that we completed acquisitions in 2019 but not 2020.
Other (Expense) / Income
Other (expense) / income was principally comprised of interest expense net of interest income. Interest expense increased by $2.0 million for 2020 as compared to 2019, due to the interest paid on the term loan debt we incurred in September 2019.
Income Tax Benefit
For 2020 we recognized a tax benefit of $0.4 million primarily attributable to the loss generated by Chembio Diagnostics Germany. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company recorded a full valuation allowance against its net deferred tax assets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we funded our business operations, including capital expenditures and working capital requirements, principally from a public offering of common stock, which generated proceeds of $28.4 million (net of expenses), and from cash and cash equivalents. Our operations used $18.9 million of cash. As of December 31, 2020, we had outstanding indebtedness of $20 million (carrying amount of $18.2 million) pursuant to the Credit Agreement described under “-Sources of Funds-Credit Agreement” below.
We continually evaluate our liquidity requirements, capital needs and availability of capital resources based on our operating needs and our planned growth initiatives, particularly in the light of our shift in business focus to the DPP SARS-CoV-2 Systems. We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for at least the next twelve months. Our future working capital needs will depend on many factors, including: the fact and timing of our receipt from the FDA of an EUA award for the DPP SARS-CoV-2 Antigen System and/or the DPP Respiratory Panel System; the fact and timing of our receipt from the FDA of a CLIA waiver for the DPP HIV-Syphilis System; the rate of our business and revenue growth, including our ability to successfully build distribution channels and commercialize the COVID-19 Diagnostic Test Systems in geographies (principally Europe) covered by our CE-Marks for those products, particularly if we are able to resume commercialization of the COVID-19 Diagnostic Test Systems in the United States; the occurrence and timing of regulatory approvals for other new products; the timing of our continuing automation of U.S. manufacturing; and the timing of our investment in research and development as well as sales and marketing. If our sources of liquidity become insufficient to fund the growth of our business, we may need to reduce the level or slow the timing of our growth plans, which would likely curtail or delay the growth in our business contemplated by our operating plan and could impair or defer our ability to achieve profitability and generate cash flow, or to seek to raise additional funds through debt or equity financings, strategic relationships, or other arrangements, to the extent funding would be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. If we were to raise additional funds through the issuance of equity or convertible securities, the issuance could result in substantial dilution to existing stockholders, and the holders of those new securities may have rights, preferences and privileges senior to those of the holders of common stock.
Sources of Funds
Credit Agreement. On September 3, 2019, we, as borrower, and certain of our subsidiaries, as guarantors, entered into a Credit Agreement and Guaranty, or the Credit Agreement, with Perceptive Credit Holdings II, LP, or the Lender.
● Principal Amount. The Credit Agreement provides for a $20,000,000 senior secured term loan credit facility, which was drawn in full on September 4, 2019. Under the terms of the Credit Agreement, we may use the proceeds for general working capital purposes and other permitted corporate purposes, to refinance certain of our existing indebtedness and to pay fees, costs and expenses incurred in connection with the Credit Agreement.
● Interest Rate. Principal outstanding under the Credit Agreement bears interest at a rate per annum equal to the sum of (a) the greater of the one-month London Interbank Offered Rate and 2.5% plus (b) 8.75%. At any time at which an event of default (as described under “-Default Provisions” below) has occurred and is continuing, the interest rate will increase by 4.0%. Accrued interest is payable on a monthly basis.
● Scheduled Repayment. No principal repayments are due prior to September 30, 2022, unless we elect to prepay principal as described under “-Optional Prepayment” below or principal is accelerated pursuant to an event of default as described under “-Default Provisions” below. Principal installments in the amount of $300,000 are payable on the last day of each of the eleven months from September 2022 through July 2023, and all remaining principal is payable at maturity on September 3, 2023.
● Optional Prepayment. We may prepay outstanding principal from time to time, subject to payment of a premium on the prepaid principal amount equal to 10% through September 3, 2020, 8% from September 4, 2020 through September 3, 2021, and 4% from September 4, 2021 through September 3, 2022. No premium will be due with respect to any prepayment made on or after September 4, 2022.
● Guaranties. Our subsidiaries Chembio Diagnostic Systems Inc. and Chembio Diagnostics Malaysia Sdn Bhd. have guaranteed, and the Lender from time to time may require our other subsidiaries to guarantee, our obligations under the Credit Agreement.
● Security. Our obligations under the Credit Agreement are secured by a first priority, perfected lien on substantially all of our property and assets, including our equity interests in our subsidiaries. Our subsidiary Chembio Diagnostic Systems Inc. has secured its guarantee of our Credit Agreement obligations with a lien on substantially all of its assets, and the Lender from time to time may require Chembio Diagnostics Malaysia Sdn Bhd. and any of our other subsidiaries that has guaranteed our Credit Agreement obligations to do the same.
● Representations and Warranties; Financial and Other Covenants. In the Credit Agreement we made customary representations and warranties as well as customary affirmative and negative covenants, including covenants limiting additional indebtedness, liens, guaranties, mergers and acquisitions, substantial asset sales, investments and loans, sale and leasebacks, transactions with affiliates, and fundamental changes. The Credit Agreement also contains financial covenants requiring that we maintain aggregate unrestricted cash of not less than $3,000,000 at all times and we achieve specified minimum rolling four-quarter (“last twelve month”) total revenue amounts as of September 30, 2019 and the last day of each calendar quarter thereafter. The minimum total revenue amounts, which range from $32.0 million to $50.1 million, were developed for purposes of the Credit Agreement and do not reflect the internal estimates and plans used by our management and board of directors to understand and evaluate our operating performance, to establish budgets, and to establish operational goals for managing our business. We therefore do not believe that the covenant requirements provide useful information to investors or others in enhancing an understanding of our future prospects.
● Default Provisions. The Credit Agreement provides for customary events of default, including events of default based on non-payment of amounts due under the Credit Agreement, defaults on other debt, misrepresentations, covenant breaches, changes of control, insolvency, bankruptcy and the occurrence of a material adverse effect on the Company. Upon an event of default resulting from a voluntary or involuntary proceeding for bankruptcy, insolvency or receivership, the amounts outstanding under the Credit Agreement will become immediately due and payable and the Lender’s commitments will be automatically terminated. Upon the occurrence and continuation of any other event of default, the Lender may accelerate payment of all obligations and terminate the Lender’s commitments under the Credit Agreement. Upon an acceleration of payment following an event of default occurring prior to September 4, 2021, the amounts due and payable by us will include a prepayment premium on accelerated principal in the amount described under “-Optional Prepayment” above.
We were in compliance with the cash balance and revenue financial covenants as of December 31, 2020.
Equity and Equity-Related Securities. We raised additional capital from an underwritten public offering of common stock in 2020 in the amount of $28.4 million (net of expenses).
Research and Development Awards. We routinely seek research and development programs that may be awarded by government, non-governmental organizations, and non-profit entities, including private foundations. Since 2015 we have received over $14.2 million of funding from some of the world’s leading health organizations, which has helped us accelerate the expansion of our pipeline of infectious disease tests. Our collaborators have included Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, The Paul G. Allen Family Foundation, FIOCRUZ and FIND, as well as U.S. government agencies such as Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority or BARDA, and the U.S. Department of Agriculture. See “Item 1. Business-Products” above. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized grant revenue totaling $2 million from government, non-governmental organizations, and non-profit entities.
Working Capital. The following table sets forth selected working capital information:
On December 2, 2020, we were awarded a contract of $12.7 million from BARDA to assist us in (a) developing, and requesting an EUA from the FDA for, the DPP Respiratory Panel and (b) performing the clinical trials for and submitting the DPP SARS-CoV-2 Antigen system to the FDA for a 510(k).
Our cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020, which included a restricted amount of $1.0 million, were held for working capital purposes. We currently intend to retain all available funds and any future earnings for use in the operation of our business and do not anticipate paying any cash dividends. We have not entered into, and do not expect to enter into, investments for trading or speculative purposes. Our accounts receivable and inventory balances fluctuate from period to period, which affects our cash flow from operating activities. Fluctuations vary depending on cash collections, client mix, raw material lead times, the mix of vendor terms, and the timing of shipment of our products and the invoicing of our research and development activities.
Uses of Funds
Cash Flow Used in Operating Activities. Our operations used $18.9 million of cash during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the net loss adjusted for non-cash items of $7.3 million and a $6.5 million increase in inventory related to supply chain timelines, including materials for COVID-19 systems that were ordered but could not be cancelled following the Revocation. Those uses of cash were offset in part by a $3.9 million increase in accounts payable and other accrued liabilities, a $1.5 million increase in deferred revenue, and a $0.3 million reduction in accounts receivable.
Capital Expenditures. Our capital expenditures totaled $4.2 million in 2020, of which $4.0 million related to investments in automated manufacturing equipment, facilities, and other fixed assets.
We have capital purchase obligations of $1.3 million related to additional automated manufacturing equipment with payments expected to come due during 2021 based on vendor performance milestones.
Effects of Inflation
Other than the impact of increases in minimum wage levels in New York, inflation and changing prices have not had a material effect on our business, and we do not expect that they will materially affect our business in the foreseeable future. Any impact of inflation on cost of revenue and operating expenses, especially employee compensation costs (including any effects of future increases in minimum wages levels in New York), may not be readily recoverable in the price of our product offerings.
Q1’21 Restructuring Charge
On January 14, 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors (the “Board”) approved a restructuring plan (“2021 Plan”) to better align its business priorities. The Plan comprises the termination of employees primarily in the manufacturing department. These actions were intended to better align the Company’s cost structure with the skills and resources required to more effectively pursue opportunities in the marketplace and execute the Company’s long-term growth strategy.
Costs associated with the 2021 Plan are primarily related to Severance and Legal costs. Severance payouts are expected to be substantially completed by the end of the six months ending June 30, 2021. Under the 2021 Plan, the Company expects to incur pre-tax charges between approximately $0.1 million and $0.2 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Significant Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies to the audited consolidated financial statements included herein. Certain of our accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by management in selecting the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. These judgments are based on our historical experience, terms of existing contracts, our evaluation of trends in the industry, information provided by our customers and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. We consider an accounting estimate to be critical if (a) it requires us to make assumptions about matters that were uncertain at the time we were making the estimate and (b) changes in the estimate or different estimates that we could have selected would have had a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
The following listing is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all of our accounting policies. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, with no need for management’s judgment in their application. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting any viable alternative would not produce a materially different result.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue for product sales in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Revenues from product sales are recognized when the customer obtains control of our product, which occurs at a point in time, typically upon tendering to the customer. We expense incremental costs of obtaining a contract as and when incurred because the expected amortization period of the asset that it would have recognized is one year or less or the amount is immaterial. Freight and distribution activities on products are performed after the customer obtains control of the goods. We have made an accounting policy election to account for shipping and handling activities that occur either when or after goods are tendered to the customer as a fulfillment activity, and therefore recognizes freight and distribution expenses in cost of product sales. We exclude certain taxes from the transaction price (e.g., sales, value added and some excise taxes).
Product revenue reserves, which are classified as a reduction in product revenue, are generally related to discounts and returns. Estimates of variable consideration and the determination of whether to include estimated amounts in the transaction price are based on all information (historical, current, and forecasted) that is reasonably available to the Company, taking into consideration the type of customer, the type of transaction, market events and trends, and the specific facts and circumstances of each arrangement. The transaction price, which includes variable consideration reflecting the impact of discounts, allowances and returns may be subject to constraint and is included in the net sales price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period. Actual amounts may ultimately differ from the Company’s estimates. If actual results vary, the Company adjusts these estimates, which could have an effect on revenue and earnings in the period of adjustment.
For applicable contracts, we recognize revenue from research and development, milestone and grant revenues when earned. Grants are invoiced after expenses are incurred. Revenues from projects or grants funded in advance are deferred until earned. For certain collaborative research projects, we recognize revenue by defining milestones at the inception of the agreement and applying judgement and estimates in recognizing revenue for relevant contracts.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize the fair value of equity-based awards as compensation expense in our consolidated statement of operations. The fair value of restricted stock and restricted stock unit awards are their fair value on the date of grant. The fair value of our stock option awards was estimated using a Black-Scholes option valuation model. This valuation model’s computations incorporate subjective assumptions, such as the expected stock price volatility and the estimated life of each award. The fair value of equity-based awards, after considering the effect of expected forfeitures, is then amortized, generally on a straight-line basis, over the related vesting period of the option.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development activities consist primarily of new product development, continuing engineering for existing products, and regulatory and clinical trial costs. Costs related to research and development efforts on existing or potential products are expensed/accrued as incurred.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value with cost being determined using a standard cost method, which approximates average cost. Average cost consists primarily of material, labor and manufacturing overhead expenses (including fixed production-overhead costs). The Company analyzes its inventory levels quarterly and writes down, in the applicable period, inventory that has become obsolete, inventory that has a cost basis in excess of its expected net realizable value and inventory in excess of expected customer demand. The Company also writes off, in the applicable period, the costs related to expired inventory. Costs of purchased inventories are recorded using weighted-average costing.
Accounts Receivable
Our policy is to review our accounts receivable on a periodic basis, no less frequently than monthly. On a quarterly basis an analysis is made of the adequacy of our allowance for doubtful accounts and adjustments are made accordingly. The allowance was approximately 0.6% of accounts receivable as of December 31, 2020.
Goodwill and Indefinite-lived Intangible Assets
We periodically review goodwill for impairment indicators. We review goodwill for impairment annually in the fourth quarter or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired. We perform the goodwill impairment review at the reporting unit level. We perform a qualitative assessment of whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. If not, no further goodwill impairment testing is performed. If so, we perform the step discussed hereafter. Our qualitative assessment involves significant estimates, assumptions, and judgments, including, macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, our financial performance, reporting unit specific events and changes in our share price.
If the fair value of the reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount, goodwill is not considered to be impaired. We would recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, provided the impairment charge does not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment annually during the first fiscal quarter of the year, and when events or changes in circumstances indicate the assets might be impaired. Impairment is indicated when the carrying value of the intangible asset exceeds its fair value.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies to the audited consolidated financial statements included herein for a complete description of recent accounting standards that we have not yet been required to implement which may be applicable to our operations. Additionally, the significant accounting standards that have been adopted during the year ended December 31, 2020 are described.