Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) provides information that management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of the consolidated financial condition and results of operations of Century Aluminum Company and its subsidiaries (collectively, “Century,” the “Company,” “our” and “we”) and should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data and in Item 1A. Risk Factors. This MD&A contains “forward-looking statements” - See “Forward-Looking Statements” above.
Overview
We are a global producer of primary aluminum with aluminum reduction facilities, or "smelters," in the United States and Iceland. The key determinants of our results of operations and cash flow from operations are as follows:
•the price of primary aluminum, which is based on the London Metal Exchange ("LME") and other exchanges, plus any regional premiums and value-added product premiums;
•the cost of goods sold, the principal components of which are electrical power, alumina, carbon products and labor, which in aggregate represent more than 75% of our cost of goods sold; and
•our production volume.
COVID-19 Update
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have taken a number of actions to protect the health and well-being of our employees and to prevent the spread of COVID-19 within our operations. As a result, our plants have not experienced any disruption in operations as a result of the pandemic, and we continue to sell all of our metal essentially as it is cast.
The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted the global economy and created significant volatility in the primary aluminum industry. Such adverse impacts to the global market include the drop in the LME price for primary aluminum to $1,457 in April 2020 from $1,772 at the start of 2020. However, we have seen some measurable improvement in the global market for primary aluminum along with an increase in the price for our product and a return to more stability in the market in which we operate in recent months. The LME price for primary aluminum averaged $1,702 per tonne for 2020 as compared to an average of $1,792 for 2019, due in part to the impacts that COVID-19 had on the LME price during 2020. Because we sell our product on a one- to three-month lag to current prices, our results reflect the LME price on this one to three month lag basis. Customer demand for value-added aluminum products and, in turn, the product premium we receive for such products, also have generally returned to first quarter 2020 levels after having been negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Decreases in the prices of our products have also been partially offset by decreases in the prices of our key cost inputs.
We have taken actions to mitigate the financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including reducing discretionary spending, optimizing working capital and deferring non-essential capital projects. The potential future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, results of operations and financial performance is difficult to predict and will depend on future developments, and such effects could exist for an extended period of time. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for additional information on the potential risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Pricing of aluminum
The overall price of primary aluminum consists of three components: (i) the base commodity price, which is based on quoted prices on the LME and other exchanges; plus (ii) any regional premium (e.g., the Midwest premium for metal sold in the United States ("MWP") and the European Duty Paid premium for metal sold into Europe); plus (iii) any product premium. Each of these price components has its own drivers and variability.
The aluminum price is influenced by a number of factors, including global supply-demand balance, inventory levels, speculative activities by market participants, production activities by competitors and political and economic conditions, as well as production costs in major production regions. These factors can be highly speculative and difficult to predict which can lead to significant volatility in the aluminum price. Increases or decreases in primary aluminum prices result in increases and decreases in our revenues (assuming all other factors are unchanged). Information regarding financial contracts is included in Note 19. Derivatives.
The historic volatility of the price of aluminum is reflected in the chart below:
The average LME price for primary aluminum was $1,702 per tonne in 2020, compared to $1,792 per tonne in 2019, and $2,110 in 2018. The average MWP price was $267 per tonne in 2020 compared to $396 per tonne in 2019 and $420 per tonne in 2018. The average European Duty Paid premium was $126 per tonne in 2020 compared to $142 per tonne in 2019 and $164 per tonne in 2018. We did see a decline in LME, MWP, and European Duty Paid premium prices beginning in the first half of 2020, with the LME price for primary aluminum falling from $1,772 per tonne, MWP price of $320 per tonne, and European Duty Paid premium price of $140 per tonne as of January 2, 2020 to $1,433, $176, and $98, respectively by May 15, 2020. There were improvements in the global markets through the second half of 2020 resulting in an increase in LME, MWP and European Duty Paid premium prices by the end of 2020, with the LME price for primary aluminum at $1,978 per tonne, MWP price at $323 per tonne and European Duty Paid premium at $150 per tonne as of December 31, 2020.
Energy, Key Supplies and Raw Materials
Our operating costs are significantly impacted by changes in the prices of the materials used in the production of aluminum, including alumina, electrical power and carbon products. Because we sell our products based principally on the LME price for primary aluminum, regional premiums and product premiums, we are unable to pass increased production costs on to our customers. Although we attempt to mitigate the effects of price fluctuations from time to time through the use of various fixed-price commitments, financial instruments and also by negotiating LME-based pricing in some of our raw materials and electrical power contracts, these efforts also limit our ability to take advantage of favorable changes in the market prices for primary aluminum or raw materials and may affect our financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
Alumina and electrical power represent the two largest components of our cost of goods sold. As a result, the availability of these cost components at competitive prices is critical to the profitability of our operations. The pricing under our alumina supply contracts is variable. A major portion of our alumina requirements is indexed to the price of primary aluminum, which provides a natural hedge to one of our largest production costs. We also purchase alumina based on a published alumina index and at fixed prices. The alumina price is influenced by a number of factors, including global supply-demand balance and other factors outside of our control. Various external events in the alumina markets during 2018 caused significant increases in the price of alumina resulting in the ratio of alumina prices to aluminum prices to well exceed historical levels, which persisted throughout 2018 and much of 2019. By the end of 2019, the relationship between alumina and aluminum prices returned to historical levels following the resolution of these supply dislocations and remained stable during 2020. The average market
alumina index price as a percentage of market LME price per tonne for 2020 was 16% compared to 19% for 2019 and 22% for 2018.
Electrical power is our other largest operating cost. Currently, our Hawesville and Sebree plants receive all of their electricity requirements under market-based power agreements. In the U.S., market-based energy prices are driven in large part by coal, natural gas, wind, and other fuel sources, as well as weather influenced electric loads. Extreme weather events, such as that experienced in mid-February 2021 throughout the United States, can result in power outages and/or significant increases in demand, which can result in significant increased power costs incurred in our operations.
Our Mt. Holly aluminum smelter is currently party to both a power agreement with a third party supplier (providing 75% of Mt. Holly's power) and with Santee Cooper (supplying 25% of Mt. Holly's power) to supply the Mt. Holly smelter with all its power needs. Both of these power agreements were set to expire on December 31, 2020 but were extended through March 31, 2021 as we finalize a new, three-year power arrangement with Santee Cooper that is expected to be effective April 1, 2021. It is expected that under the new power contract with Santee Cooper, 100% of Mt. Holly's electrical power requirements will be supplied from Santee Cooper's generation at cost of service based rates. The new contract with Santee Cooper is expected to provide sufficient energy to allow the smelter to increase its current production to 75% of Mt. Holly's full production capacity. If we are unable to finalize this proposed new power contract with Santee Cooper and obtain all necessary government approvals, we may choose, or be forced, to further curtail operations at the plant. See Item 1A. Risk Factors.
In Iceland, approximately 70% of the power requirements for our Grundartangi plant is indexed to the price of primary aluminum, which provides a natural hedge of one of our largest production costs. Since November 2019, the price of the remaining 30% of Grundartangi’s power requirements has been linked to the market price for power in the Nord Pool power market, the trading market for power in the Nordic countries and certain other areas of Europe.
Production/Shipment Volumes
Shipment volume is another key determinant of our financial results. In normal circumstances, fluctuations in production and shipment volumes, other than through acquisitions or expansions, are generally small period over period. Any adverse changes in the conditions that affect shipment volumes could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and cash flows.
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, the shipment volumes and revenues for primary aluminum shipments:
(1) Excludes scrap aluminum and alumina sales
Results of Operations
The following discussion for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects restart activity at Hawesville and no change in production capacities at our other operating facilities.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net sales: Net sales (excluding alumina sales) decreased by $220.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, primarily driven by unfavorable LME and regional premium price realizations of $188.6 million and unfavorable volume and product mix of $31.6 million.
Gross profit (loss): Gross loss increased by $12.6 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, primarily driven by unfavorable LME and regional premium price realizations of $188.6 million. The increases to gross loss were offset by favorable raw material price realizations of $178.6 million.
Selling, general and administrative expenses: Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $3.9 million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to decreases in compensation cost in the current year, partially offset by increases in professional fees.
Net (gain) loss on forward and derivative contracts: In 2020, we recognized losses of $17.3 million primarily related to LME, MWP and Nord Pool fixed forward financial sales contracts. The losses were primarily driven by fluctuations in forward prices. In 2019, we had recognized gains of $12.0 million primarily related to LME and MWP fixed forward financial sales contracts. The gains were primarily driven by decreases in the LME and MWP prices during 2019.
Income tax expense (benefit): We have a valuation allowance against all of our U.S. and certain foreign deferred tax assets. We recognized a $3.1 million income tax benefit in 2020 as compared to income tax benefit of $8.4 million in 2019. The decrease in income tax benefit year over year primarily relates to an increase in earnings of certain of our foreign entities.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
Net sales: Net sales for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 decreased $56.6 million compared to the same period in 2018, driven by lower price realizations of $249.5 million primarily resulting from decreases in the LME price offset by $136.2 million in favorable volume and product mix year over year.
Gross profit: Gross profit for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 decreased $1.0 million compared to the same period in 2018, driven primarily by lower price realizations of $249.5 million due to decreases in the LME. The decrease to gross profit is offset by favorable price realizations of alumina and other raw materials of $170.7 million, power price realizations of $47.2 million, volume and product mix of $24.2 million, and operating expenses of $5.6 million.
Selling, general and administrative expenses: Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $7.2 million in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to increases in compensation cost in the current year (favorable stock compensation expense in 2018, reflecting our lower stock price).
Net (gain) loss on forward and derivative contracts: In 2019, we recognized gains of $12.0 million primarily related to LME and MWP fixed forward financial sales contracts. The gains were primarily driven by decreases in the LME and MWP prices during 2019. In 2018, we recognized gains of $6.3 million primarily related to Nord Pool and LME fixed forward financial sales contracts which settle from November 2019 through December 2020. These gains were primarily driven by the increase in the Nord Pool price.
Income tax expense (benefit): We have a valuation allowance against all of our U.S. and certain foreign deferred tax assets. We recognized an $8.4 million income tax benefit in 2019 as compared to income tax benefit of $0.2 million in 2018. The increase in income tax benefit year over year primarily relates to a decrease in earnings of certain of our foreign entities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Our principal sources of liquidity are available cash and cash flow from operations. We also have access to our existing revolving credit facilities and have raised capital in the past through public equity and debt markets. We regularly explore various other financing alternatives. Our principal uses of cash include the funding of operating costs (including post-retirement benefits), debt service requirements, capital expenditures, investments in our growth activities and in related businesses, working capital and other general corporate requirements.
We believe that cash provided from operations and financing activities will be adequate to cover our operations and business needs over the next 12 months. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $81.6 million and unused availability under our revolving credit facilities of $100.6 million, resulting in a total liquidity position of approximately $182.2 million.
Adverse changes in the price of aluminum or our principal costs of production could materially impact our ability to generate and raise cash. Furthermore, the COVID-19 pandemic could continue to impact the economy which may impact the price of our products as well as our ability to access capital and/or the terms under which we can do so. In 2020, we took preemptive action to preserve our liquidity and manage our cash flow. Such actions include reducing discretionary spending, optimizing working capital and deferring non-essential capital projects. To preserve liquidity in light of the uncertainty in the global markets due to COVID-19, in March 2020, we drew down a total of $90.0 million under our U.S. and Iceland revolving credit facilities. We have since repaid $45.0 million on our U.S. revolving credit facility. As of December 31, 2020, the remaining outstanding borrowings on the Iceland revolving credit facility were $45.0 million. We also effectively extended the maturities of our principal debt obligations. On July 1, 2020, we issued $250.0 million in aggregate principal amount of our senior secured notes that will mature in 2025 (the "2025 Notes") and used the proceeds, together with cash on hand, to purchase all of our 7.5% senior secured notes that were set to mature in 2021 (the "2021 Notes"). In connection with the offering of the 2025 Notes, we also entered into Amendment No.1 to our U.S. revolving credit facility extending the maturity date to May 16, 2023. As the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and our operations is fluid and constantly evolving, we will continue to assess a variety of measures to improve our financial performance and liquidity. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for additional information.
Available Cash
Our available cash and cash equivalents balance at December 31, 2020 was $81.6 million compared to $38.9 million at December 31, 2019.
Sources and Uses of Cash
Our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities as reflected in the consolidated statement of cash flows for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 are summarized below:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net cash provided by operating activities for 2020 was $42.9 million, compared to $17.7 million for 2019. The increase in net cash provided by operating activities was primarily driven by improvements in working capital. The improvements in working capital were primarily attributable to timing of raw material receipts and the timing of trade receivable collections, offset by increasing raw material prices.
The decrease in net cash used in investing activities during 2020 was due to lower capital expenditures related to Hawesville restart activities and deferral of capital projects in response to COVID-19.
Net cash provided by financing activities decreased by $7.6 million during 2020 primarily due to payments made on our term loan with Glencore Ltd. ("the Hawesville Term Loan"), offset by net borrowings on our U.S. revolving credit facility and Iceland revolving credit facility. Borrowings on our revolving credit facilities are available, if needed, for working capital requirements, general corporate or other purposes.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
Net cash provided by operating activities for 2019 was $17.7 million, compared to net cash used in operating activities of $69.1 million for 2018. The increase in net cash provided by operating activities was primarily driven by lower inventory costs and a decrease in accounts receivable due to timing of receivable collections.
The decrease in net cash used in investing activities was due to lower capital expenditures related to Hawesville restart activities and the receipt of $20.8 million from the sale of our interest in Baise Haohai Carbon Co., Ltd. ("BHH"), a former joint venture with Guangxi Qiangqiang Carbon Co., Ltd. ("GQQ") during 2019.
Net cash provided by financing activities decreased by $2.6 million during 2019 due to lower net borrowings under our U.S. revolving credit facility, offset by proceeds from the Hawesville Term Loan. Borrowings on our U.S. revolving credit facility are short term in nature to fund working capital requirements and are repaid on a continuous basis. Borrowings on our Hawesville Term Loan are required to be paid ratably over 24 months beginning in January 2020 and are used to partially finance the second phase of the Hawesville restart project.
Availability Under Our Credit Facilities
The U.S. revolving credit facility, dated May 2018, provides for borrowings of up to $175.0 million in the aggregate including up to $110.0 million under a letter of credit sub-facility, and also includes an uncommitted accordion feature whereby borrowers may increase the capacity of the U.S. revolving credit facility by up to $50.0 million, subject to agreement with the lenders. The U.S. revolving credit facility matures in May 2023. Any letters of credit issued and outstanding under the U.S. revolving credit facility reduce our borrowing availability on a dollar-for-dollar basis.
We have also entered into, through our wholly-owned subsidiary Nordural Grundartangi ehf ("Grundartangi"), a $50.0 million revolving credit facility, dated November 2013, as amended (the "Iceland revolving credit facility"). The Iceland revolving credit facility matures in November 2022.
The availability of funds under our credit facilities is limited by a specified borrowing base consisting of certain accounts receivable, inventory and qualified cash deposits which meet the lenders' eligibility criteria. Increases in the price of aluminum and/or restarts of previously curtailed operations, for example, increase our borrowing base by increasing our accounts receivable and inventory balances; decreases in the price of aluminum and/or curtailments of production capacity would decrease our borrowing base by reducing our accounts receivable and inventory balances. As of December 31, 2020, our U.S. revolving credit facility had a borrowing base of $129.9 million, no outstanding borrowings, and $34.3 million in letters of credit outstanding. Of the outstanding letters of credit, $16.2 million related to our power commitments and the remainder are primarily for the purpose of securing secured certain debt and workers’ compensation commitments. As of December 31, 2020, our Iceland revolving credit facility had a borrowing base of $50.0 million and $45.0 million in outstanding borrowings.
As of December 31, 2020, our credit facilities had $100.6 million of net availability after consideration of our outstanding borrowings and letters of credit. We may borrow and make repayments under our credit facilities in the ordinary course based on a number of factors, including the timing of payments from our customers and payments to our suppliers.
Our credit facilities contain customary covenants, including restrictions on mergers and acquisitions, indebtedness, affiliate transactions, liens, dividends and distributions, dispositions of collateral, investments and prepayments of indebtedness, including in the U.S. revolving credit facility, a springing financial covenant that requires us to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio of at least 1.0 to 1.0 any time availability under the U.S. revolving credit facility is less than or equal to $17.5 million, or 10% of the borrowing base but not less than $12.5 million. We intend to maintain availability to comply with these levels any time we would not meet the ratio, which could limit our ability to access the full amount of our availability under our U.S. revolving credit facility. Our Iceland revolving credit facility contains a covenant that requires Grundartangi to maintain a minimum equity ratio. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all such covenants or maintained availability above such covenant triggers.
Senior Secured Notes
We have $250.0 million aggregate principal of senior secured notes that will mature on July 1, 2025 (the "2025 Notes"), unless earlier refinanced in accordance with their terms. Interest on the 2025 Notes is payable semi-annually on January 1 and July 1 of each year, beginning on January 1, 2021, at a rate of (i) 10.00% per annum in cash and (ii) 2.00% per annum in the form of additional notes or in cash, at Century's option. The indenture governing the 2025 Notes contains customary covenants which may limit our ability, and the ability of certain of our subsidiaries, to: (i) incur additional debt; (ii) incur additional liens; (iii) pay dividends or make distributions in respect of capital stock; (iv) purchase or redeem capital stock; (v) make investments or certain other restricted payments; (vi) sell assets; (vii) issue or sell stock of certain subsidiaries; (viii) enter into transactions with shareholders or affiliates; and (ix) effect a consolidation or merger.
We applied the net proceeds from the offering of the 2025 Notes described above, together with cash on hand, toward payment of the total consideration amount to holders whose 2021 Notes were accepted and purchased in the tender offer and to fund the redemption of any remaining 2021 Notes. As a result, the Company's and the guarantors' obligations under the indenture governing the 2021 Notes have been fully discharged.
Hawesville Term Loan
On April 29, 2019, we entered into a term loan agreement with Glencore Ltd. pursuant to which the Company borrowed $40.0 million. Borrowings under the Hawesville Term Loan were used to partially finance the second phase of the Hawesville restart project. The Hawesville Term Loan matures on December 31, 2021, and is being repaid in 24 equal monthly installments of principal that began on January 31, 2020. The Hawesville Term Loan bears interest, due monthly, at a floating rate equal to LIBOR plus 5.375% per annum. The Hawesville Term Loan is not secured by any collateral. As of December 31, 2020, the outstanding balance of the Hawesville Term Loan was $20.0 million.
Contingent Commitments
We have a contingent obligation in connection with the “unwind” of a contractual arrangement between Century Aluminum Kentucky ("CAKY"), Big Rivers and a third party and the execution of a long-term cost-based power contract with Kenergy, a member of a cooperative of Big Rivers, in July 2009. This contingent obligation consists of the aggregate payments made to Big Rivers by the third party on CAKY’s behalf in excess of the agreed upon base amount under the long-term cost-based power contract with Kenergy. As of December 31, 2020, the principal and accrued interest for the contingent obligation was $26.6 million, which was fully offset by a derivative asset. We may be required to make installment payments for the contingent obligation in the future. These payments are contingent based on the LME price of primary aluminum and the level of Hawesville’s operations. Based on the LME forward market at December 31, 2020 and management’s estimate of the LME forward market beyond the quoted market period, we believe that we will not be required to make payments on the contingent obligation during the term of the agreement, which expires in 2028. There can be no assurance that circumstances will not change thus accelerating the timing of such payments.
Employee Benefit Plan Contributions
In 2013, we entered into a settlement agreement with the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation ("PBGC") regarding an alleged "cessation of operations" at our Ravenswood facility. Pursuant to the terms of the agreement, we agreed to make additional contributions (above any minimum required contributions) to our defined benefit pension plans totaling approximately $17.4 million. Under certain circumstances, in periods of lower primary aluminum prices relative to our cost of operations, we are able to defer one or more of these payments, but would then be required to provide the PBGC with acceptable security for deferred payments. We did not make any contributions during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. We have elected to defer certain payments under the PBGC agreement and have provided the PBGC with the appropriate security. The remaining contributions under this agreement are approximately $9.6 million.
Section 232 Aluminum Tariff
On March 23, 2018, the U.S. implemented a 10% tariff on imported primary aluminum products into the U.S. These tariffs are intended to protect U.S. national security by incentivizing the restart of primary aluminum production in the U.S., reducing reliance on imports and ensuring that domestic producers, like Century, can supply all the aluminum necessary for critical industries and national defense. In addition to primary aluminum products, the tariffs also cover certain other semi-finished products. All imports that directly compete with our products are covered by the tariff, with the exception of imports from Australia, Argentina, Canada, and Mexico or imports that receive a product exclusion from the Department of Commerce.
Other Items
In December 2020, we announced a preliminary agreement with Santee Cooper on a new three year power agreement that is expected to be effective on April 1, 2021. This new power contract is expected to provide sufficient energy to allow the smelter to increase its production to 75% of Mt. Holly's full production capacity. We anticipate spending approximately $50.0 million in 2021 to bring Mt. Holly's annualized production capacity to 170,000 tonnes. For certain risks related to the anticipated restart, see Item 1A. Risk Factors.
In March 2018, we announced our intention to return our Hawesville smelter, which since 2015 had been operating at approximately 40% capacity, to full production and upgrade its existing reduction technology. The first phase of the project,
which involved the restart of the three potlines and approximately 150,000 tonnes of production capacity that had been curtailed in 2015, was successfully completed on budget and ahead of schedule in early 2019. The second phase of the project involves the rebuilding of the pots from the two potlines that had continued to operate past their expected life cycle and the implementation of certain new technology across all production. These two potlines were taken out of production in February and September 2019, respectively. The rebuild of the first of these potlines was completed in the second quarter of 2020. With the restart of this potline, the Hawesville smelter is currently operating at approximately 80% production capacity, with total project costs to date of approximately $108.3 million. The rebuild of the fifth and final potline and the completion of the technology upgrades is expected to be completed over the next several years, subject to market conditions.
In May 2018, we temporarily curtailed one potline at our Sebree aluminum smelter due to an equipment failure. Sebree was returned to full capacity by the end of the third quarter of 2018. As of December 31, 2020, we received $19.9 million of insurance proceeds. In January 2021, the claims process was concluded and a final payment of $1.4 million of insurance proceeds was received on January 21, 2021.
In 2011, our Board of Directors approved a $60.0 million common stock repurchase program and subsequently increased this program by $70.0 million in the first quarter of 2015. Under the program, Century is authorized to repurchase up to $130.0 million of our outstanding shares of common stock, from time to time, on the open market at prevailing market prices, in block trades or otherwise. The timing and amount of any shares repurchased will be determined by our management based on its evaluation of market conditions, the trading price of our common stock and other factors. We made no repurchases during the years ended 2020, 2019, and 2018. As of December 31, 2020, we had $43.7 million remaining under the repurchase program authorization. The repurchase program may be expanded, suspended or discontinued by our Board, in its sole discretion, at any time.
In November 2009, Century Aluminum of West Virginia, Inc. ("CAWV") filed a class action complaint for declaratory judgment against the United Steel, Paper and Forestry, Rubber, Manufacturing, Energy, Allied Industrial and Service Workers International Union ("USW"), the USW’s local and certain CAWV retirees, individually and as class representatives ("CAWV Retirees"), seeking a declaration of CAWV’s rights to modify/terminate retiree medical benefits. Later in November 2009, the USW and representatives of a retiree class filed a separate suit against CAWV, Century Aluminum Company, Century Aluminum Master Welfare Benefit Plan, and various John Does with respect to the foregoing. On August 18, 2017, the District Court for the Southern District of West Virginia approved a settlement agreement in respect of these actions, pursuant to which, CAWV agreed to make payments into a trust for the benefit of the CAWV Retirees in the aggregate amount of $23.0 million over the course of ten years. Upon approval of the settlement, we paid $5.0 million to the aforementioned trust in September 2017 and agreed to pay the remaining amounts under the settlement agreement in annual increments of $2.0 million for nine years. At December 31, 2020, we had $2.0 million in other current liabilities and $7.5 million in other liabilities related to this agreement.
We are a defendant in several actions relating to various aspects of our business. While it is impossible to predict the ultimate disposition of any litigation, we do not believe that any of these lawsuits, either individually or in the aggregate, will have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations or liquidity. See Note 15. Commitments and Contingencies to the consolidated financial statements included herein for additional information.
Capital Resources
We intend to finance our future capital expenditures from available cash, cash flow from operations and if necessary, borrowings under our existing revolving credit facilities. For major investment projects, we would likely seek financing from various capital and loan markets and may potentially pursue the formation of strategic alliances. We may be unable, however, to issue additional debt or equity securities, or enter into other financing arrangements on attractive terms, or at all, due to a number of factors including a lack of demand, unfavorable pricing, poor economic conditions, unfavorable interest rates, or our financial condition or credit rating at the time. Future uncertainty in the U.S. and international markets and economies may adversely affect our liquidity, our ability to access the debt or capital markets and our financial condition.
Capital expenditures incurred for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $8.7 million, excluding expenditures of $5.6 million associated with the restart at Hawesville. We estimate our total capital spending excluding the Mt. Holly restart project in 2021 will be approximately $25.0 million, related to our ongoing investment and sustainability projects at our plants.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the consolidated financial statements. The preparation of the financial statements requires that management make judgments, assumptions and estimates in applying these accounting policies. Those judgments are normally based on knowledge and experience about past and current events and on assumptions about future events. Critical accounting estimates require management to make assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time of the estimate and a change in these estimates may have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations. Significant judgments and estimates made by our management include expenses and liabilities related to inventories, pensions and other postretirement benefits ("OPEB"), deferred tax assets and property, plant and equipment. Our management has discussed the development and selection of these critical accounting estimates with the audit committee of our Board of Directors and the Audit Committee has reviewed our disclosure.
Inventories
Our inventories are stated at lower of cost or net realizable value ("NRV").
Our estimate of the market value of our inventories involves establishing a net realizable value for both finished goods and the components of inventory that will be converted to finished goods, raw materials and work in process. This requires management to use its judgment when making assumptions about future selling prices and the costs to complete our inventory during the period in which it will be sold.
Our assumptions are subject to inherent uncertainties given the volatility surrounding the market price for primary aluminum sales and the market price for our major inputs, alumina and electrical power.
Although we believe that the assumptions used to estimate the market value of our inventory are reasonable, actual market conditions at the time our inventory is sold may be more or less favorable than management’s current estimates.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Liabilities
We sponsor several pension and other OPEB plans. Our liabilities under these defined benefit plans are determined using methodologies that involve several actuarial assumptions, the most significant of which are the discount rate, health care cost inflation rate and the long-term rate of return on plan assets. We review our actuarial assumptions on an annual basis and make modifications to the assumptions when appropriate.
Discount Rate Selection
We select a discount rate for purposes of measuring obligations under defined benefit plans by matching cash flows separately for each plan to the yields on high-quality zero coupon bonds. We use the Ryan Above Median Yield Curve (the "Ryan Curve"). We believe the projected cash flows used to determine the Ryan Curve rate provide a good approximation of the timing and amounts of our defined benefit payments under our plans and no adjustment to the Ryan Curve rate has been made.
A change of a half percentage point in the discount rate for our defined benefit plans would have the following effects on our obligations under these plans as of December 31, 2020:
Medical Trend Rate
Measurement of our postretirement benefit obligations requires the use of several assumptions about factors that will affect the amount and timing of future benefit payments. The assumed health care cost trend rates are the most critical estimates for measurement of the postretirement benefit obligation. Changes in the health care cost trend rates have a significant effect on the amounts reported for the health care benefit obligation.
Medical cost inflation is initially estimated to be 6.1% and 6.7% for pre and post-65 participants, respectively, declining to 4.5% over ten years and thereafter. A one-percentage-point change in the assumed health care cost trend rate would have had the following effects in 2020:
Long-term Rate of Return on Plan Assets Assumption
Our expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is derived from our asset allocation strategies and anticipated future long-term performance of individual asset classes. Our analysis gives consideration to recent plan performance and historical returns; however, the assumptions are primarily based on long-term, prospective rates of return. The weighted average long-term rate of return on plan assets for our defined benefit pension plans is 7.25% for 2020.
Based on information provided by independent actuaries and other relevant sources, the Company believes that the assumptions used to estimate expenses, assets and liabilities of pensions and other postretirement benefits are reasonable; however, changes in these assumptions could impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Deferred Income Tax Assets
We regularly assess the likelihood that deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income. To the extent we believe that it is more likely than not that a deferred tax asset will not be realized, a valuation allowance is established. The amount of a valuation allowance is based upon our best estimate of our ability to realize the net deferred tax assets. We have a valuation allowance of $499.4 million recorded for all of our U.S. deferred tax assets and a portion of our Icelandic deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020.
Property, Plant and Equipment Impairment
We review our property, plant and equipment for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of these assets (asset group) may not be recoverable. The carrying amount of the assets (asset group) is not recoverable if it exceeds the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the assets (asset group). In that case, an impairment loss would be recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the assets (asset group), with the fair value determined using a discounted cash flow calculation. These estimates of future cash flows include management’s assumptions about the expected use of the assets (asset group), the remaining useful life, expenditures to maintain the service potential, market and cost assumptions.
Determination as to whether and how much an asset is impaired involves significant management judgment involving highly uncertain matters, including estimating the future sales volumes, future selling prices and estimated raw material and conversion costs, alternative uses for the asset, and estimated proceeds from the disposal of the asset.
Other Contingencies
We are a defendant in several actions relating to various aspects of our business. While it is impossible to predict the ultimate disposition of any litigation, we do not believe that any of these lawsuits, either individually or in the aggregate, will have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations or liquidity. See Note 15. Commitments and Contingencies to the consolidated financial statements included herein for additional information.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards Updates
Information regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements is included in Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the consolidated financial statements included herein.
Contractual Obligations
In the normal course of business, we have entered into various contractual obligations that will be settled in cash. These obligations consist primarily of long-term debt obligations and purchase obligations. The expected future cash flows required to meet these obligations through the year 2029 are shown in the table below. More information is available about these contractual obligations in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included herein.
(1)Long-term debt includes principal repayments on our 2025 Notes, Hawesville Term Loan, Iceland Revolving Credit facility, and the IRB. Payments are based on the assumption that all outstanding debt instruments will remain outstanding until their respective due dates. For our contingent obligation, based on the LME forward market prices for primary aluminum at December 31, 2020, we believe that we will not have any payment obligations through the term of the agreement, which expires in 2028.
(2)Estimated interest payments on our long-term debt assume that all outstanding debt instruments will remain outstanding until their respective due dates. Our estimated future interest payments for any debt with a variable rate are based on the assumption that the December 31, 2020 rate for that debt continues until the respective due date. We assume that no interest payments on the contingent obligation will be paid through the term of agreement, see above.
(3)Operating leases include long-term leases for land, office space, automobiles, and mobile equipment.
(4)Purchase obligations include long-term alumina and power contracts, excluding market-based power and raw material requirements contracts. Purchase obligations not executed or legally binding as of December 31, 2020 have been excluded from this table. For contracts with LME-based pricing provisions, including our long-term Icelandic power contracts, we assumed an LME price using the LME forward curve as of December 31, 2020.
(5)Other long-term liabilities include asset retirement obligations. Asset retirement obligations are primarily estimated disposal costs for spent potliner used in the reduction cells of our domestic smelters.
Material Commitments
We also have outstanding commitments related to pension, supplemental executive retirement benefit ("SERB") plans, OPEB and workers' compensation obligations. As of December 31, 2020, estimated future payments related to these obligations through the year 2030 amount to approximately $186.1 million, $16.5 million, $61.7 million and $9.8 million, respectively.