Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying footnotes, and Part I, Item 1. Business - Assets.
A comparative discussion of our 2019 operating results to our 2018 operating results can be found in Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 filed with the SEC on February 21, 2020.
Overview
We own and operate crude oil, natural gas and NGL midstream assets and operations. Headquartered in Houston, Texas, we are a fully-integrated midstream solution provider that specializes in connecting shale-based energy supplies to key demand markets. We conduct our operations through our wholly-owned subsidiary, Crestwood Midstream, a limited partnership that owns and operates gathering, processing, storage, disposal and transportation assets in the most prolific shale plays across the United States.
Our Company
We provide broad-ranging services to customers across the crude oil, natural gas and NGL sector of the energy value chain. Our midstream infrastructure is geographically located in or near significant supply basins, especially developed and emerging liquids-rich and crude oil shale plays, across the United States. We believe that our strategy of focusing on prolific, low-cost shale plays positions us well to (i) generate greater returns in varying commodity price environments, (ii) capture greater upside economics when development activity occurs, and (iii) in general, better manage through commodity price cycles and production changes associated therewith.
Our financial statements reflect three operating and reporting segments: (i) gathering and processing; (ii) storage and transportation; and (iii) marketing, supply and logistics. For a description of the assets included in our operating and reporting segments, see Part I, Item 1. Business.
Gathering and Processing. Our G&P operations provide natural gas, crude oil and produced water gathering, compression, treating, processing and disposal services to producers in multiple unconventional resource plays in some of the largest shale plays in the United States in which we have established footprints in the “core of the core” areas (Bakken, Powder River Basin, Marcellus, Barnett and Delaware Permian).
Storage and Transportation. Our S&T operations provide crude oil and natural gas storage and transportation services to producers, utilities and other customers and consists of our crude oil terminals in the Bakken and Powder River Basin and our natural gas storage and transportation assets in the Northeast and Texas Gulf Coast.
Marketing, Supply and Logistics. Our MS&L segment consists of NGL, crude oil and natural gas marketing and logistics operations, and NGL storage, terminal and transportation (including rail, truck and pipeline) assets which provide integrated supply and logistics solutions to producers, refiners and other customers.
Outlook and Trends
Our business objective is to create long-term value for our unitholders. We expect to create value for our investors by generating stable operating margins and improving cash flows from our diversified midstream operations by prudently financing investments in our assets and expansions of our portfolio, maximizing throughput and optimizing services on our assets, and effectively controlling our capital expenditures, operating and administrative costs.
During 2020, crude oil and other commodity prices decreased significantly due primarily to decreases in energy demand as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken by OPEC, Russia and the United States and other oil-producing countries related to the over-supply of oil. The resulting low commodity price environment adversely impacted U.S. producers and other companies in the energy industry. Despite the recent decline in commodity prices and resulting market conditions, our long-term business strategy has not changed. We have, however, implemented a number of adjustments to our operations and financial strategies in response to these market conditions, including (i) substantially reducing capital expenditures in response to lower development activity by our gathering and processing customers; (ii) realigning our organization to reduce operating and administrative expenses; (iii) engaging with our customers to maintain volumes across our asset portfolio; (iv) optimizing our storage, transportation and marketing assets to take advantage of regional commodity price volatility; (v) acquiring
businesses that synergize with our existing operations and disposing of other non-core businesses; and (vi) evaluating our debt and equity structure to preserve liquidity and ensure balance sheet strength during this period of uncertainty in the energy and financial markets. Given our efforts over the past few years to improve the partnership’s competitive position in the businesses we operate, manage costs and improve margins, create a stronger balance sheet and implement new operating standards consistent with our Environmental, Social and Governance program, we believe the Company is well positioned to execute its business plan and weather current market conditions.
Business Highlights
Below is a discussion of events that highlight our core business activities during the year ended December 31, 2020. Through continued execution of our plan, we have materially improved the strategic and financial position of the Company and expect to capitalize on increasing opportunities in an improving but competitive market environment, which will position us to achieve our chief business objective to create long-term value for our unitholders.
Bakken. In the Bakken, we completed several capital projects that expanded capacity on our natural gas gathering system, and also expanded capacity on our produced water gathering system while replacing several miles of water gathering pipeline with pipe that is composed of higher capacity material that is more suitable for the environment and climate conditions in the Bakken. We believe that the expansion of our Arrow facilities, including the placing in service of the Bear Den II processing plant in late 2019, will allow us to provide greater flow assurance to our producer customers, reduce the flaring of natural gas experienced by producers, and further our commitment to sustainability and environmental stewardship on the Fort Berthold Indian Reservation.
In July 2020, a U.S. District Court (District Court) ordered the Dakota Access Pipeline (DAPL) to cease operation based on an alleged procedural permitting failure. On August 5, 2020, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit (D.C. Circuit) stayed the DAPL shutdown, and set an expedited briefing schedule to determine the merits of the District Court’s decision. The D.C. Circuit issued an opinion on January 26, 2021 which upheld the District Court’s decision on the merits, but did not rule on whether DAPL should be prohibited from continued operation. The plaintiffs have sought another injunction against DAPL’s continued operation, which has been fully briefed before the District Court. After the D.C. Circuit’s January 26, 2021 decision, the District Court scheduled a status conference to be held on April 9, 2021 to determine whether the Army Corps will allow DAPL to continue to operate without a valid easement, and while the Army Corps prepare an Environmental Impact Statement. We continue to monitor these legal proceedings, as well as the Army Corps renewed permitting efforts. We are actively engaged with our producer customers on the Arrow system to ensure downstream market access for their crude oil volumes. The Arrow gathering system currently connects to the DAPL, Hiland and Tesoro pipelines, providing significant downstream delivery capacity for our Arrow customers. Additionally, we can transport Arrow crude volumes to our COLT Hub facility by pipeline or truck, which mitigates the impact to our producers with the ability to access multiple markets out of the basin.
Powder River Basin. In the Powder River Basin, we completed the 200 MMcf/d expansion of our processing capacity at our Bucking Horse facility, which increased our processing capacity to 345 MMcf/d. In addition, we placed in-service two compressor stations with 18,750 horsepower and significantly expanded the gas gathering system to connect numerous wells that had been drilled and completed by our producer customers.
In June 2020, Chesapeake, our customer in the Powder River Basin and northeast Marcellus, filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. In December 2020, Chesapeake filed a motion in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of Texas for authorization to enter into, assume and make all payments under an amended and restated gas gathering and processing contract with us, and Chesapeake emerged from bankruptcy in February 2021. Chesapeake is current on all amounts due to us.
Delaware Permian. In the Delaware Permian, through our Crestwood Permian joint venture, we are expanding our gas gathering systems and continue to optimize processing volumes at our Orla processing plant. Additionally, during 2020, we completed construction and commenced operations of a produced water gathering and salt water disposal system pursuant to an agreement with a large integrated producer in Culberson and Reeves Counties, Texas. The system capacity is 60 MBbls/d as of December 31, 2020 with plans to expand up to 120 MBbls/d based on producer activity.
Fayetteville Shale. On October 1, 2020, we sold our gathering systems in the Fayetteville Shale to a third party for approximately $23 million.
Marketing, Supply and Logistics. In April 2020, we acquired several NGL storage and rail-to-truck terminals from Plains for approximately $162 million. These assets are complementary to our existing NGL assets, are located in high demand markets across the central and eastern United States and include 7 MMBbls of NGL storage and seven terminals.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Policies
Our significant accounting policies are described in Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 2.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to select appropriate accounting estimates and to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We consider our critical accounting estimates to be those that require difficult, complex, or subjective judgment necessary in accounting for inherently uncertain matters and those that could significantly influence our financial results based on changes in those judgments. Changes in facts and circumstances may result in revised estimates and actual results may differ materially from those estimates. We have discussed the development and selection of the following critical accounting estimates and related disclosures with the Audit Committee of the board of directors of our general partner.
Goodwill
Our goodwill represents the excess of the amount we paid for a business over the fair value of the net identifiable assets acquired. We evaluate goodwill for impairment annually on December 31, and whenever events indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit could be less than its carrying amount. This evaluation requires us to compare the fair value of each of our reporting units to its carrying value (including goodwill). If the fair value exceeds the carrying amount, goodwill of the reporting unit is not considered impaired.
We estimate the fair value of our reporting units based on a number of factors, including discount rates, projected cash flows and the potential value we would receive if we sold the reporting unit. Estimating projected cash flows requires us to make certain assumptions as it relates to the future operating performance of each of our reporting units (which includes assumptions, among others, about estimating future operating margins and related future growth in those margins, contracting efforts and the cost and timing of facility expansions) and assumptions related to our customers, such as their future capital and operating plans and their financial condition. When considering operating performance, various factors are considered such as current and changing economic conditions and the commodity price environment, among others. Due to the imprecise nature of these projections and assumptions, actual results can and often do, differ from our estimates. If the assumptions embodied in the projections prove inaccurate, we could incur a future impairment charge. In addition, the use of the income approach to determine the fair value of our reporting units (see further discussion of the use of the income approach below) could result in a different fair value if we had utilized a market approach, or a combination thereof.
During 2020, current and forward commodity prices significantly declined from their levels at December 31, 2019 due primarily to the decreases in energy demand as a result of the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken by the OPEC, Russia, the United States and other oil-producing countries relating to the oversupply of oil. We believe that the decrease in commodity prices has had and will continue to have a negative impact on certain of our customers in our gathering and processing segment, which could adversely impact the financial performance of certain of the reporting units within those operations.
Upon acquisition, we are required to record the assets, liabilities and goodwill of a reporting unit at its fair value on the date of acquisition. As a result, any level of decrease in the forecasted cash flows of these businesses or increases in the discount rates utilized to value those businesses from their respective acquisition dates would likely result in the fair value of the reporting unit falling below the carrying value of the reporting unit, and could result in an assessment of whether that reporting unit’s goodwill is impaired.
We acquired our Powder River Basin reporting unit in April 2019, and during the year ended December 31, 2020, we fully impaired the goodwill associated with this reporting unit based on the impact that the decline in commodity prices has had on our producer customers in the Powder River Basin described above. At December 31, 2020, our goodwill consisted of approximately $45.9 million associated with our G&P Arrow reporting unit and $92.7 million associated with our MS&L NGL Marketing and Logistics reporting unit. We continue to monitor our remaining goodwill, and we could experience additional impairments of the remaining goodwill in the future if we experience a significant sustained decrease in the market value of our common or preferred units or if we receive additional negative information about market conditions or the intent of our customers on our remaining operations with goodwill, which could negatively impact the forecasted cash flows or discount
rates utilized to determine the fair value of those businesses. A 5% decrease in the forecasted cash flows or a 1% increase in the discount rates utilized to determine the fair value of our Arrow and NGL Marketing and Logistics reporting units would not have resulted in a goodwill impairment of either of those reporting units.
Long-Lived Assets
Our long-lived assets consist of property, plant and equipment and intangible assets that have been obtained through multiple business combinations and property, plant and equipment that has been constructed in recent years. The initial recording of a majority of these long-lived assets was at fair value, which is estimated by management primarily utilizing market-related information, asset specific information and other projections on the performance of the assets acquired (including an analysis of discounted cash flows which can involve assumptions on discount rates and projected cash flows of the assets acquired). Management reviews this information to determine its reasonableness in comparison to the assumptions utilized in determining the purchase price of the assets in addition to other market-based information that was received through the purchase process and other sources. These projections also include projections on potential and contractual obligations assumed in these acquisitions. Due to the imprecise nature of the projections and assumptions utilized in determining fair value, actual results can, and often do, differ from our estimates.
We utilize assumptions related to the useful lives and related salvage value of our property, plant and equipment in order to determine depreciation and amortization expense each period. Due to the imprecise nature of the projections and assumptions utilized in determining useful lives, actual results can, and often do, differ from our estimates.
To estimate the useful life of our finite lived intangible assets we utilize assumptions of the period over which the assets are expected to contribute directly or indirectly to our future cash flows. Generally this requires us to amortize our intangible assets based on the expected future cash flows (to the extent they are readily determinable) or on a straight-line basis (if they are not readily determinable) of the acquired contracts or customer relationships. Due to the imprecise nature of the projections and assumptions utilized in determining future cash flows, actual results can, and often do, differ from our estimates.
We continually monitor our business, the business environment and the performance of our operations to determine if an event has occurred that indicates that a long-lived asset may be impaired. If an event occurs, which is a determination that involves judgment, we may be required to utilize cash flow projections to assess our ability to recover the carrying value of our assets based on our long-lived assets’ ability to generate future cash flows on an undiscounted basis. This differs from our evaluation of goodwill, for which we perform an assessment of the recoverability of goodwill utilizing fair value estimates that primarily utilize discounted cash flows in the estimation process (as described above), and accordingly a reporting unit that has experienced a goodwill impairment may not experience a similar impairment of the underlying long-lived assets included in that reporting unit. During 2020 and 2019, we recorded $3.1 million and $4.3 million of impairments of our property, plant and equipment primarily related to certain of our water gathering facilities in our Arrow operations, which is further discussed in Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 2. During 2018, we did not record any material impairments of our intangible assets and property, plant and equipment. During 2020, we sold our Fayetteville assets and recorded a loss on long-lived assets of approximately $19.9 million and during 2018, we sold our MS&L West Coast operations and recorded a loss on long-lived assets of approximately $26.9 million. For a further discussion of these assets sales, see Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 3.
Projected cash flows of our long-lived assets are generally based on current and anticipated future market conditions, which require significant judgment to make projections and assumptions about pricing, demand, competition, operating costs, construction costs, legal and regulatory issues and other factors that may extend many years into the future and are often outside of our control. If those cash flow projections indicate that the long-lived asset’s carrying value is not recoverable, we record an impairment charge for the excess of the carrying value of the asset over its fair value. The estimate of fair value considers a number of factors, including the potential value we would receive if we sold the asset, discount rates and projected cash flows. Due to the imprecise nature of these projections and assumptions, actual results can and often do, differ from our estimates.
We continue to monitor our long-lived assets, and we could experience additional impairments of the remaining carrying value of these long-lived assets in the future if we receive additional negative information about market conditions or the intent of our long-lived assets’ customers, which could negatively impact the forecasted cash flows or discount rates utilized to determine the fair value of those investments.
Equity Method Investments
We evaluate our equity method investments for impairment when events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the equity method investment may be impaired and that impairment is other than temporary. If an event occurs, we evaluate the recoverability of our carrying value based on the fair value of the investment. If an impairment is indicated, we adjust the carrying values of the asset downward, if necessary, to their estimated fair values.
We estimate the fair value of our equity method investments based on a number of factors, including discount rates, projected cash flows, enterprise value and the potential value we would receive if we sold the equity method investment. Estimating projected cash flows requires us to make certain assumptions as it relates to the future operating performance of each of our equity method investments (which includes assumptions, among others, about estimating future operating margins and related future growth in those margins, contracting efforts and the cost and timing of facility expansions) and assumptions related to our equity method investments’ customers, such as their future capital and operating plans and their financial condition. When considering operating performance, various factors are considered such as current and changing economic conditions and the commodity price environment, among others. Due to the imprecise nature of these projections and assumptions, actual results can and often do, differ from our estimates.
During 2020, current and forward commodity prices significantly declined from their levels at December 31, 2019 due primarily to the decreases in energy demand as a result of the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken by the OPEC, Russia, the United States and other oil-producing countries related to the oversupply of oil. We currently anticipate that the decrease in commodity prices could have a negative impact on certain of our equity method investments’ customers, which could adversely impact the financial performance of certain of those investments. Although we currently anticipate that the decline in commodity prices has not decreased the fair value of our equity investments below their carrying value and any such decline would not be considered other than temporary, we continue to monitor our equity method investments (especially those with gathering and processing operations such as our Crestwood Permian equity method investment). If we receive additional negative information about market conditions or the intent of our equity method investments’ customers to curtail production in the future that negatively impacts the forecasted cash flows or discount rates utilized to determine the fair value of those investments, we could experience impairments to the carrying value of these investments.
Our equity method investments have long-lived assets, intangible assets, goodwill and equity method investments in their underlying financial statements, and our equity investees apply similar accounting policies and have similar critical accounting estimates in assessing those assets for impairment as we do. During 2020, we recorded a $4.5 million reduction to the equity earnings from our PRBIC equity method investment as a result of us recording our proportionate share of a long-lived asset impairment recorded by the equity method investee. The carrying value of our PRBIC equity method investment was $3.6 million at December 31, 2020. Our Stagecoach Gas equity method investment has approximately $656.5 million of goodwill in its financial statements, which it assesses for impairment annually on December 31 or whenever events indicate that it is more likely than not that its fair value could be less than its carrying amount. This assessment requires Stagecoach Gas to make certain assumptions about its future operating performance (which includes assumptions, among others, about estimating future operating margins and related future growth in those margins, contracting efforts and the cost and timing of facility expansions, in addition to current and changing economic conditions, the commodity price environment and discount rates). Stagecoach Gas concluded that its goodwill was not impaired because the fair value of its reporting unit approximated its book value at December 31, 2020, and accordingly a significant decrease in the assumptions utilized by Stagecoach Gas could result in impairments being recorded by Stagecoach Gas, which could result in a significant reduction in our equity earnings from Stagecoach Gas. We believe that the fair value of our equity investment in Stagecoach Gas exceeded its $792.5 million carrying value at December 31, 2020, and accordingly did not have any triggers to assess our investment for impairment during 2020.
Variable Interest Entities
We evaluate all legal entities in which we hold an ownership interest to determine if the entity is a variable interest entity (VIE). Our interests in a VIE are referred to as variable interests. Variable interests can be contractual, ownership or other interests in an entity that change with changes in the fair value of the VIE’s assets. When we conclude that we hold an interest in a VIE, we must determine if we are the entity’s primary beneficiary. A primary beneficiary is deemed to have a controlling financial interest in a VIE.
We consolidate any VIE when we determine that we are the primary beneficiary. We must disclose the nature of any interests in a VIE that is not consolidated. Significant judgment is exercised in determining that a legal entity is a VIE and in evaluating our interest in a VIE. We use primarily a qualitative analysis to determine if an entity is a VIE. We evaluate the entity’s need
for continuing financial support; the equity holder’s lack of a controlling financial interest; and/or if an equity holder’s voting interests are disproportionate to its obligation to absorb expected losses or receive residual returns. We evaluate our interests in a VIE to determine whether we are the primary beneficiary. We use primarily a qualitative analysis to determine if we are deemed to have a controlling financial interest in the VIE, either on a standalone basis or as part of a related party group. We continually monitor our interests in legal entities for changes in the design or activities of an entity and changes in our interests, including our status as the primary beneficiary to determine if the changes require us to revise our previous conclusions.
As a result of our VIE analysis, we concluded that our investment in Crestwood Permian is a VIE that we are not the primary beneficiary of, and as a result, we account for our investment in Crestwood Permian as an equity method investment. Our other equity investments are not considered to be VIEs. However, any future changes in the design or nature of the activities of these entities may require us to reconsider our conclusions associated with these entities. Such reconsideration would require the identification of the variable interests in the entity and a determination of which party is the entity’s primary beneficiary. If an equity investment was considered a VIE and we were determined to be the primary beneficiary, the change could cause us to consolidate the entity. The consolidation of an entity that is currently accounted for under the equity method could have a significant impact on our financial statements. See Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 6 for more information on our equity method investments.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenues for services and products under our revenue contracts as our obligations to perform services or deliver/sell products under the contracts are satisfied. A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation in the contract and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. Under certain contracts, we may be entitled to receive payments in advance of satisfying our performance obligations under the contract. We recognize a liability for these payments in excess of revenue recognized and present it as deferred revenue or contract liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had deferred revenues of approximately $182.5 million and $153.5 million. Our deferred revenues primarily relate to:
•Capital Reimbursements. Certain contracts in our G&P segment require that our customers reimburse us for capital expenditures related to the construction of long-lived assets utilized to provide services to them under the revenue contracts. Because we consider these amounts as consideration from customers associated with ongoing services to be provided to customers, we defer these upfront payments in deferred revenue and recognize the amounts in revenue over the life of the associated revenue contract as the performance obligations are satisfied under the contract.
•Contracts with Increasing (Decreasing) Rates per Unit. Certain of our contracts have fixed rates per volume that increase and/or decrease over the life of the contract once certain time periods or thresholds are met. We record revenues on these contracts ratably per unit over the life of the contract based on the remaining performance obligations to be performed, which can result in the deferral of revenue for the difference between the consideration received and the ratable revenue recognized.
The evaluation of when performance obligations have been satisfied and the transaction price that is allocated to our performance obligations requires significant judgments and assumptions, including our evaluation of the timing of when control of the underlying good or service has transferred to our customers, estimating the revenue to be generated per unit over the life of the contracts, and determining the relative standalone selling price of goods and services provided to customers under contracts with multiple performance obligations. Actual results can significantly vary from those judgments and assumptions.
How We Evaluate Our Operations
We evaluate our overall business performance based primarily on EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA. We do not utilize depreciation, amortization and accretion expense in our key measures because we focus our performance management on cash flow generation and our assets have long useful lives.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA - We believe that EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are widely accepted financial indicators of a company’s operational performance and its ability to incur and service debt, fund capital expenditures and make distributions. We believe that EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are useful to our investors because it allows them to use the same performance measure analyzed internally by our management to evaluate the performance of our businesses and investments without regard to the manner in which they are financed or our capital structure. EBITDA is defined as income before income taxes, plus debt-related costs (interest and debt expense, net, and gain (loss) on modification/extinguishment of debt) and depreciation, amortization and accretion expense. Adjusted EBITDA considers the adjusted earnings impact of our unconsolidated affiliates by adjusting our equity earnings or losses from our unconsolidated affiliates to reflect our proportionate share (based on the distribution percentage) of their EBITDA, excluding impairments. Adjusted EBITDA also considers the impact of certain significant items, such as unit-based compensation charges, gains or losses on long-lived assets, gains on acquisitions, impairments of long-lived assets and goodwill, third party costs incurred related to potential and completed acquisitions, certain environmental remediation costs, the change in fair value of commodity inventory-related derivative contracts, costs associated with the realignment and restructuring of our operations, and other transactions identified in a specific reporting period. The change in fair value of commodity inventory-related derivative contracts is considered in determining Adjusted EBITDA given that the timing of recognizing gains and losses on these derivative contracts differs from the recognition of revenue for the related underlying sale of inventory to which these derivatives relate. Changes in the fair value of other derivative contracts is not considered in determining Adjusted EBITDA given the relatively short-term nature of those derivative contracts. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not measures calculated in accordance with GAAP, as they do not include deductions for items such as depreciation, amortization and accretion, interest and income taxes, which are necessary to maintain our business. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as alternatives to net income, operating cash flow or any other measure of financial performance presented in accordance with GAAP. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA calculations may vary among entities, so our computation may not be comparable to measures used by other companies.
See our reconciliation of net income to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA in Results of Operations below.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our results of operations (in millions).
Segment Results
The following tables summarize the EBITDA of our segments (in millions):
Segment Results
Below is a discussion of the factors that impacted EBITDA by segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gathering and Processing
EBITDA for our gathering and processing segment decreased by approximately $247.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. Our gathering and processing segment’s EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 was impacted by a $19.9 million loss on long-lived assets related to the sale of our Fayetteville gathering systems and an $80.3 million goodwill impairment related to our Jackalope operations. For the year ended December 31, 2019, our gathering and processing segment’s EBITDA was impacted by a $209.4 million gain related to the acquisition of the remaining 50% equity interest in Jackalope. For a further discussion of these matters, see “Critical Accounting Estimates” above and Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Notes 2 and 3.
Our gathering and processing segment’s revenues decreased by approximately $219.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, while our costs of product/services sold decreased by approximately $264.6 million. These decreases were primarily due to declines in commodity prices experienced during 2020 compared to 2019, which impacted the average prices that our gathering and processing segment realized on its agreements under which it purchases and sells crude oil and natural gas during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our costs of product/services sold decreased faster than our revenues primarily as a result of Arrow placing in service a 120 MMcf/d cryogenic plant in August 2019, which resulted in a 108%, 34%, 9% and 30% increase in Arrow’s natural gas processing volumes and natural gas, crude oil and water gathering volumes, respectively, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. Partially offsetting the increase in Arrow’s volumes was a decrease in volumes during the second and third quarters of 2020 that resulted from certain of our gathering and processing customers shutting in volumes in response to the decrease in commodity prices experienced during the second quarter of 2020. Commodity prices began to improve late in the second quarter of 2020 and, as a result, certain of our gathering and processing customers began to bring some of the shut-in production back online during the third and fourth quarters of 2020. In addition, in April 2019, Crestwood Niobrara acquired the remaining 50% equity interest in Jackalope from Williams Partners LP and we began consolidating Jackalope’s results, which partially offset the decrease in revenues experienced related to the decline in commodity prices and producer shut-ins described above.
Our gathering and processing segment’s operations and maintenance expenses decreased by approximately $13.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to our cost cutting efforts which began in early second quarter of 2020 as a result of the low commodity price environment discussed above. In addition, our gathering and processing segment’s operations and maintenance expenses also decreased due to the sale of our Fayetteville assets described below.
Our gathering and processing segment’s EBITDA was impacted by a loss on long-lived assets of approximately $19.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the sale of our Fayetteville assets which were sold on October 1, 2020. For a further discussion on the sale of our Fayetteville gathering assets, see Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 3. In addition, during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded a loss on long-lived assets of approximately $3.1 million and $4.3 million primarily related to the removal and retirement of certain water gathering lines on our Arrow system. For a further discussion on the retirement of our Arrow system water gathering lines, see Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 2.
Our gathering and processing segment’s EBITDA was impacted by equity losses from our Crestwood Permian equity investment of approximately $1.0 million and $5.8 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Equity earnings from our Crestwood Permian equity investment were impacted by our proportionate share of write-offs at the equity investment related to certain of their growth projects and the retirement of certain of their gathering and processing assets during 2020 and 2019. Aside from these write-offs, Crestwood Permian’s results were relatively consistent year-over-year with decreases in gathering volumes (as a result of the decrease in commodity prices described above) being largely offset by the operating results generated by placing in service a produced water gathering and disposal system in late 2020. Our gathering and processing segment’s EBITDA was also impacted by a decrease in equity earnings from our Jackalope equity investment of $3.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 due to the acquisition of the remaining 50% equity interest in Jackalope in April 2019.
Storage and Transportation
EBITDA for our storage and transportation segment decreased by approximately $12.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. Revenues from our COLT Hub operations decreased by $11.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a decline in demand for rail loading services as a result of the decline in commodity prices, which resulted in a decrease of 23% in rail loading volumes during 2020 compared to 2019. In addition, in late 2019 and early 2020, we renewed several rail loading and storage contracts at lower rates resulting in lower revenues during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019.
Our storage and transportation segment’s costs of product/services sold and operations and maintenance expenses were relatively flat during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019.
Our storage and transportation segment’s EBITDA was also impacted by a net decrease in earnings from unconsolidated affiliates during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. Earnings from our PRBIC equity investment decreased by approximately $4.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. During 2020, we recorded a $4.5 million reduction in equity earnings from PRBIC to reflect our proportionate share of a long-lived asset impairment recorded by our PRBIC equity investment. Earnings from our Stagecoach Gas equity investment increased by approximately $3.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to the increase in our proportionate share of Stagecoach Gas’s equity earnings from 40% to 50% effective July 1, 2019. Aside from the change in earnings percentage, our earnings from our Stagecoach Gas equity investment were relatively flat. During 2020, the demand for natural gas storage and transportation services provided by Stagecoach Gas was relatively flat due to decreases in natural gas prices and tight basis
differentials across its assets, offset by an increase in producer activity and lack of new infrastructure being built, which is keeping the demand for Stagecoach Gas’s storage and transportation services relatively stable.
Marketing, Supply and Logistics
EBITDA for our marketing, supply and logistics segment decreased by approximately $26 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. Our marketing, supply and logistics segment’s revenues decreased by approximately $696.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, while our costs of product/services sold decreased by approximately $679.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019.
Our crude oil and natural gas marketing operations experienced a decrease in its revenues of approximately $632.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, and a decrease in its product costs of approximately $631.1 million year over year. These decreases were driven by lower average sales prices to our customers and lower volumes due to the decline in commodity prices experienced during 2020.
Our NGL marketing and logistics operations were impacted by the significant decline in commodity prices described above and their impact on the NGL markets during 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our NGL marketing and logistics operations experienced a decrease in revenues and costs of product/services sold of approximately $63.6 million and $48.7 million, respectively, compared to 2019, primarily driven by lower NGL prices during 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, revenues decreased more than costs of product/services sold as a result of the decline in NGL prices, which was due to a combination of decreases in overall commodity prices, high NGL production and constrained NGL infrastructure. Although we were able to take advantage of market disruptions and low NGL prices during 2020 (which created strong margin for delivery into forward markets, and the constrained NGL infrastructure increased demand for our storage, terminalling and transportation assets), there was less volatility in NGL market conditions in 2020 than there was during 2019, where a combination of record high NGL production and constrained NGL infrastructure allowed our NGL marketing and logistics operations to capitalize on the significant market disruptions to utilize our trucking, rail and storage assets to source seasonal inventory for delivery into forward markets allowing us to generate higher margins in 2019 compared to 2020. Partially offsetting the decrease in revenues and costs of product/services sold was the operating results of the NGL assets that we acquired from Plains in April 2020. Included in our costs of product/services sold was a loss of $20.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 and a gain of $19.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 related to our price risk management activities.
Our marketing, supply and logistics operations and maintenance expenses increased by approximately $7.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to the acquisition of several NGL storage and rail-to-truck terminals from Plains in April 2020.
Our marketing, supply and logistics segment’s EBITDA includes a loss on long-lived assets of approximately $2.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to the impairment and loss on the sale of our Bakken transportation assets.
Other EBITDA Results
General and Administrative Expenses. During the year ended December 31, 2020, general and administrative expenses decreased by approximately $12 million compared to 2019, primarily due to lower unit-based compensation charges as a result of the decrease in the market price for Crestwood Equity’s common units during 2020 compared to 2019.
Items not affecting EBITDA include the following:
Depreciation, Amortization and Accretion Expense. During the year ended December 31, 2020, depreciation, amortization and accretion expense increased by approximately $41.6 million compared to 2019, primarily due to the acquisition of NGL assets from Plains in April 2020 and the acquisition of the remaining 50% equity interest in Jackalope in April 2019. In addition, we placed in-service the expansion of our processing capacity at our Bucking Horse processing facility on our Powder River Basin system in early 2020 and placed into service the Bear Den II processing plant on our Arrow system in late 2019.
Interest and Debt Expense, Net. Interest and debt expense, net increased by approximately $18.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to the issuance of $600 million unsecured senior notes in April 2019. In addition, our capitalized interest was lower during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 due to the timing of growth capital projects primarily in the Bakken and Powder River Basin.
The following table provides a summary of our interest and debt expense, net (in millions):
Liquidity and Sources of Capital
Crestwood Equity is a holding company that derives all of its operating cash flow from its operating subsidiaries. Our principal sources of liquidity include cash generated by operating activities from our subsidiaries, distributions from our joint ventures, borrowings under the Crestwood Midstream credit facility, and sales of equity and debt securities. Our equity investments use cash from their respective operations and contributions from us to fund their operating activities, maintenance and growth capital expenditures, and service their outstanding indebtedness.
The COVID-19 pandemic’s impact on global crude oil demand and corresponding supply and demand imbalances have created significant near-term challenges for the energy industry including record low commodity prices, production declines and temporary shut-ins for producers in every major basin across North America. We are aggressively responding to these extraordinary market events by canceling or delaying capital projects, substantially reducing operating and administrative costs, optimizing our storage assets and working closely with our customers to maintain volumes across our diversified asset portfolio. Through these steps, combined with the steps we have taken over the past few years, we believe our liquidity sources and operating cash flows are sufficient to address our future operating, debt service and capital requirements.
We make quarterly cash distributions to our common unitholders within approximately 45 days after the end of each fiscal quarter in an aggregate amount equal to our available cash for such quarter. We also pay quarterly cash distributions of approximately $15 million to our preferred unitholders and quarterly cash distributions of approximately $9 million to Crestwood Niobrara’s non-controlling partner. We believe our operating cash flows will exceed cash distributions to our partners, preferred unitholders and non-controlling partner, and as a result, we will have adequate operating cash flows as a source of liquidity for our growth capital expenditures.
On January 21, 2021, we declared a quarterly cash distribution of $0.625 per unit to our common unitholders, which was paid on February 12, 2021 and was consistent with the distribution paid in November 2020. Based on our financial performance in 2020 and our estimates of our financial performance for future quarters, we believe the current level of distributions is appropriate. Our Board of Directors evaluates the level of distributions to our common and preferred unitholders every quarter and considers a wide range of strategic, commercial, operational and financial factors, including current and projected operating cash flows and liquidity needs and the potential adverse impact of future distribution reductions on our common unitholders, including our general partner. The evaluation also includes a review of the potential for an event of default of the debt of Crestwood Holdings, which could result in a change in control at Crestwood Holdings and, accordingly, in us, which is further described in Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $507.1 million of available capacity under the Crestwood Midstream credit facility considering the most restrictive debt covenants in the credit agreement. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all of our debt covenants applicable to the credit facility and our senior notes. We may from time to time seek to retire or purchase our outstanding debt through cash purchases and/or exchanges for equity securities, in open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, tender offers or otherwise. Such repurchases or exchanges, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. The amounts involved may be material. In January 2021, Crestwood Midstream issued $700 million of 6.00% unsecured senior notes due 2029 (the 2029 Senior Notes). We utilized the proceeds from the issuance of the 2029 Senior Notes to repurchase and cancel $399.2 million outstanding on our senior notes due 2023 (2023 Senior Notes) and to reduce borrowings on our credit facility. We intend to redeem and cancel the remaining 2023 Senior Notes after they become callable at par in April 2021. See Part IV, Item 15.
Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 9 for a more detailed description of the covenants related to our credit facility and senior notes.
Cash Flows
The following table provides a summary of Crestwood Equity’s cash flows by category (in millions):
Operating Activities
Our operating cash flows decreased by approximately $12.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was driven by lower revenues of approximately $927.6 million primarily from our marketing, supply and logistics segment’s and our gathering and processing segment’s operations, offset by lower costs of product/services sold of approximately $944.4 million primarily from these segments as discussed above in Results of Operations.
Investing Activities
Capital Expenditures. The energy midstream business is capital intensive, requiring significant investments for the acquisition or development of new facilities. We categorize our capital expenditures as either:
•growth capital expenditures, which are made to construct additional assets, expand and upgrade existing systems, or acquire additional assets; or
•maintenance capital expenditures, which are made to replace partially or fully depreciated assets, to maintain the existing operating capacity of our assets, extend their useful lives or comply with regulatory requirements.
During 2021, we anticipate growth capital expenditures of approximately $35 million to $45 million, which includes contributions to our equity investments related to their capital projects. In addition, we expect to spend between approximately $20 million to $25 million on maintenance capital expenditures and approximately $5 million to $15 million on capital expenditures that are directly reimbursable by our customers. We anticipate that our growth and reimbursable capital expenditures in 2021 will increase the services we can provide to our customers and the operating efficiencies of our systems. We expect to finance our capital expenditures with a combination of cash generated by our operating subsidiaries, distributions received from our equity investments and borrowings under our credit facility. Additional commitments or expenditures will be made at our discretion, and any discontinuation of the construction of these projects could result in less future operating cash flows and earnings.
The following table summarizes our capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2020 (in millions):
(1) Represents purchases of property, plant and equipment that are reimbursable by third parties.
Acquisitions and Divestitures. Below is a summary of the acquisitions and divestitures which impacted our investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
•In April 2020, we acquired NGL assets from Plains for approximately $162 million;
•In April 2019, Crestwood Niobrara acquired Williams’s 50% equity interest in Jackalope for approximately $462.1 million, net of cash acquired of approximately $22.5 million; and
•In October 2020, we sold our Fayetteville gathering assets for approximately $23 million.
Investments in Unconsolidated Affiliates. Pursuant to our joint venture agreements with our respective equity investments, we periodically make contributions to our equity investments to fund their expansion projects and for other operating purposes. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we contributed approximately $3.4 million and $28.3 million to our Crestwood Permian equity investment primarily to fund its expansion projects and we contributed $6.0 million and $8.6 million during 2020 and 2019 to our other equity investments for other operating purposes. We also contributed $24.4 million to our Jackalope equity investment during 2019 prior to our acquisition of the remaining 50% equity interest in Jackalope from Williams, and this contribution was primarily utilized by us after Jackalope’s consolidation to fund its growth capital expenditures. For further details regarding these contributions, see Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 6.
Financing Activities
The following equity and debt transactions which impacted our financing activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 included the following:
Equity and Debt Transactions
•During the year ended December 31, 2020, distributions to our partners increased by $10.3 million compared to 2019, primarily due to the increase in our quarterly distribution from $0.60 per limited partner unit to $0.625 per limited partner unit;
•During the year ended December 31, 2019, Crestwood Niobrara issued $235 million in new Series A-3 Preferred Units to CN Jackalope Holdings LLC in conjunction with Crestwood Niobrara’s acquisition of the remaining 50% equity interest in Jackalope from Williams. For a further discussion of this transaction, see Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 12;
•During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, Crestwood Niobrara paid cash distributions of $37.1 million and $25.0 million to its non-controlling partner. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2020, Crestwood Niobrara received contributions of $2.8 million from its non-controlling partner;
•During the year ended December 31, 2020, our taxes paid for unit-based compensation vesting increased by approximately $4.6 million compared to 2019, primarily due to higher vesting of unit-based compensation awards;
•During the year ended December 31, 2020, we paid approximately $12.6 million to repurchase and cancel approximately $12.8 million of our senior notes due 2023;
•During the year ended December 31, 2019, we received net proceeds of approximately $591.1 million from the issuance of our senior notes due 2027; and
•During the year ended December 31, 2020, our debt-related transactions resulted in net proceeds of approximately $161.9 million compared to net borrowings of approximately $22.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Guarantor Summarized Financial Information
Crestwood Midstream and Crestwood Midstream Finance Corp. are issuers of our debt securities (the Issuers). Crestwood Midstream is a holding company and owns no operating assets and has no significant operations independent of its subsidiaries. Crestwood Midstream Finance Corp. is Crestwood Midstream’s 100% owned subsidiary and has no material assets or operations other than those related to its service as co-issuer of our senior notes. Obligations under Crestwood Midstream’s senior notes and its credit facility are jointly and severally guaranteed by substantially all of its subsidiaries (collectively, the Guarantor Subsidiaries), except for Crestwood Infrastructure Holdings LLC, Crestwood Niobrara LLC, Crestwood Pipeline and Storage Northeast LLC, Powder River Basin Industrial Complex LLC, and Tres Palacios Holdings LLC and their respective subsidiaries (collectively, Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries). The assets and credit of our Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries are not available to satisfy the debts of the Issuers or Guarantor Subsidiaries, and the liabilities of our Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries do not constitute obligations of the Issuers or Guarantor Subsidiaries. See Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 9 for additional information regarding our credit facility and senior notes and related guarantees.
The following tables provide summarized financial information for the Issuers and Guarantor Subsidiaries (collectively, the Obligor Group) on a combined basis after elimination of significant intercompany balances and transactions between entities in the Obligor Group. The investment balances in the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries have been excluded from the supplemental
summarized combined financial information. Transactions with other related parties, including the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries, represent affiliate transactions and are presented separately in the summarized combined financial information below.
Summarized Combined Balance Sheet Information (in millions)
Summarized Combined Income Statement Information (in millions)
(1) We have operating agreements with certain of our affiliates pursuant to which we charge them operations and maintenance expenses in accordance with their respective agreements, and these charges are reflected as a reduction of operations and maintenance expenses in our consolidated statements of operations. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we charged $28.5 million to our affiliates under these agreements.
(2) Includes $26.7 million of net general and administrative expenses that were charged by our affiliates to us.
Contractual Obligations
We are party to various contractual obligations. A portion of these obligations are reflected in our consolidated financial statements, such as long-term debt, leases and asset retirement obligations, while other obligations, such as capital and other commitments and contractual interest amounts are not reflected on our consolidated balance sheets. The following table summarizes our contractual cash obligations as of December 31, 2020 (in millions):
(1) In January 2021, Crestwood Midstream issued $700 million of 6.00% unsecured senior notes due 2029. We utilized the proceeds from the issuance of the 2029 Senior Notes to repurchase and cancel $399.2 million outstanding on our 2023 Senior Notes. We intend to redeem and cancel the remaining 2023 Senior Notes after they become callable at par in April 2021.
(2) $719.0 million of our long-term debt is variable interest rate debt at the Alternate Base rate or Eurodollar rate plus an applicable spread. These rates plus their applicable spreads were between 2.40% and 4.50% at December 31, 2020. These rates have been applied for each period presented in the table.
(3) Includes our operating and finance leases. See Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 11 for a further discussion of these obligations.
(4) Fixed price purchase commitments are volumetrically offset by third party fixed price sale contracts.
(5) Primarily related to growth and maintenance contractual purchase obligations in our gathering and processing segment and environmental obligations included in accrued expenses and other liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets. Other contractual purchase obligations are defined as legally enforceable agreements to purchase goods or services that have fixed or minimum quantities and fixed or minimum variable price provisions, and that detail approximate timing of the underlying obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we have not entered into any transactions, agreements or other arrangements that would result in off-balance sheet liabilities.
Our equity interest in Crestwood Permian is considered to be a variable interest entity. We are not the primary beneficiary of Crestwood Permian and as a result, we account for our investment in Crestwood Permian as an equity method investment. For a further discussion of our investment in Crestwood Permian, see Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 6.