ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
This section includes a discussion of the financial condition and results of operations of CrossFirst Bankshares, Inc. and its subsidiaries. Refer to Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis Discussion of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our 2019 Form 10-K filed with the SEC on March 10, 2020 for a discussion of the financial condition and results of operations of the Company for the period ended December 31, 2018 and a comparison between the 2018 and 2019 results.
Tables may include additional periods to comply with disclosure requirements or to illustrate trends in greater depth. You should read the following financial data in conjunction with the other information contained in this 10-K, including under “Risk Factors Summary” and in the financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this 10-K.
Growth History
We have grown organically primarily by establishing eight branches, attracting new clients and expanding our relationships with existing clients, as well as through two strategic acquisitions. The data below presents the business' growth in key areas for the past five years and the related compound annual growth rate (“CAGR”):
Our Strategy
Our strategy has been to build the most trusted bank in our markets, which we believe drives value for our stockholders. During 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic allowed us to serve our customers by providing PPP loan funding, modifying loans through payment deferrals and rate adjustments, and using our technology to reduce contact exposure.
Despite the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, we remain focused on growth and building stockholder value through greater efficiency and increased profitability. We intend to execute our strategic plan through the following:
•Continue organic growth;
•Selectively pursue opportunities to expand through acquisitions or new market development;
•Attract and develop talent;
•Maintain a branch-lite business model with strategically placed locations; and
•Leverage technology to enhance the client experience and improve profitability.
Performance Measures
2021 Events:
Four of our branches are located in areas recently impacted by severe, cold weather conditions. One branch sustained water damage, but did not impact operations or our ability to support our customers. The impact to our customers in Oklahoma and Texas remains uncertain, but may reduce a customer’s ability to pay all principal and interest payments when due. We may assist our customers impacted by the recent cold weather conditions by modifying loan terms.
2020 Highlights:
•Total assets reached $5.7 billion including $593 million or 15% loan growth and $771 million or 20% deposit growth.
•Successful execution of our succession plan pursuant to which Michael J. Maddox was named as the Company’s Chief Executive Officer effective June 1, 2020 to succeed George F. Jones, Jr. who was appointed as Vice Chairman.
•Supported our local businesses and communities by issuing $369 million of PPP loans to approximately 1,200 customers.
•Improved our efficiency ratio from 58.37% in 2019 to 58.13% in 2020 in spite of the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic.
•Effectively responded to the COVID-19 pandemic using our business continuity plan resulting in no impact to bank operations, reduced health risks to employees and continuous support to our customers.
•Book value per share of $12.08 at December 31, 2020 compared to $11.58 at December 31, 2019.
Review and Update on the COVID-19 Pandemic Impact
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused, and is expected to continue to cause, economic uncertainty and a disruption to the financial markets, the duration and extent of which is not currently known. A discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company and its operations and measures undertaken by the Company in response thereto is provided below.
Bank Operations
The Company has a business continuity plan to mitigate operational risks in unusual, unexpected events. The plan identifies key components of our operations and creates responses to ensure normal operations continue and to minimize the effects of potential loss. We implemented the business continuity procedures in March 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. During the remainder of 2020, our employees worked in the office on a rotation schedule or remotely to limit exposure risk to our employees and customers. We met with customers by appointment and our drive-thru locations operated during normal hours. No material interruptions to our business operations have occurred to date.
Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) Lending Facility and Loans in 2020
The PPP was established by the CARES Act and authorized forgivable loans to small businesses. The Bank provided PPP loans to support current customers and foster relationships with new customers. The loans earned interest at 1%, included fees between 1% and 5% and typically matured in two or five years. The loans originated under the PPP received a 0% risk weight under the regulatory capital rules which resulted in increased Common Equity Tier 1, Tier 1, and Tier 2 capital ratios, but the PPP loans are included in the calculation of our Leverage ratio.
The following table summarizes the impact of the PPP loans on our 2020 financials:
PPP Lending Facility and Loans in 2021
The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 allocated an additional $284 billion in PPP funding. On January 11, 2021, the SBA reopened PPP funds for first draw borrowers and on January 13, 2021, opened PPP funds for second draw borrowers. The second round of PPP loans have similar terms to the first round of PPP loans mentioned above. The PPP loans are currently available through March 31, 2021 or until no available funding under the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 remains.
The Bank participated in the second round of PPP funding to continue support of current and new customers. PPP loan activity between January 1, 2021 and February 24, 2021 is provided below:
† Earned fees include fees earned from loans forgiven and monthly amortization fees on loans outstanding.
Loan Modifications
The CARES Act allowed financial institutions to elect to suspend GAAP principles and regulatory determinations for loan modifications relating to the COVID-19 pandemic that would otherwise require evaluation as troubled debt restructurings (“TDR”) from March 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020 as long as the loan was not more than 30 days past due as of December 31, 2019. The Company elected to use this guidance and started the modified loan process during the first quarter of 2020. During the third quarter of 2020, the Company assessed and approved a second round of modifications. These modifications were based on a customer’s business condition, evaluation of near and long term recovery potential and level of support from the owners and guarantors. On December 27, 2020, the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 was signed into law, which extended the period during which the Company may, elect not to consider whether loan modifications relating to the COVID-19 pandemic are TDRs through January 2, 2022. The Company elected to apply the guidance.
The Company currently expects most of these modified loans to recover from the pandemic, but uncertainty regarding the short-term and long-term effects of the COVID-19 pandemic remain that may require the Company to (i) downgrade modified loans which may increase our ALLL, (ii) reverse interest income previously recognized but not received, and (iii) charge-off modified loans.
Deferred loan interest accrues on loans modified as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic until determined that it is more likely than not that we will be unable to collect the accrued interest balance. After the deferral period, the modified loan terms require all accrued interest to be paid or capitalized and amortized over the original loan term. Loan modification information at December 31, 2020 is provided below:
Loan modifications primarily include payment deferrals, reduced monthly payments, changes in interest rate and extension of the maturity date.
Loan Portfolio and Credit Quality
The COVID-19 pandemic impacted our borrowers resulting in credit migration, charge-offs and an increased provision. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company moderated loan growth to focus on current customers, implemented floors on loans and monitored unfunded credit lines. Listed below are categories in our loan portfolio that have been or may be significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in increased monitoring.
Energy Loans
Energy loans are collateralized by oil and natural gas reserves and the borrower’s cash flows are impacted by changes in the price of oil and natural gas. Our customers have significant experience in the energy sector and the Company has an experienced group of energy lenders and credit officers that proactively monitor the portfolio. Oil and natural gas prices declined in the first quarter of 2020 and remained low as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and other factors that reduced cash flow for our energy customers. As a result, approximately 60% of the energy portfolio was downgraded in 2020 and $5 million of loans were charged-off. We anticipate some relief for our customers in 2021 if oil and gas prices rebound and stabilize. We plan to decrease our overall energy exposure from 8% to 5% of our total loan portfolio.
Real Estate Loans
Our real estate loans are comprised of construction and development loans, 1-4 family loans and commercial real estate loans. There is significant uncertainty regarding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our real estate loan portfolio, but we continue to monitor the following industries:
These industries were identified due to travel restrictions, cancellation of events and large gatherings, reduction in demand for senior living housing and furlough of workers and an increase in unemployment numbers. The Bank has worked with business owners in these industries by modifying loan terms and funding the PPP loans.
Commercial Loans
The Company provides a mix of variable-rate and fixed-rate commercial loans across various industries. We extend commercial loans on an unsecured and secured basis. There is significant uncertainty regarding the impact the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our commercial loan portfolio, but we identified the following industries that received an increase in monitoring:
These industries were identified based on travel, entertainment and restaurant restrictions, cancellation of events and large gatherings, business closures and furlough of workers and an increase in unemployment numbers have also impacted these industries.
Goodwill Impairment
We performed a goodwill impairment analysis during the second quarter of 2020 and it resulted in a $7 million impairment, representing the total value of goodwill previously reported. See Note 6: Goodwill and Core Deposit Intangible within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Non-Interest Expense section within Management's Discussion and Analysis for more information.
Discussion and Analysis - Results of Operations
Net Interest Income
Our profitability depends in substantial part on our net interest income. Net interest income is the difference between the amounts received on our interest-earning assets and the interest paid on our interest-bearing liabilities. Net interest income is impacted by internal and external factors including:
•Changes in the volume, rate, and mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities;
•Changes in competition, federal economic, monetary and fiscal policies and economic conditions; and
•Changes in credit quality.
We present and discuss net interest income on a tax-equivalent basis. A tax-equivalent basis makes all income taxable at the same rate. For example, $100 of tax-exempt income would be presented as $126.58, an amount that, if taxed at the statutory federal income tax rate of 21% would yield $100. We believe a tax-equivalent basis provides for improved comparability between the various earning assets.
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016 to the second quarter of 2019, we operated in a rising interest rate environment. Our yield on earning assets and cost of funds were driven by the rate environment. In July 2019, interest rates started to decline and continued through 2020. Our earning assets repriced quicker than our cost of funds, resulting in a lower net interest margin in 2019 and 2020. A table showing our five-year yield on earning assets and cost of funds is presented below:
The following table presents, for the periods indicated, average balance sheet information, interest income, interest expense and the corresponding average yield earned and rates paid:
Changes in interest income and interest expense result from changes in average balances (volume) of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, as well as, changes in average interest rates. The following table sets forth the effects of changing rates and volumes on our net interest income during the period shown. Information is provided with respect to: (i) changes in volume (change in volume times old rate); (ii) changes in rates (change in rate times old volume); and (iii) changes in rate/volume (change in rate times the change in volume):
Interest Income - Interest income declined for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. Lower yields on earning assets were driven by a decline in the interest rate environment. The decline in asset yields was partially offset by year-over-year loan growth and PPP loan income. PPP loan fees and interest income improved the earning asset yield by 6 basis points. We anticipate PPP income will positively impact our yield in the first half of 2021 as loans are forgiven and we accelerate the recognition of the unearned loan fees. We currently expect earning asset yields to remain flat or slightly decline in 2021 as a result of competition and the continued low rate environment.
Interest Expense - Interest expense declined for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The cost of interest-bearing deposits declined due to strategic rate changes in our deposit products driven by the declining rate environment. The cost of FHLB and other borrowings declined due to shorter term funding in 2020 compared to 2019 and the declining rate environment. The rates on interest-bearing liabilities were offset by an increase in average volume to support our asset growth. We currently anticipate our cost of funds to remain flat or slightly decline in 2021 as we continue to reduce rates on deposits and longer term borrowings.
Net Interest Income - Net interest income increased for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The increase was driven by growth in average earning assets, offset by compression in net interest margin as earning assets repriced quicker than interest-bearing liabilities. We currently expect the net interest margin to remain flat in 2021 as earning assets continue to reprice, offset by maturities in borrowed funds that have higher interest rates. Our expected margin may continue to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, placing loans on non-accrual status, including loans with deferred payments, and changes in competition.
Impact of Transition Away from LIBOR
Refer to Note 1: Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies under the Recent Accounting Pronouncements within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding the impact of the LIBOR transition on the Company.
Noninterest Income
The components of noninterest income were as follows for the periods shown:
The changes in noninterest income were driven by the following:
Service Charges and Fees on Customer Accounts - This category includes account analysis fees offset by a customer rebate program. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same corresponding period in 2019 was driven by a decline in costs associated with our rebate program, including a reduction in the funded balance and reduction in rates used. In addition, customer growth and an increase in outstanding balances improved account analysis fees.
Gain on Sale of Available-for-Sale Securities - The increase in the gain for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the declining rate environment, which increased the value of the Company’s securities sold in 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The 2020 sales were a strategic decision by management to capitalize on attractive market conditions and improve credit quality.
Impairment of Premises and Equipment Held for Sale - During 2017, we relocated to a new corporate administration building. As a result, we listed two support buildings for sale. During the first half of 2019, the Company sold its remaining assets held-for-sale related to the transition. The two support buildings had been recently acquired and were extensively remodeled, which resulted in a difference between book and market value for those assets.
Swap Fee Income, Net - Swap fee income, net includes both swap fees from the execution of new swaps and the credit valuation adjustment (“CVA”). Swap fees on new swaps depend on the size and term of the underlying asset. During 2019, the swap program benefited from attractive market conditions and a change in the CVA methodology. During 2020, swap fee income, net was lower due to management's loan and pricing strategy and lower loan originations, excluding PPP loans, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. During 2020, a borrower with a back-to-back swap was downgraded and resulted in a $300 thousand loss related to the CVA. Refer to Note 7: Derivatives and Hedging Activities within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding the change in CVA methodology.
ATM and Credit Card Interchange Income - The increase in ATM and credit card interchange income for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 was primarily the result of customers that mobilized their workforce directly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company anticipates the credit card activity will decline slightly in connection with a decline in COVID-19 cases.
Noninterest Expense
The components of noninterest expense were as follows for the periods indicated:
The changes in noninterest expense were driven by the following:
Salary and Employee Benefits - Salary and employee benefit costs increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 primarily due to changes in staffing levels. Prior to the second quarter of 2020, the Company anticipated loan and deposit growth that required an increase in headcount and resulted in increased compensation costs. As result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company focused on optimizing staffing levels during the third quarter of 2020, which resulted in incremental costs in the form of severance arrangements. Increases in costs were partially offset by a reduction in incentive compensation.
Professional Fees - Professional fees increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same corresponding period in 2019 primarily from an increase in legal fees as a result of loan workouts. In addition, the Company’s accounting fees increased in 2020 compared to 2019 due to the transition from a private company to a public company.
Deposit Insurance Premiums - The 2019 expense was impacted by a $664 thousand assessment credit received in the third quarter. The credit was the result of the DIF Reserve Ratio exceeding the statutorily required minimum reserve ratio in 2018. The FDIC uses a risk-based premium system to calculate the quarterly fee. Our premiums increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same
period in 2019 as a result of strong asset growth, changes in asset quality and changes in capital ratios, all of which increased our quarterly fees.
Advertising - The decline in advertising costs was driven by the COVID-19 pandemic that reduced in-person events.
Software and Communication - The increase was driven by our continued strategy to invest in technologies that allow us to cover beginning-to-end loan originations, provide customers with a suite of online tools and allow us to analyze reporting trends. In addition to the growing number of technologies implemented, a portion of costs increased as a result of our growth.
Foreclosed Assets, net - The increase in foreclosed assets, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same corresponding period in 2019 primarily resulted from new appraisals obtained on industrial facilities and land that resulted in a $1 million valuation adjustment during the second quarter of 2020. Subsequent to the write-down, the industrial facilities were sold for $1 million.
Goodwill Impairment - The Company performed an interim review for goodwill impairment at June 30, 2020. A quantitative review was performed on the Tulsa market reporting unit, using a combination of income and market based approaches. The capitalization of earnings, an income approach, used a single period of cash flows, adjusted for growth and a capitalization rate. The market approach used price-to-book multiples of peer banks and included a control premium. The reporting unit’s fair value was less than its book value and resulted in a $7 million impairment, representing the total value of goodwill previously reported during the quarter ended June 30, 2020. Refer to Note 6: Goodwill and Core Deposit Intangible within the Notes to the Financial Statements for more information.
Other noninterest expense - Year-over-year changes included a $747 thousand increase in commercial card costs as a result of our growing customer base and increased use as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, insured cash sweep (“ICS”) deposits increased in 2020 from 2019, which drove related fees higher by $459 thousand. Insurance costs and director fees increased by $453 thousand and $495 thousand, respectively, related to our transition to a public company. Increased costs were offset by a $478 thousand decline in operational loan costs as loan volumes, types of loans originated or renewed and events related to foreclosed assets declined. Travel and education related costs declined by $815 thousand as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Income Taxes
Our income tax expense (benefit) differs from the amount that would be calculated using the federal statutory tax rate, primarily from investments in tax advantaged assets, such as bank-owned life insurance and tax-exempt municipal securities, state tax credits and permanent tax differences from equity-based compensation. Detail behind the differences between the statutory rate and effective tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 is provided in Note 11: Income Taxes within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Our 2017 effective tax rate was impacted by the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act that reduced the corporate tax rate from 35% to 21%. Year-over-year, the December 31, 2020 effective tax rate increased due to the non-taxable, goodwill impairment and a state tax credit received in 2019. We currently anticipate the effective tax rate to increase slightly in 2021. A five-year trend of our income tax and effective tax rate is presented below:
Discussion and Analysis - Financial Condition
Loan Portfolio
Loans represent our largest portion of earning assets and typically provide higher yields than other assets. The quality and diversification of the loan portfolio is an important consideration when reviewing our financial condition. We established an internal loan policy that outlines a standard lending philosophy and provides consistent direction to achieve goals and objectives, which include maximizing earnings over the short and long term by managing risks through the policy. Internal concentration limits exist on all loans, including commercial real estate, energy, and land development. We established strong underwriting practices and procedures to assess our borrowers, including review of debt service, collateral value and evaluation of guarantors. We also engage third-parties to independently review our loan portfolio. Appropriate actions are taken when a borrower is no longer able to service its debt.
Our loan portfolio consists of various types of loans, primarily made up of commercial and commercial real estate loans. Commercial loans are generally paid back through normal business operations. Commercial real estate loans, which include both construction and limited term financing are typically paid back through normal income from operations, the sale of the underlying property or refinancing by other institutional sources. Most of our loans are made to borrowers within the states we operate, which include Kansas, Missouri, Oklahoma and Texas. In addition, we occasionally invest in syndicated shared national credits and loan participations.
Gross loans, net of unearned income grew $590 million from the prior year to over $4 billion as of December 31, 2020. Our commercial loan portfolio decreased slightly by $18 million or 1% as a result of increased pay downs and charge-offs. Our commercial real estate and residential and multifamily real estate loans experienced substantial growth of $156 million or 15% and $282 million or 71%, respectively. Commercial real estate was driven by activity in our Dallas and Kansas City markets and the portfolio remains well diversified with growth in the office space, industrial, and senior living sectors. Residential real estate growth was attributable to the development of relationships with key residential and multifamily real estate developers within our markets. Energy loans decreased $64 million or 16% due to price volatility in the market and management’s strategy to lower our energy loan concentration. As of December 31, 2020, loan yields declined to 4.26% compared to 5.52% in the prior year, primarily as a result of lower interest rates from adjustable rate loan movements in LIBOR and Prime.
As of December 31, 2020, PPP loans made up approximately 7% of the total portfolio, representing $292 million in loans. The loans are guaranteed by the Small Business Administration (“SBA”), earn interest at 1.00%, and include a fee. During the first round of PPP, the Company produced loans for almost 1,200 customers totaling $369 million of which $77 million were forgiven in the fourth quarter and we anticipate most loan fees to be recognized in the first half of 2021. Excluding PPP loans, the loan portfolio grew by $301 million or 8% compared to the prior year.
The following table presents the balance and associated percentage of each major product type within our portfolio as of the dates indicated:
For a discussion of the Company’s loan segments refer to the “Loan Portfolio Segments” section within Note 4: Loan and Allowance for Loan Losses within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Real Estate Loans
Our real estate portfolio is comprised of construction and development loans, 1-4 family loans and commercial real estate loans. A breakdown of our commercial real estate portfolio by type and by geography (based upon location of collateral) as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 is presented below:
Commercial Loans
The Company provides a mix of variable- and fixed-rate commercial loans across various industries. We extend commercial loans on an unsecured and secured basis. Unsecured commercial loan balances totaled $142 million as of December 31, 2020 or 3% of the total loan portfolio.
A breakdown of the Company’s commercial loan portfolio as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 by industry is provided below:
The following table shows the contractual maturities of our gross loans and sensitivity to interest rate changes:
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses is an amount required to cover net loan charge-offs plus the amount which, in the opinion of the Bank’s management, is considered necessary to bring the balance in the allowance to, or maintain the balance in the allowance at, a level adequate to absorb expected loan losses in the existing loan portfolio. Management uses available information to analyze losses on loans; however, future additions to the allowance may be necessary based on changes in economic conditions, the size of the loan portfolio, the composition of the portfolio, or the performance of individual loans.
For a discussion of the evaluation of the Company’s allowance for loan losses refer to the “Allowance for Loan Losses” section in Note 1: Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The following table provides an analysis of the activity in our allowance for the periods indicated:
Prior to the year ended December 31, 2019, the changes in the ALLL were primarily attributable to our loan growth.
The December 31, 2019 ALLL increased $19 million or 50% from the prior year. The year-over-year change in the allowance was the result of a $791 million increase in gross loans, net of unearned income that increased the required reserve by approximately $9 million. In addition, the allowance included a $13 million increase in the reserve associated with our impaired loans that was primarily the result of one nonperforming commercial loan relationship in which the borrower’s business and the value of the underlying collateral continued to deteriorate in the fourth quarter of 2019. The increase was partially offset by a decline in the energy portfolio’s qualitative loss factors due to stabilized oil prices and the current stage of the business cycle that resulted in a $3 million decline in the required reserve.
A discussion regarding changes to the December 31, 2020 ALLL is provided below.
Charge-offs and Recoveries
The below table provides the ratio of net charge-offs during the period to average loans outstanding based on our loan categories:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, charge-offs included: (i) $19 million related to a commercial loan that deteriorated and was substantially reserved for during 2019 that required a $2 million increase to the 2020 provision, (ii) $6 million related to a large commercial loan restructured in 2020 that required a $5 million increase to the 2020 provision, (iii) $6 million related to several, smaller commercial loans that required a $5 million increase to the 2020 provision, (iv) $5 million related to three energy loans that were classified or listed as special mention in 2019 and required a $4 million increase to the 2020 provision, and (iv) a $2 million charge-off related to a commercial real estate loan impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic that required a $1 million increase to the 2020 provision.
Charge-offs for the year ended December 31, 2019 included $8 million related to two commercial loans. The commercial loans were partially charged-off. In addition, one energy credit accounted for $3 million in charge-offs during 2019.
Provision
There are significant uncertainties regarding the ultimate effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Depending upon the extent and duration of the future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we may need to make additional increases to our provision for loan losses in future periods. To the extent the pandemic continues to cause a recession or decrease economic activity for an extended time period, we expect our business and operations will be negatively impacted. Customers may seek additional loan modifications or restructuring or we may experience adverse movement in risk classifications, any of which could potentially result in the need to increase provisions and impact the ALLL. The December 31, 2020 provision increased primarily due to the reasons discussed below.
Substandard, Accruing Loans:
Prior to 2020, loans risk rated substandard or lower were considered impaired and evaluated on an individual basis. For the year ended December 31, 2020, loans risk rated substandard, on accrual and not a TDR, were evaluated collectively. The change in approach provided a better estimate of potential losses inherent in the substandard portfolio. Substandard, accruing loans not considered a TDR totaled $187 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $40 million at December 31, 2019. Substandard, accruing loans are discussed in additional detail below.
Grade Migration:
The Company downgraded approximately $843 million of loans between December 31, 2019 and 2020. Downgrades primarily resulted from the COVID-19 pandemic, lower economic activity and lower oil and gas prices. Loan categories significantly impacted by downgrades are discussed below.
Energy - The increase in supply realized during the first quarter of 2020 and decrease in demand for oil and natural gas created by the COVID-19 pandemic placed considerable pricing volatility and uncertainty in the market. As a result, $254 million of energy loans were downgraded, including $83 million downgraded to substandard and accruing in 2020. The downgrades increased the ALLL by approximately $11 million, including $8 million related to loans downgraded to substandard and accruing.
Commercial Real Estate (“CRE”) - The decline in economic activity in 2020 impacted our CRE borrowers. During 2020, the Company downgraded $336 million of CRE loans, including $196 million downgraded to watch, within our pass rated loan category, and $58 million downgraded to substandard and accruing. The downgrades increased the ALLL by approximately $8 million, including $6 million related to loans downgraded to substandard and accruing.
Commercial - The decline in economic activity in 2020 significantly impacted supply and demand for our borrowers’ products and services. As a result, $232 million of commercial loans were downgraded, including $56 million of loans listed as substandard and accruing. The downgrades increased the ALLL by approximately $6 million from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020.
Impaired Loans and Other Factors:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the impaired loan portfolio increased the ALLL by $7 million after taking out the impact of the charge-offs mentioned above. Changes in qualitative and quantitative rates on pass rated loans increased the ALLL by $6 million primarily due to an increase in 2020 charge-offs that impacted the historical charge-off ratios and declines in economic activity offset by balance reductions on pass rated loans that decreased the ALLL by $4 million.
While no portion of our allowance for loan losses is in any way restricted to any individual loan or group of loans and the entire allowance is available to absorb losses from any and all loans, the following tables represent management’s allocation of our allowance to specific loan categories for the periods indicated:
Nonperforming Assets
Nonperforming assets consist of nonperforming loans, foreclosed assets held for sale and impaired securities. Nonperforming loans include nonaccrual loans, loans past due 90 days or more and still accruing interest and loans modified under TDR that are not performing in accordance with their modified terms. For information regarding nonperforming loans and related accounting policies refer to the “Nonperforming Loans” section within Note 1: Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. For a breakout of the loan portfolio's nonaccrual loans refer to “Nonaccrual loans” within Note 4: Loans and Allowance for Loan Losses. For information on TDRs, refer to “Troubled Debt Restructurings” section in Note 4: Loans and Allowance for Loan Losses within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
At December 31, 2020, nonperforming assets increased $31 million or 64% from 2019. $60 million of loans became nonperforming in 2020, offset by a $19 million charge-off in 2020 on a nonperforming loan with a balance of $21 million at December 31, 2019 and pay downs of $6 million related to December 31, 2019 nonperforming loans. A number of nonperforming loans were significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Nonperforming loans included businesses in the following industries: (i) hotel, (ii) senior housing, and a few commercial credits. As of December 31, 2020, 34% of the nonperforming asset balance related to energy credits caused by volatility in the oil and natural gas market.
At December 31, 2019, nonperforming assets increased $30 million or 169% from 2018. During 2019, a commercial loan relationship with an outstanding balance of $30 million was restructured as a TDR due to financial problems. By December 31, 2019, the commercial TDR was in default of the modified terms as the borrower’s business and the value of the underlying collateral continued to deteriorate. This $30 million loan relationship was the primary reason for the increase in nonperforming assets and the increase in the ALLL to period end nonperforming loans.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company foreclosed on $4 million of assets, including land and industrial assets. These assets related to one commercial loan and one commercial real estate loan. During the year ended December 31, 2020, these assets were written-down by $1 million and the industrial facilities were sold. In addition, the Company foreclosed on a commercial real estate building valued at $1 million. For information regarding the foreclosed assets held-for-sale refer to Note 8: Foreclosed Assets within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The following table presents the Company’s nonperforming assets for the dates indicated:
During the year ended December 31, 2020, $1 million of interest income was recognized related to the $75 million in nonaccrual loans above. If the loans had been current in accordance with their original terms and had been outstanding through the period or since inception, the gross interest income that would have been recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020 would have been $2 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, $1 million of interest income was recognized related to the $40 million in nonaccrual loans above. If the loans had been current in accordance with their original terms and had been outstanding throughout the period or since inception, the gross interest income that would have been recorded for the year ended December 31, 2019 would have been approximately $3 million.
Other Asset Quality Metrics
Other asset quality metrics management reviews include loans past due 30 - 89 days and classified loans. The Company defines classified loans as loans categorized as substandard - performing, substandard - nonperforming, doubtful or loss. For the definitions of substandard, doubtful and loss, refer to the “Loans by Risk Rating” section within Note 4: Loan and Allowance for Loan Losses in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The increase in December 31, 2020 loans past due between 30 and 89 days was driven by a commercial loan and a commercial real estate loan. The commercial loan matured during the fourth quarter of 2020. The Company is working with the borrower to renew the loan. The commercial real estate loan is in the hotel industry, which has been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company continually analyzed the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and reduction in oil and gas prices. Our discussion regarding grade migration is provided within the “provision” section above.
The following table summarizes our loans past due 30 - 89 days, classified assets and related ratios:
Investment Portfolio
Our investment portfolio is governed by our investment policy that sets our objectives, limits and liquidity requirements among other items. The portfolio is maintained to serve as a contingent, on-balance sheet source of liquidity. The objective of our investment portfolio is to optimize earnings, manage credit risk, ensure adequate liquidity, manage interest rate risk, meet pledging requirements and meet regulatory capital requirements. Our investment portfolio is generally comprised of government sponsored entity securities and U.S. state and political subdivision securities with limits set on all types of securities.
At the date of purchase, all debt securities are classified as available-for-sale securities. Since interest rates move in cycles, having an available-for-sale portfolio allows management to: (i) protect against additional unrealized market valuation losses; (ii) provide more liquidity as rates rise, which often coincides with increasing loan demand and slower deposit growth; and (iii) generate more money to
reinvest when rates are higher giving the institution an opportunity to lock in higher yields. In the event the available-for-sale portfolio becomes too large given the constraints set in the policy, investments may be classified as held-to-maturity. Held-to-maturity classification will only be used if we have the intent and ability to hold the investment to its maturity.
At December 31, 2020, available-for-sale debt securities decreased $85 million or 11% from the prior year. As part of management’s investment strategy during 2020, the Company chose not to replace all of the cash flows associated with mortgage-backed security prepayments and realize gains from selling securities that were adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic or at risk of possible downgrades. Securities showing signs of credit stress, faster prepayments and low reinvestment yield options were analyzed to ensure adequate levels of risk were maintained within the portfolio. As of December 31, 2020, the securities portfolio had $39 million in unrealized gains.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company acquired an $11 million privately-held, equity security as part of a loan restructuring. Refer to the “Equity Securities” section in Note 3: Securities within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
During 2019, the investment portfolio increased to manage our liquidity position. In 2018, the investment portfolio declined from the prior year as we moved liquid assets to support higher yielding assets. Prior to fiscal year 2018, we purchased securities of states of the U.S. and political subdivisions as part of our tax and liquidity strategies.
For information related to the book value and fair value of our available-for-sale debt securities at December 31, 2020 and 2019 refer to the “Available-for-Sale Securities” segment in Note 3: Securities within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. For information related to the investment maturity schedule and weighted average yield for each range of maturities refer to the “Maturity Schedule” segment in Note 3: Securities within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Bank-Owned Life Insurance (“BOLI”)
The Company maintains investments in BOLI policies to help control employee benefit costs, as a protection against loss of certain employees and as a tax planning strategy. The decline in yield between December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020 is attributable to the insurance carrier’s underlying investments and operating costs that decreased overall income on the underlying asset. Yield declined between 2017 and 2018 as a result of the 2017 Tax Act, which lowered the tax rate for corporations.
The following table provides the balance of BOLI income earned and tax-equivalent yield for the periods indicated:
Deposits
Deposits come through our markets as well as through participation in certain online programs. The Company offers a variety of deposit products including noninterest-bearing demand deposits and interest-bearing deposits that include transaction accounts (including NOW accounts), savings accounts, money market accounts, and certificates of deposit. The Bank also acquires brokered deposits, internet subscription certificates of deposit, and reciprocal deposits through the Intrafi Network. The reciprocal deposits include both the Certificate of Deposit Account Registry Service (“CDARS”) and Insured Cash Sweep (“ICS”) program. The Company is a member of the Intrafi Network which effectively allows depositors to receive FDIC insurance on amounts greater than the FDIC insurance limit, which is currently $250 thousand. The Intrafi Network allows institutions to break large deposits into smaller amounts and place them in a network of other Intrafi Network institutions to ensure full FDIC insurance is gained on the entire deposit.
Our asset growth required us to place a greater emphasis on both interest and noninterest-bearing deposits. Deposit accounts are added by loan cross-selling, client referrals and involvement within our community.
At December 31, 2020, deposits grew $771 million or 20% from the prior year. Deposit growth was driven by demand in our ICS deposit product that increased $516 million from the prior year. The ICS product provided customers with the ability to manage their cash flow during the COVID-19 pandemic while providing insurance. In addition, our interest-bearing checking accounts saw higher demand due to PPP loan fundings. Year-over-year, time deposits declined by $196 million or 16% and money market deposits declined by $52 million as customers moved into more attractive products.
During 2019, deposits grew $716 million or 22% from the prior year. Transaction deposits increased from the prior year due to the offering of a new deposit product and customer growth through our relationship model. In addition, we saw increased interest in our money market accounts. Our time deposits increased due to our attractive interest rates on short-term CDs. During 2018, the Company introduced a deposit fee reimbursement program. The program attracted customers into noninterest bearing deposits that drove the growth in our noninterest-bearing deposits.
The following table sets forth deposit balances by certain categories as of the dates indicated and the percentage of each deposit category to total deposits:
The following table sets forth the maturity of time deposits as of December 31, 2020:
Other Borrowed Funds
Since it may not be possible to achieve the institution’s overall funding needs through core deposit funding, other borrowings may be used to support asset growth. Management has a funds management policy and committee, which supports the use of other borrowings. The risks associated with other borrowings are addressed in the same fashion as other balance sheet risks incurred by the Bank. Credit risk, interest rate risk, concentration risk, capital adequacy and liquidity are measured for the balance sheet as a whole, including any wholesale funding strategies that have been implemented or are expected to be implemented.
The following table sets forth the amounts outstanding and weighted average interest rate of our borrowings as of the dates indicated:
For a description and general terms of the other borrowed funds, refer to Note 10: Borrowing Arrangements within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The following table sets forth the maximum amount at any month end during the reporting period, the weighted average interest rate and the average balance of other borrowings during the reported period for the years indicated:
Liquidity
Liquidity is the ability to generate adequate amounts of cash from depositors, stockholders, profits or other funding sources, to meet our needs for cash, including payments to borrowers, operational costs, capital requirements and other strategic cash flow needs.
Our liquidity policy governs our approach to our liquidity position. The objective is to maintain adequate, but not excessive, liquidity to meet the daily cash flow needs of our clients while attempting to achieve adequate earnings for our stockholders. Our liquidity position is monitored continuously by our finance department.
Liquidity resources can be derived from two sources: (i) on-balance sheet liquidity resources, which represent funds currently on the balance sheet; and (ii) off-balance sheet liquidity resources, which represent funds available from third-party sources. On-balance sheet liquidity resources include overnight funds, short-term deposits with other banks, available-for-sale (“AFS”) securities, and certain other sources. Off-balance sheet liquidity resources consist of credit lines, wholesale deposits and debt funding and certain other sources.
On-balance sheet liquidity resources can be broken down into three sections: (i) primary liquidity resources, which represent liquid funds that are on the balance sheet; (ii) tertiary liquidity resources, which represent assets that can be sold into the secondary market; and (iii) public funds, which represent deposits. Primary liquidity resources include overnight funds plus short-term, interest-bearing deposits with other banks and unpledged AFS securities. Tertiary liquidity resources include loans that can be sold into the secondary market or through participation and unpledged securities classified as held-to-maturity. Public funds are another source of wholesale deposits as they require collateral.
Off-balance sheet liquidity resources require sufficient collateral, in the form of loans or securities, and have a larger, negative impact on our capital ratios. As a result, off-balance sheet liquidity has a higher cost on our asset growth compared to deposit growth. Off-balance sheet liquidity exists in several forms including: (i) internet subscription certificates of deposit; (ii) brokered deposits; (iii) borrowing capacity; (iv) repurchase agreements; or (v) other sources.
Internet subscription certificates of deposit are deposits made through national, wholesale certificates of deposit funding programs. These programs are designed to provide funding outside of the Bank’s normal market or existing client base and allow the Bank to diversify its wholesale funding resources. This form of funding does not require collateral and generally cannot be redeemed early. Brokered deposits are deposits funded through various broker-dealer relationships. The market for wholesale deposits is well developed. A key feature of this type of funding is that it is generally unsecured and does not require collateral for pledging.
Borrowing capacity refers to a form of liability-based funding. Repurchase agreements are another source of short-term funding in which a bank agrees to sell a security to a counterparty and repurchase the same or an identical security from the counterparty at a specified future date and price. Public funds are another source of wholesale deposits as they require collateral.
Our short-term and long-term liquidity requirements are primarily met through cash flow from operations, redeployment of prepaying and maturing balances in our loan portfolio and security portfolio, increases in client deposits and wholesale deposits. Other alternative sources of funds will supplement these primary sources to the extent necessary to meet additional liquidity requirements on either a short-term or long-term basis.
The Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows summarize our sources and uses of cash by type of activity for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalent of $409 million compared to $187 million at December 31, 2019. The change in cash and cash equivalents was due to an $80 million increase in cash provided by operating activities, a $686 million increase in cash provided by financing activities and net cash used in investing activities of $545 million. During 2020, liquid assets increased as an indirect result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The proceeds from PPP loans increased demand deposits and the Company’s overall liquidity as PPP loan proceeds waited to be disbursed. Loan growth was lower than deposit growth as customers protected their liquid positions. In addition, the Company was able to payoff matured borrowings without replacing it with new debt. Our portfolio of on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet liquidity continues to exceed the amount we estimate we would need to manage through an adverse liquidity event.
December 31, 2019, we had cash and cash equivalents of $187 million compared to $217 million at December 31, 2018. The change in cash and cash equivalents was due to a $74 million increase in cash provided by operating activities, a $759 million increase in cash provided by financing activities and net cash used in investing activities of $862 million. To fund the $806 million increase in loans, we increased deposits by $716 million and issued stock that resulted in $58 million in cash after the payoff of our preferred stock outstanding and payment of dividends. Due to our current liquidity, the Company was able to reduce other borrowings and increase its security portfolio as well.
As of December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, we had the following available funding:
Capital Requirements
The Company and the Bank are subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by the federal banking agencies. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate certain mandatory and possibly additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Refer to Item 1. Business under the “Supervision and Regulation” section for a detailed discussion regarding our capital requirements.
The Company monitors our capital ratios using forecasts and stress testing. Based on our capital ratios in 2019 and 2020 we were considered well-capitalized. As of December 31, 2020, the FDIC categorized the Bank as “well-capitalized” under the prompt corrective action framework. There have been no conditions or events since December 31, 2020 that management believes would change this classification.
Refer to Note 13: Regulatory Matters in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the table that summarizes the capital requirements applicable to the Company and the Bank in order to be considered “well-capitalized” from a regulatory perspective, as well as the Company’s and the Bank’s capital ratios as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. The Bank exceeded all regulatory capital requirements under Basel III and the Bank was considered to be “well-capitalized” for the periods ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Stockholders’ Equity
Prior to our IPO in 2019, the Company’s increase in equity primarily came from private placements. During 2020, the Company’s equity increased due to net income and an increase in the unrealized gain on available-for-sale debt securities as a result of the lower interest rate environment. The following graph presents total stockholders’ equity and book value per share as of the end of the periods indicated:
Changes in stockholders’ equity are provided in the Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity and in Note 22: Stock Offerings and Repurchases within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Contractual Obligations
Refer to Note 10: Borrowing Arrangements within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a listing of our December 31, 2020 significant contractual cash obligations to third parties on debt obligations. Refer to Note 18: Operating Leases within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a summary of our contractual cash obligations to third parties on lease obligations. Contractual obligations may be satisfied through our on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet liquidity discussed above.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are subject to off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business to meet the needs of our clients that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. These off-balance sheet arrangements include commitments to fund loans and standby letters of credit.
Commitments to originate loans are agreements to lend to a client as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Since a portion of the commitments may expire without being drawn upon, the total commitment amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. Each client’s creditworthiness is evaluated on a case-by-case basis. The amount of collateral obtained, if deemed necessary, is based on management’s credit evaluation of the counterparty. The type of collateral that we obtain varies, but may include accounts receivable, inventory, property, plant and equipment, commercial real estate and residential real estate.
Lines of credit, included in commitments to fund loans, are agreements to lend to a client as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Lines of credit generally have fixed expiration dates. Since a portion of the line may expire without being drawn upon, the total unused lines do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. Each client’s creditworthiness is evaluated on a case-by-case basis. The amount of collateral obtained, if deemed necessary, is based on management’s credit evaluation of the counter-party. Collateral held varies but may include accounts receivable, inventory, property, plant and equipment, commercial real estate and residential real estate. Management uses the same credit policies in granting lines of credit as it does for on-balance-sheet instruments.
Standby letters of credit are irrevocable conditional commitments issued by the Company to guarantee the performance of a client to a third party. Financial standby letters of credit are primarily issued to support public and private borrowing arrangements, including commercial paper, bond financing and similar transactions. The credit risk involved in issuing standby letters of credit is essentially the same as that involved in extending loans to clients. Fees for letters of credit are initially recorded by the Company as deferred revenue and are included in earnings at the termination of the respective agreements. Should the Company be obligated to perform under the standby letters of credit, the Company may seek recourse from the client for reimbursement of amounts paid.
The following is a summary of our off-balance sheet commitments outstanding as of the dates presented:
Interest Rate Sensitivity
A primary component of market risk is interest rate volatility. Managing interest rate risk is a key element of our balance sheet management. Interest rate risk is the risk that net interest margins will be eroded over time due to changing market conditions. Many factors can cause margins to erode: (i) lower loan demand; (ii) increased competition for funds; (iii) weak pricing policies; (iv) balance sheet mismatches; and (v) changing liquidity demands. We manage our sensitivity position using our interest rate risk policy. The management of interest rate risk is a three-step process and involves: (i) measuring the interest rate risk position; (ii) policy constraints; and (iii) strategic review and implementation.
Our exposure to interest rate risk is managed by the Bank’s Funds Management Committee (“FMC”) in accordance with policies approved by the Bank’s board of directors. The FMC uses a combination of three systems to measure the balance sheet’s interest rate risk position. Because each system serves a different purpose and provides a different perspective, the three systems in combination are expected to provide a better overall result than a single system alone. The three systems include: (i) gap reports; (ii) earnings simulation; and (iii) economic value of equity.
•A gap report measures the repricing volume of assets and liabilities by time period. The difference between repricing assets and repricing liabilities for a particular time period is known as the periodic repricing gap. Using this method, it is possible to estimate the impact on earnings of a given rate change. As a method of evaluating interest rate risk, the gap report is a reasonably accurate method of assessing earnings exposure. However, its reliability diminishes as balance sheet complexity increases. Optionality and other factors complicate the analysis.
•An earnings simulation measures the effect of changing interest rates on net interest income and earnings. Earnings simulation is more detailed than gap analysis. Under this approach, the repricing characteristics of each asset and liability instrument are programmed into a computer simulation model. This programming allows the Bank to refine important characteristics such as caps, floors, and time lag. It also allows the Bank to include the impact of new business activity in the analysis. Gap reporting only considers the existing balance sheet position.
•Economic Value of Equity (“EVE”) is a valuation approach to measuring long-term interest rate risk exposure. This approach considers all future time periods, which provides an advantage over earnings simulation. However, a negative attribute of EVE is that it assumes a sustained change in rates, which is never the case in the long-term. This seeks to compute the financial risk of having a duration mismatch between assets and funding.
In addition, the FMC compares the current interest rate risk position to policy limits. This procedure is compliance oriented and results in either a pass or fail outcome. When the balance sheet is in compliance, no further action is necessary. In instances of noncompliance, the FMC will develop a plan of action to correct the condition. A summary of the plan and its timing for completion will be forwarded to the board of directors each quarter until compliance is reestablished.
The FMC also evaluates interest rate risk positioning in light of anticipated interest rates. The purpose of this comparison is to determine whether action steps need to be taken to modify current strategy. The results form a decision-making input for the committee. If it is determined that more asset sensitivity is needed, the committee will either increase rate sensitive assets or reduce rate sensitive liabilities. The opposite will occur if less asset sensitivity is desired.
Loan and deposit repricing assumptions are critical in measuring interest rate risk. For loans, management reviews spreads and prepayment assumptions. For deposits, management reviews beta factors and decay assumptions. The FMC reviews and adjusts repricing assumptions at least annually. Model assumptions are included in the output reports and reviewed by the FMC on a periodic basis.
When evaluating balance sheet rate sensitivity, a proper analysis of total funding is of critical importance. The funding side of the balance sheet can be segregated into three broad categories, as follows: (i) funding with defined maturity dates; (ii) non-maturity deposits; and (iii) perpetual funding.
•Funding with defined maturity dates includes certificates of deposit and borrowed funds. The repricing analysis requires a twofold statement of behavior for each balance sheet category. It requires a cash flow schedule for principal and interest payments and a repricing schedule of rate adjustments. Once the cash flow and repricing projections are developed, the category can be analyzed for interest rate risk exposure.
•Non-maturity deposits tend to be a longer term, less volatile source of funds. Non-maturity deposits have very short contractual lives. The Bank uses historical analysis to develop its decay assumptions, but it looks at aggregate account types rather than individual clients. The review analyzes both non-maturity deposits as a whole and individual deposit categories.
•Perpetual funding is the most stable and least costly source of funding. Its main component is equity capital. It has a zero interest rate and cannot be withdrawn by stockholders because of a rate change. In effect, it is a perpetual source of free funding.
To ensure a formal evaluation process, periodic independent evaluations are conducted and documented. Such evaluation consists primarily of: (i) an assessment of internal controls; (ii) an evaluation of data integrity; (iii) the appropriateness of the risk management system; (iv) the reasonableness of validity scenarios; (v) a review of the FMC policy; and (vi) validation of calculations. In addition, to ensure the model is working as expected a back test of the model is completed at least annually.
All of the assumptions used in our analysis are inherently uncertain and, as a result, the model cannot precisely measure future net interest income or precisely predict the impact of fluctuations in market interest rates on net interest income. Actual results may differ from the model’s simulated results due to timing, magnitude and frequency of interest rate changes as well as changes in market conditions and the application and timing of various management strategies.
On a quarterly basis, we run various simulation models including a static balance sheet and dynamic growth balance sheet. These models test the impact on net interest income and fair value of equity from changes in market interest rates under various scenarios. Under the static model and dynamic growth models, rates are shocked instantaneously and ramped rates change over a 12-month horizon based upon parallel and nonparallel yield curve shifts. Parallel shock scenarios assume instantaneous parallel movements in the yield curve compared to a flat yield curve scenario. Nonparallel simulation involves analysis of interest income and expense under various changes in the shape of the yield curve.
Our internal policy regarding internal rate risk simulations currently specifies that for instantaneous parallel shifts of the yield curve, estimated net interest income at risk for the subsequent one-year period should not decline by more than 5% for a -100 basis point shift, 5% for a 100 basis point shift, 10% for a 200 basis point shift, 15% for a 300 basis point shift, and 20% for a 400 basis point shift.
The Company has several instruments that can be used to manage interest rate risk, including: (i) modifying the duration of interest-bearing liabilities; (ii) modifying the duration of interest-earning assets, including our investment portfolio; and (iii) entering into on-balance sheet derivatives. As of December 31, 2020, we have not entered into instruments such as leveraged derivatives or financial options to mitigate interest rate risk from specific transactions. Based upon the nature of our operations, we are not subject to foreign exchange or commodity price risk.
The FMC evaluates interest rate risk using a rate shock method and rate ramp method. In a rate shock analysis, rates change immediately and the change is sustained over the time horizon. In a rate ramp analysis, rate changes occur gradually over time. The following tables summarize the simulated changes in net interest income and fair value of equity over a 12 month horizon using a rate shock and rate ramp method as of the dates indicated:
The hypothetical negative change in net interest income as of December 31, 2020 in an up 100 environment is primarily due to floors placed on variable rate loans that limit interest income growth as rates start to rise. In an up 200 and 300 environment, floors on variable rate loans become less effective and earning assets reprice faster than interest-bearing liabilities. Loans remain the largest portion of our adjustable earning assets, as the mix of adjustable loans or those maturing in one year was 74%.
The models the Company uses include assumptions regarding interest rates and balance changes. These assumptions are inherently uncertain and, as a result, the model cannot precisely estimate net interest income or precisely predict the impact of higher or lower interest rates on net interest income. Actual results may differ from simulated results due to timing, magnitude and frequency of interest rate changes as well as changes in market conditions, customer behavior and management strategies, among other factors.
Selected Quarterly Financial Data (unaudited)
The following table presents selected quarterly financial data for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Overview
Net Interest Income
Interest income for the fourth quarter of 2020 declined as compared to the fourth quarter of 2019 due to a lower interest rate environment, partially offset by a $724 million increase in interest-earning assets. Interest income increased for the fourth quarter of 2020 on a linked-quarter basis primarily due to PPP loan fees recognized during the quarter.
Interest expense for the fourth quarter of 2020 declined as compared to the fourth quarter of 2019 as a result of a lower interest rate environment, partially offset by a $478 million increase in interest-bearing funds. Interest expense for the fourth quarter of 2020 declined on a linked-quarter basis primarily due to reductions in other borrowings outstanding and renewals of time deposits at lower interest rates.
The fourth quarter of 2020 tax-equivalent net interest margin was 3.12%, an increase from 2.98% in the prior quarter and a decline from 3.23% in the fourth quarter of 2019 as a result of the changes mentioned above.
Provision for Loan Losses
The provision for loan losses for the fourth quarter of 2020 declined from the prior year primarily due to a $16 million increase in the provision on a large loan that deteriorated in the fourth quarter of 2019. On a linked-quarter basis, the provision for loan losses for the fourth quarter of 2020 remained unchanged.
Noninterest Income
For the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company increased fee income commensurate with its customer growth and recorded stronger credit card interchange fees and other service charges than in 2019. Because of the interest rate environment, the Company had less activity in the back-to-back swap program. In addition, a borrower with a back-to-back swap was downgraded and resulted in a $300 thousand loss related to the CVA.
Noninterest Expense
During the fourth quarter of 2020, occupancy costs increased $379 thousand or 19% from the prior year and increased $283 thousand or 13% from the quarter ended September 30, 2020 due to our two new locations. Fourth quarter 2020 salary and employee benefit costs increased $907 thousand or 7% from the prior year and increased $97 thousand or 1% on a linked quarter basis due to an increase in performance based compensation. Deposit insurance premiums increased $384 thousand or 50% year-over-year and $55 thousand or 5% on a linked quarter basis. The increase in deposit insurance premiums is driven by changes in assets, asset quality and equity. Overall, the Company continues to realize benefits from reduced travel, entertainment, and other discretionary spending as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Incomes Taxes
Year-over-year fourth quarter 2020 income taxes increased from the same period in 2019 primarily due to an increase in taxable income. On a linked-quarter basis, fourth quarter 2020 income tax remained flat. The Company benefited from the tax-exempt municipal bond portfolio and bank-owned life insurance in 2019 and 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP and with general practices within the financial services industry. Application of these principles requires management to make complex and subjective estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under current circumstances. These assumptions form the basis for our judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from independent, objective sources. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. Use of alternative assumptions may have resulted in significantly different estimates. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
The Company qualifies as an EGC under the JOBS Act. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an EGC can take advantage of the extended transition period when complying with new or revised accounting standards. This allows an EGC to delay adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would apply to private companies; however, the EGC can still early adopt new or revised accounting standards, if applicable. We have elected to take advantage of this extended transition period, which means the financial statements in this Form 10-K, as well as financial statements we file in the future, will be subject to all new or revised accounting standards generally applicable to private companies, unless stated otherwise. This decision will remain in effect until the Company loses its EGC status.
Our most significant accounting policies are described in Note 1: Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. We identified the following accounting policies and estimates that, due to the difficult, subjective or complex judgments and assumptions inherent in those policies and estimates and the potential sensitivity of our financial statements to those judgments and assumptions, are critical to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
All significant accounting pronouncements are described in Note 1: Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company has identified the following accounting pronouncements that due to the impact on the Company’s financial statements are critical to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations.