ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion supplements and provides information about the major components of the results of operations, financial condition, liquidity and capital resources of the Corporation. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements. In addition to current and historical information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements relate to our future business, financial condition or results of operations. For a description of certain factors that may have a significant impact on our future business, financial condition or results of operations, see “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” prior to Item 1. “Business.”
OVERVIEW
Our primary financial goals are to maximize the Corporation’s earnings and to deploy capital in profitable growth initiatives that will enhance long-term shareholder value. We track three primary financial performance measures in order to assess the level of success in achieving these goals: (1) return on average assets (ROA), (2) return on average equity (ROE), and (3) growth in earnings. In addition to these financial performance measures, we track the performance of the Corporation’s three principal business segments: community banking, mortgage banking, and consumer finance. We also actively manage our capital through growth, dividends and share repurchases, while considering the need to maintain a strong capital position.
Financial Performance Measures
Consolidated net income for the Corporation was $22.4 million in 2020, or $6.06 per share assuming dilution, compared to $18.9 million in 2019, or $5.47 per share assuming dilution, and $18.0 million in 2018, or $5.15 per share assuming dilution. The Corporation’s ROE and ROA were 12.54 percent and 1.14 percent, respectively, for 2020, compared to 12.02 percent and 1.20 percent, respectively, for 2019 and 12.40 percent and 1.19 percent, respectively, for 2018.
Consolidated net income for 2020 and 2019 were affected by certain items that management does not expect to have an ongoing impact on consolidated net income, including a gain upon sale of a pool of purchased credit impaired (PCI) loans in 2020, charges related to early repayment of borrowings in 2020, merger related expenses incurred in connection with the Corporation’s acquisition of Peoples Bankshares, Incorporated (Peoples) recorded in 2020 and 2019, impairment charges related to branch consolidation in 2020, and provisions of the CARES Act, which provided income tax benefits related to prior tax years. Excluding the effects of these items, adjusted net income for 2020 was $22.4 million, or $6.06 per share, compared to $19.5 million, or $5.66 per share, for 2019 and $18.0 million, or $5.15 per share, for 2018. Adjusted ROE and adjusted ROA were 12.54 percent and 1.14 percent, respectively, for 2020, compared to 12.44 percent and 1.25 percent, respectively, for 2019 and 12.40 percent and 1.19 percent, respectively, for 2018. Refer to “Use of Certain Non-GAAP Financial Measures,” below, for a reconciliation of adjusted net income, adjusted earnings per share, adjusted ROE and adjusted ROA, which are non-GAAP financial measures, to the most directly comparable financial measures calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Consolidated net income and earnings per share increased 19.0 percent and 10.8 percent, respectively, for 2020, compared to 2019. Adjusted net income and adjusted earnings per share increased 15.0 percent and 7.1 percent, respectively, for 2020, compared to 2019. The increase in adjusted earnings per share for 2020 compared to 2019 is due primarily to higher mortgage banking segment net income, partially offset by higher provision for loan losses at the community banking segment, and the issuance of 209,871 shares of common stock in connection with the acquisition of Peoples.
Impact of and Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused a significant disruption in economic activity worldwide, and has had a significant impact on businesses and consumers in our market areas and on our results of operations, which the Corporation expects to continue. Many businesses temporarily closed or reduced their availability at the beginning of the pandemic; and while many people have returned to work, the U.S. unemployment rate remained elevated at 6.7 percent in December 2020, after having reached 14.7 percent in April 2020. Additional unemployment issues may be obscured given the government relief programs that have been made available during late 2020 and early 2021 to assist those in need. There remains substantial uncertainty about critical factors that may affect the economy and employment, including the severity and duration of the pandemic; the availability and pace of vaccinations, the pace of economic recovery when the pandemic subsides, potential re-tightening of policies that had previously allowed businesses to open; any further government stimulus efforts, including the nature, timing and extent of such stimulus; and the timing of reopening of schools, many of which are currently being conducted virtually.
The COVID-19 pandemic presents significant risks and uncertainties to our businesses; however, at this time we cannot determine the ultimate impact of the pandemic on the results of operations of the Corporation. The federal government and state and local governments have responded to this crisis with unprecedented relief efforts and economic stimulus. We cannot predict the duration or severity of the pandemic, the extent of government intervention during and following the pandemic or the effects the pandemic will have on the Corporation. We believe that as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, our results of operations may be impacted by elevated loan losses, net interest margin compression and falling demand for loans.
Risks to Results of Operations
Elevated loan losses. The COVID-19 pandemic has had a significant impact on businesses and consumers in our market areas. Many businesses temporarily or permanently closed or have faced declines in revenue since the beginning of the pandemic as consumers were instructed to stay at home. Even as many businesses have reopened, restrictions remain, including limited gathering sizes. This disruption has caused employers to lay off or reduce compensation of certain employees, and has caused some people not to receive steady incomes because they are not able to work due to illness or having to care for children or family members, resulting in many households facing reduced income. Commercial and consumer borrowers affected by the pandemic may not be able to make timely payments on loans, which may lead to an increase in delinquencies or defaults and may ultimately result in increases in net charge-offs and provision for loan losses. Furthermore, collateral values may decline as a result of decreased economic activity and increased uncertainty during the crisis, which may contribute to an increase in loan losses during and after the pandemic.
In 2020, the Corporation recorded additional provision for loan losses of approximately $8.0 million as a result of asset quality deterioration that is expected to arise as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic disruption. Management continues to monitor changes in economic conditions and asset quality resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. If conditions deteriorate further, then additional provision for loan losses may be required in future periods.
Net interest margin compression. Since December 31, 2019, the FOMC has reduced its benchmark interest rate target to near zero by announcing rate cuts of 50 basis points on March 3, 2020 and 100 basis points on March 15, 2020. Treasury yields for all maturities are also lower since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. Lower market interest rates have resulted in lower average yields on all classes of earning assets. While average costs of deposits and borrowings have also decreased, and we expect the average cost of time deposits to continue to decrease due to the repricing of time deposits at maturity, those factors may not offset the effect on net interest margin of lower yields on earning assets.
Falling demand for loans. As businesses and consumers have been affected by the pandemic, new investment and consumer spending may decline, resulting in lower demand for loans. Our recent performance and strategic planning have depended, in part, on growth in lending at the community banking segment, and we have invested in expanding our commercial lending team. While loans outstanding at the community banking segment grew during 2020 (which included loans originated under the PPP), there can be no assurance that loan growth will continue during or after the pandemic.
Lower demand for loans in our markets as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, combined with lower interest rates on new loans, may negatively impact interest income from loans.
Impairment of securities and goodwill. A broad decrease in economic activity as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic is expected to affect tax revenues of states and political subdivisions, the pandemic has required increased health and safety expenditures by states and political subdivisions, and increased uncertainty has resulted in volatility in the market price of investments. The Corporation holds securities issued by states and political subdivisions that may experience shortfalls in general revenues or an inability to repay obligations when due as a result of the crisis. Additionally, the Corporation holds debt securities of corporate issuers whose financial condition may be adversely impacted by the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. There is a risk that these securities may become impaired, which would have a negative impact on the Corporation’s results of operations. Additionally, depending on the severity and duration of the economic consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Corporation’s goodwill allocated to the community banking segment may become impaired, which would have a negative impact on the Corporation’s results of operations.
2021 Outlook
Management’s overall outlook for 2021 is relatively positive given our diversified business strategy; however, we will be affected by many challenges in 2021, including the COVID-19 pandemic and limited availability and distribution of vaccines, cyber security and fraud prevention, the low interest rate environment and the impacts of the changing social and political landscapes. These uncertainties could potentially lead to a continued economic downturn, fraud losses, further margin compression, asset quality deterioration and regulatory actions. The following additional factors could influence our financial performance in 2021:
● Community Banking: Growth in higher-yielding earning assets, specifically loans, will continue to be our primary focus at the Bank during 2021. Despite the issues faced during 2020, our growing lending team continued focus on commercial lending and our completion of the acquisition of Peoples contributed to growth in our loan portfolio during 2020. Growth in loans also included PPP loans, many of which may be repaid or forgiven by the SBA during 2021. While our asset quality remains strong, we do expect some deterioration in asset quality as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2021, we will continue to explore expansion opportunities and we will continue to add to our digital services platform by leveraging our treasury solutions team, branch network, and commercial relationship managers to communicate the benefits of our mobile business services to our existing and potential customers. We also intend to introduce contactless debit cards to customers during 2021, further enhancing our customers’ experience.
● Mortgage Banking: C&F Mortgage generates significant noninterest income from the origination and sale of residential loan products into the secondary market. In 2020, a favorable interest rate environment and an extremely active housing market contributed to record loan production, subsequent gains on sales of loans and ancillary fee income at the mortgage banking segment. Revenue from mortgage lender services offered through C&F Mortgage’s Lender Solutions division also reached record levels due to new customers and higher loan production volume. Loan production and revenue in 2021 are highly uncertain and will depend on economic conditions and market factors beyond our control, including the COVID-19 pandemic, interest rates, housing inventory and loan demand. In addition, during 2021, C&F Mortgage anticipates it will continue to (1) compete to retain and attract qualified loan officers, (2) invest in technology to further enhance our fully digital application and document collection process and (3) grow our Lender Solutions division.
● Consumer Finance: C&F Finance provides automobile financing through programs that are designed to serve customers in the non-prime sector and marine and RV financing for borrowers in the prime sector. As has been the case for the last several years, competition in the non-prime automobile loan business remains aggressive, resulting in lower interest rates and in many cases, less restrictive underwriting standards by several of our competitors. We expect organic loan growth to continue to be challenging in 2021. Credit quality has consistently improved since we strengthened our underwriting standards in 2016, and as a result we have experienced a sustained decline in annual charge offs as a percentage of average loans that continued in 2020. However, we do anticipate some deterioration in asset quality in 2021 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic,
and particularly the potential impacts of the pandemic on nonprime automobile borrowers. We continued to grow our marine and RV loan portfolio in 2020 and remain committed to only purchasing prime contracts in this segment, which should result in lower loan losses for these higher credit quality borrowers. During the second quarter of 2021, we plan to relocate our C&F Finance corporate headquarters to a new, larger facility in Richmond, Virginia.
Principal Business Segments
An overview of the financial results for each of the Corporation’s principal segments is presented below. A more detailed discussion is included in the section “Results of Operations.”
Community Banking: The community banking segment reported net income of $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net income of $9.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Previously, the community banking segment was referred to as the retail banking segment. There have been no changes to the composition of the community banking segment.
The decrease in community banking segment net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was due primarily to (1) lower average yields on loans; (2) higher provision for loan losses resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic disruption; (3) higher operating expenses, including the effects of (a) assuming certain operating costs of Peoples, which was acquired by the Corporation on January 1, 2020, including costs that have been eliminated following the integration of its operations into the Bank’s, (b) opening two new financial centers in the third quarter of 2020 and (c) investing in technology infrastructure to support continued growth; (4) early debt repayment charges of $2.2 million incurred in connection with the payoff of borrowings of $44.5 million; (5) lower interest income on excess cash reserves; (6) higher merger related expenses in connection with the acquisition of Peoples; (7) higher interest expense on deposits as a result of higher average deposit balances; and (8) a $281,000 write-down of assets in connection with the consolidation of the Bank’s former main office in West Point, VA into a nearby branch office and the donation of the building to the Town of West Point; partially offset by (1) a gain of $3.5 million on the sale of a pool of PCI loans; (2) higher average loans outstanding, which contributed to higher interest income on loans; (3) higher interchange income; and (4) income tax benefits of $326,000 related to prior tax years of Peoples as a result of favorable net operating loss carryback treatment under the CARES Act.
Average loans increased $216.5 million, or 27.8 percent, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. These increases included $99.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 of average balances of loans acquired in the acquisition of Peoples, and $59.7 million of average balances of loans originated under the PPP. In addition to increases resulting from the acquisition of Peoples and the PPP, the increase in average loans outstanding for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 resulted from growth in the commercial real estate and commercial business lending segments of the loan portfolio. Average loan yields were lower for 2020 compared to 2019 due to repricing of variable rate loans and lower average yields on new lending, including PPP loans. The recognition of interest income on PCI loans is based on management’s expectation of future payments of principal and interest, which is inherently uncertain. Earlier than expected repayments of certain PCI loans resulted in the recognition of additional interest income during 2020 and 2019. Interest income recognized on PCI loans was $3.0 million and $3.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
C&F Bank’s total nonperforming assets were $3.9 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $2.6 million at December 31, 2019. Nonperforming assets at December 31, 2020 included $3.0 million in nonaccrual loans, compared to $1.5 million at December 31, 2019 and included $907,000 in other real estate owned, compared to $1.1 million at December 31, 2019. The increase in nonaccrual loans compared to December 31, 2019 is due primarily to the downgrading of one commercial relationship in the fourth quarter of 2020, partially offset by payoffs. Nonaccrual loans were comprised primarily of one commercial relationship at December 31, 2020 and were comprised primarily of residential mortgages and equity lines at December 31, 2019. The community banking segment recorded provision for loan losses of $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $360,000, for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the allowance for loan losses increased primarily as a result of reserves based on qualitative adjustments related to the COVID-19 pandemic and due to loan growth. As of December 31, 2020, compared to December
31, 2019, there have not been significant changes in the overall credit quality of the loan portfolio, although management believes the effects of PPP loans, payment deferrals and government stimulus may be delaying signs of credit deterioration. Management believes that the level of the allowance for loan losses is sufficient to absorb losses inherent in the portfolio. However, if there is further deterioration in economic conditions, additional provision may be required in future periods.
Mortgage Banking: The mortgage banking segment reported net income of $10.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net income of $3.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The increase in net income of the mortgage banking segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was due primarily to higher gains on sales of loans and mortgage banking fee income, resulting from higher margins and record loan production, higher mortgage lender services income for providing mortgage origination functions to third parties, and higher net interest income due to higher balances of loans held for sale. Partially offsetting these factors were higher expenses tied to loan production, including compensation expense, loan processing expense and data processing expense. Mortgage loan originations for the mortgage banking segment were $1.8 billion and $944.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Loan production for the year ended December 31, 2020 was the highest reported by the mortgage banking segment for any calendar year in the Corporation’s history. Lower interest rates on mortgage loans have contributed to an increase in volume in the broader mortgage industry in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in the prior year. Mortgage loan originations for the mortgage banking segment during the year ended December 31, 2020 for refinancings and home purchases were $917.5 million and $854.5 million, respectively, compared to $224.9 million and $719.2 million, respectively, during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Consumer Finance: The consumer finance segment reported net income of $7.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net income of $6.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The increase in net income of the consumer finance segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was due primarily to lower provision for loan losses as a result of lower net charge-offs and a decrease in interest expense due to lower average cost of borrowings, partially offset by lower interest income due to lower average yields on loans. The average yield on loans for the year ended December 31, 2020 was lower compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to continued competition in the non-prime automobile loan business, including the effect of a lower interest rate environment, and the consumer finance segment’s pursuing growth in higher quality, lower yielding loans, which include prime marine and recreational vehicle (RV) loans.
The net charge-off ratio for 2020 decreased to 1.54 percent from 3.05 percent for 2019. The decline reflects a lower number of charge-offs during 2020, due to improvement in loan performance, and lower losses per loan charged off as a result of a strong used car market. Improvement in loan performance has resulted from C&F Finance Company continuing to purchase higher quality loans as well as borrowers benefitting from the government’s stimulus measures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020. C&F Finance Company offers payment deferrals at times to non-prime automobile borrowers as a management technique to achieve higher ultimate cash collections. C&F Finance Company offered a higher number of payment deferrals during the first and second quarters of 2020 to borrowers impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and as of December 31, 2020, most borrowers who received a deferral had resumed making payments and were current. The average amount deferred on a monthly basis during the fourth quarter of 2020 and the year ended December 31, 2020 was 1.56 percent and 2.93 percent of non-prime automobile loans outstanding, compared to 1.87 percent and 1.90 percent during the same periods in 2019. At December 31, 2020, total delinquent loans, which does not include loans that have been granted a payment deferral, as a percentage of total loans was 3.08 percent, compared to 2.48 percent at September 30, 2020 and 4.17 percent at December 31, 2019. The allowance for loan losses was $23.5 million, or 7.53 percent of total loans at December 31, 2020, compared to $21.8 million, or 6.96 percent of total loans at December 31, 2019. The increase in the level of the allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans is a result of reserves based on qualitative adjustments to reflect losses that management believes are probable as a result of the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Management believes that the level of the allowance for loan losses is sufficient to absorb losses inherent in the portfolio. However, if there is further deterioration in economic conditions, additional provision may be required in future periods.
Other: The remaining components included in the consolidated results of operations of the Corporation are comprised primarily of net losses associated with holding company expenses of the Corporation, partially offset by the net income of C&F Wealth Management. These components reported aggregate net losses of $1.4 million and $1.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The lower net loss during 2020, compared to 2019, was primarily due to higher net wealth management services income and lower merger related expenses recorded at the holding company during 2020.
Acquisition of Peoples Bankshares, Incorporated: On January 1, 2020, the Corporation completed the acquisition of Peoples and its banking subsidiary, Peoples Community Bank for an aggregate purchase price of $22.2 million of cash and stock. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Corporation recorded merger related expenses of $1.4 million ($1.1 million after income taxes), of which $1.3 million (1.0 million after income taxes) was allocated to the community banking segment and $100,000 ($100,000 after income taxes) was recorded as a holding company expense. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Corporation recorded merger related expenses of $709,000 ($653,000 after income taxes), of which $236,000 ($196,000 after income taxes) was allocated to the community banking segment and the remainder was recorded as a holding company expense. In the aggregate, in connection with the acquisition of Peoples, the Corporation recorded merger related expenses of $2.1 million ($1.8 million after income taxes).
Capital Management and Dividends
Total equity was $194.5 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $165.3 million at December 31, 2019. Capital growth resulted primarily from earnings for the year ended December 31, 2020 and the issuance of $11.6 million of common equity in connection with the acquisition of Peoples on January 1, 2020, which was partially offset by cash dividends during 2020. On September 29, 2020, the Corporation completed the issuance of $20.0 million in aggregate principal amount of subordinated notes due in 2030, which are included in Tier 2 capital of the Corporation for regulatory purposes. The subordinated notes will initially bear interest at a fixed rate of 4.875% for five years and at the three month SOFR plus 475.5 basis points thereafter. The Corporation assumed $4.0 million in outstanding principal of subordinated notes in connection with the acquisition of Peoples, which are also included in Tier 2 capital of the Corporation for regulatory purposes.
The Corporation’s Board of Directors continued its historical practice of paying dividends in 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Corporation declared dividends of $1.52 per share. Annual dividends per share increased 2.0 percent over dividends of $1.49 per share declared in 2019. The Board of Directors of the Corporation continually reviews the amount of cash dividends per share and the resulting dividend payout ratio in light of changes in economic conditions, current and future capital levels and requirements and expected future earnings. In making its decision on the payment of dividends on the Corporation’s common stock, the Corporation’s Board of Directors considers operating results, financial condition, capital adequacy, regulatory requirements, shareholder returns, and other factors.
On November 17, 2020, the Board of Directors of the Corporation authorized a program, effective November 17, 2020, to repurchase up to 365,000 shares of the Corporation’s common stock (the Repurchase Program) through November 30, 2021. Repurchases under the program may be made through privately negotiated transactions or open market transactions, including pursuant to a trading plan in accordance with Rule 10b5-1 and/or Rule 10b-18 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and shares repurchased will be returned to the status of authorized and unissued shares of common stock. The Corporation’s previous share repurchase program expired on May 31, 2020 and the Corporation had made aggregate common stock repurchases of $2.1 million under the previous repurchase program. As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation has made aggregate common stock repurchases of 7,459 shares for an aggregate cost of $275,000 under the Repurchase Program. At December 31, 2020, the book value per share of the Corporation’s common stock was $52.80, and tangible book value per share was $45.32, compared to $48.07 and $43.61, respectively, at December 31, 2019.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The preparation of financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions. Those accounting policies with the greatest uncertainty and that require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments affecting the application of these policies, and the greatest likelihood that materially different amounts would be reported under different conditions, or using different assumptions, are described below.
Allowance for Loan Losses: We establish the allowance for loan losses through charges to earnings in the form of a provision for loan losses. Loan losses are charged against the allowance when we believe that the collection of the principal is unlikely. Subsequent recoveries of losses previously charged against the allowance are credited to the allowance. The allowance represents an amount that, in our judgment, will be adequate to absorb probable losses inherent in the loan portfolio. Our judgment in determining the level of the allowance is based on evaluations of the collectibility of loans while taking into consideration such factors as trends in delinquencies and charge-offs for relevant periods of time, changes in the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, current economic conditions that may affect a borrower’s ability to repay and the value of collateral, overall portfolio quality and review of specific potential losses. This evaluation is inherently subjective because it requires estimates that are susceptible to significant revision as more information becomes available.
Impairment of Loans: We consider a loan impaired when it is probable that the Corporation will be unable to collect all interest and principal payments as scheduled in the loan agreement. We do not consider a loan impaired during a period of delay in payment if we expect the ultimate collection of all amounts due. We measure impairment on a loan-by-loan basis based on either the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate, the loan’s obtainable market price, or the fair value of the collateral if the loan is collateral dependent. Large groups of smaller balance homogeneous loans are collectively evaluated for impairment. We maintain a valuation allowance to the extent that the measure of the impaired loan is less than the recorded investment in the loan. All troubled debt restructurings (TDRs) are also considered impaired loans and are evaluated individually. A TDR occurs when we agree to significantly modify the original terms of a loan by granting a concession due to the deterioration in the financial condition of the borrower. For more information see the section titled “Asset Quality” within Item 7.
Loans Acquired in a Business Combination: Acquired loans are classified as either (i) PCI loans or (ii) purchased performing loans and are recorded at fair value on the date of acquisition.
PCI loans are those for which there is evidence of credit deterioration since origination and for which it is probable at the date of acquisition that the Corporation will not collect all contractually required principal and interest payments. When determining fair value, PCI loans are aggregated into pools of loans based on common risk characteristics as of the date of acquisition such as loan type, date of origination, and evidence of credit quality deterioration such as internal risk grades and past due and nonaccrual status. The difference between contractually required payments at acquisition and the cash flows expected to be collected at acquisition is referred to as the “nonaccretable difference.” Any excess of cash flows expected at acquisition over the estimated fair value is referred to as the “accretable yield” and is recognized as interest income over the remaining life of the loan when there is a reasonable expectation about the amount and timing of such cash flows.
On a quarterly basis, we evaluate our estimate of cash flows expected to be collected on PCI loans. Estimates of cash flows for PCI loans require significant judgment. Subsequent decreases to the expected cash flows will generally result in a provision for loan losses resulting in an increase to the allowance for loan losses. Subsequent significant increases in cash flows may result in a reversal of post-acquisition provision for loan losses or a transfer from nonaccretable difference to accretable yield that increases interest income over the remaining life of the loan, or pool(s) of loans. Disposals of loans, which may include sale of loans to third parties, receipt of payments in full or in part from the borrower or foreclosure of the collateral, result in removal of the loan from the PCI loan portfolio at its carrying amount.
PCI loans are not classified as nonperforming by the Corporation at the time they are acquired, regardless of whether they had been classified as nonperforming by the previous holder of such loans, and they will not be classified as nonperforming so long as, at quarterly re-estimation periods, we believe we will fully collect the new carrying value of
the pools of loans.
The Corporation accounts for purchased performing loans using the contractual cash flows method of recognizing discount accretion based on the acquired loans’ contractual cash flows. Purchased performing loans are recorded at fair value, including a credit discount. The fair value discount is accreted as an adjustment to yield over the estimated lives of the loans. There is no allowance for loan losses established at the acquisition date for purchased performing loans. A provision for loan losses may be required for any deterioration in these loans in future periods.
Goodwill: The Corporation's goodwill was recognized in connection with past business combinations and is reported at the community banking segment and the consumer finance segment. The Corporation reviews the carrying value of goodwill at least annually or more frequently if certain impairment indicators exist. In testing goodwill for impairment, the Corporation may first consider qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances lead to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If, after assessing the totality of events and circumstances, we conclude that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then no further testing is required and the goodwill of the reporting unit is not impaired. If the Corporation elects to bypass the qualitative assessment or if we conclude that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then the fair value of the reporting unit is compared with its carrying value to determine whether an impairment exists.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Corporation elected to bypass the qualitative assessment and performed a test of goodwill for impairment at the community banking segment and the consumer finance segment by measuring the fair value of each reporting unit at the testing date and comparing to their respective carrying values. Management concluded that no impairment existed as of December 31, 2020 and that the fair value of the consumer finance segment substantially exceeded its carrying value. The fair value of the community banking segment exceeded its carrying value by $8.8 million or approximately 6 percent. Management measured the fair value of the community banking segment based on correlated indications of value using an income approach (discounted cash flows) and market approach (capitalized forward earnings, capitalized tangible book value and observed transaction multiples of tangible book value). The measurement of fair value was dependent upon management’s expectation of future earnings of the community banking segment, which have been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic disruption, as well as management’s understanding and expectations regarding pricing of bank mergers and acquisitions during and after the pandemic. The impacts on the earnings of the community banking segment of the pandemic include recognition of higher provisions for loan losses and a decrease in net interest margin. Management’s estimate of the fair value of the community banking segment may be negatively impacted if adverse effects of the pandemic on loan losses and net interest margin are greater than management expects them to be in future periods.
Income Taxes: Determining the Corporation’s effective tax rate requires judgment. The Corporation’s net deferred tax asset is determined annually based on temporary differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities that will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future based on enacted tax laws and rates applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. In addition, there may be transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax outcomes are uncertain and the Corporation’s tax returns are subject to audit by various tax authorities. Although we believe that estimates related to income taxes are reasonable, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome will not be materially different than that which is reflected in the consolidated financial statements.
For further information concerning accounting policies, refer to Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” under the heading “Note 1: Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.”
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
NET INTEREST INCOME
The following table shows the average balance sheets, the amounts of interest earned on earning assets, with related yields, and interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities, with related rates, for each of the years ended December 31,
2020, 2019 and 2018. Loans include loans held for sale. Loans placed on a nonaccrual status are included in the balances and are included in the computation of yields, but had no material effect. Accretion and amortization of fair value purchase adjustments related to business combinations are included in the computation of yields on loans and investments and on the costs of deposits and borrowings. The accretion contributed approximately 34 basis points and 23 basis points to the yields on community banking segment loans and total loans, respectively, and 18 basis points to both the yield on interest earning assets and net interest margin for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately 44 basis points and 29 basis points to the yields on community banking segment loans and total loans, respectively, and 23 basis points to both the yield on interest earning assets and net interest margin for the year ended December 31, 2019, and approximately 41 basis points and 28 basis points to the yields on community banking segment loans and total loans, respectively, and 21 basis points to both the yield on interest earning assets and the net interest margin for the year ended December 31, 2018. Interest on tax-exempt loans and securities is presented on a taxable-equivalent basis (which converts the income on loans and investments for which no income taxes are paid to the equivalent yield as if income taxes were paid) using the federal corporate income tax rate of 21 percent that was applicable for all periods presented.
TABLE 1: Average Balances, Income and Expense, Yields and Rates
Interest income and expense are affected by fluctuations in interest rates, by changes in the volume of earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, and by the interaction of rate and volume factors. The following table shows the direct causes of the year-to-year changes in the components of net interest income on a taxable-equivalent basis. The Corporation calculates the rate and volume variances using a formula prescribed by the SEC. Rate/volume variances, the third element in the calculation, are not shown separately in the table, but are allocated to the rate and volume variances in proportion to the absolute dollar amounts of each.
TABLE 2: Rate-Volume Recap
Net interest income, on a taxable-equivalent basis, for 2020 increased to $84.2 million, compared to $81.1 million for 2019, primarily as a result of the growth in average earning assets, partially offset by lower net interest margin. Average earning assets grew $341.2 million, or 23.2 percent, in 2020 compared to 2019, and net interest margin decreased 87 basis points to 4.65 percent in 2020, compared to 5.52 percent in 2019. The net interest margin decline for 2020 as compared to 2019 was due primarily to lower average yields on loans and other earning assets, partially offset by (1) using lower-yielding excess cash to fund growth in loans and securities and repay borrowings and (2) growth in low cost deposits, including noninterest-bearing demand deposits. The yield on interest-earning assets and cost of interest-bearing liabilities decreased by 112 basis points and 30 basis points, respectively, for 2020, compared to 2019. Average earning assets grew by $341.2 million for 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to growth in loans (including PPP loans) and securities funded by deposit growth as well as the acquisition of Peoples on January 1, 2020.
Average loans, which includes both loans held for investment and loans held for sale, increased $320.1 million to $1.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019. Average loans held for investment at the community banking segment increased $216.5 million, or 27.8 percent, for 2020, compared to 2019. This increase included during 2020 $99.1 million of average balances of loans acquired in the acquisition of Peoples, and $59.7 million of average balances of loans originated under the PPP. The remaining increase in average loans outstanding at the community banking segment for 2020 compared to 2019 was due primarily to growth in the commercial real estate and commercial business lending segments of the loan portfolio. Average loans held for investment at the consumer finance segment increased $850,000, or 0.2 percent, for 2020, compared to 2019 as average marine and RV loans increased due to the continued expansion of the consumer finance segment’s purchases of those loan contracts, which was partially offset by a decrease in average automobile loans due to continuing competition for loan contracts. Average loans held at the mortgage banking segment, which consist primarily of loans held for sale, increased $102.7 million, or 150.4 percent, for 2020, compared to 2019, as a result of higher loan production and a longer average holding period between origination and the time that loans
were sold in the secondary market, which were due in part to higher mortgage industry volume during a time of historically low interest rates.
The overall yield on loans decreased 140 basis points to 6.18 percent for 2020, compared to 2019, due to changes in the composition of the loan portfolio and lower average yields at each operating segment. The community banking segment average loan yield decreased 83 basis points to 4.75 percent for 2020, compared to 2019, due primarily to lower market interest rates and lower interest income on PCI loans. The average loan yield for the community banking segment includes, with respect to PPP loans, interest at a note rate of one percent as well as net deferred fees that were amortized based on the contractual maturity of the related loan or accelerated into interest income upon repayment of the loan. Net PPP loan fees recognized in 2020 were $1.6 million, and there were unrecognized net deferred PPP fees at December 31, 2020 of $2.2 million, which are expected to be recognized primarily in 2021. The consumer finance segment average loan yield decreased 83 basis points to 12.65 percent for 2020, compared to 2019, due to continued competition in the non-prime automobile loan business, including the effect of a lower interest rate environment, and the consumer finance segment continuing to pursue growth in higher quality, lower yielding loans, which includes prime marine and RV loans. The mortgage banking segment average loan yield decreased 105 basis points to 2.90 percent due to lower market interest rates for mortgage loans.
Average securities available for sale increased $38.8 million for 2020, compared to 2019, due primarily to higher purchases of securities and the acquisition of Peoples. The average yield on the securities portfolio on a taxable-equivalent basis decreased 52 basis points for 2020, compared to 2019, due to purchases of securities in 2020 at lower average yields relative to the average yield of the portfolio as a whole and increased calls of securities that were issued during periods of higher market interest rates.
Average interest-bearing deposits in other banks, consisting primarily of excess cash reserves maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank, decreased $17.7 million during 2020, compared to 2019, as the Corporation utilized excess cash to fund growth in loans and securities and repay borrowings. The average yield on these overnight funds decreased 120 basis points for 2020, compared to 2019, due to lower average rates on excess cash reserves, partially offset by an increase in purchased time deposits, which had higher yields during 2020. The Federal Reserve Bank decreased the interest rate on excess cash reserve balances from 1.55 percent at the end of 2019 to 0.10 percent by the end of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Average money market, savings and interest-bearing demand deposits increased $145.7 million for 2020, compared to 2019, and average time deposits increased $97.8 million for 2020, compared to 2019. The increase in average money market, savings and interest bearing-demand deposits included $58.7 million for 2020, and the increase in average time deposits included $76.8 million for 2020 related to the acquisition of Peoples. Average noninterest-bearing demand deposits increased $148.3 million for 2020, compared to 2019, including $42.9 million related to the acquisition of Peoples. Higher average deposit balances are due primarily to deposit growth during 2020 and the acquisition of Peoples. Deposit growth was also impacted by the effect of PPP loans and direct government payments received by depositors. The average cost of interest-bearing deposits decreased 16 basis points for 2020, compared to 2019, due primarily to lower rates on money market, savings and interest-bearing demand deposits, which take effect immediately upon a change in offered rates. Offered rates on time deposits were also lower during 2020, compared to 2019. Changes in the average cost of time deposits lag changes in pricing based on the repricing of time deposits at maturity.
Average borrowings decreased $31.0 million for 2020, compared to 2019, due primarily to the repayment of long-term borrowings in 2020, partially offset by the issuance of $20.0 million of subordinated notes by the Corporation, subordinated notes that were assumed during the acquisition of Peoples and new finance leases. Repayment of long-term borrowings included paying off a revolving bank line of credit balance of $75.0 million and paying off aggregate convertible FHLB advances of $44.5 million using excess cash. The average cost of borrowings decreased 51 basis points during 2020 compared to 2019, due primarily to the payoff of the revolving bank line of credit and lower short-term interest rates. Aggregate repayments in December 2020 of convertible FHLB advances of $37.0 million are expected to result in annualized interest cost savings of $783,000, and such savings are expected to benefit net interest margin in 2021, compared to 2020.
The Corporation believes that its net interest margin may be affected in future periods by several factors that are difficult to predict, including: (1) changes in interest rates, which may depend on the severity of adverse economic conditions, the timing and extent of any economic recovery, and the extent of government stimulus measures, which are inherently uncertain, (2) possible changes in the composition of earning assets which may result from decreased loan demand as a result of the current economic environment (3) accretion of purchase discounts on loans related to acquisitions, which is included in yields on loans and may fluctuate based on the timing of repayment, (4) the repricing of higher-rate time deposits and borrowings as they mature to lower rates, which may occur at a slower rate than the repricing of interest earning assets and (5) the recognition of net deferred fees on PPP loans, which is subject to the timing of repayment or forgiveness.
Discussion of net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2018 has been omitted as such discussion was provided in Part II, Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis,” under the heading “Net Interest Income” in the Corporation’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was filed with the SEC on March 3, 2020.
NONINTEREST INCOME
TABLE 3: Noninterest Income
Total noninterest income increased $23.4 million, or 73.1 percent, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in noninterest income was due primarily to (1) an increase in gains on sales of loans and mortgage banking fee income, which consists of fees related to loan originations, at the mortgage banking segment as a result of higher margins and record loan production, (2) an increase in gains on sales of loans at the community banking segment related to the sale of a pool of PCI loans in 2020, (3) an increase in mortgage lender services income at the mortgage banking segment for providing mortgage origination functions to third parties, as a result of the Lender Solutions division of C&F Mortgage adding new customers and higher mortgage industry volume, (4) an increase in wealth management services income, and (5) an increase in debit card interchange income at the community banking segment. These increases were partially offset by decreased service charges on deposit accounts at the community banking segment resulting from fewer overdraft fees charged and asset write-downs at the community banking segment of $579,000 in 2020. Asset write-downs, included in “Other income (loss), net,” at the community banking segment included $298,000 of merger related costs recognized in connection with disposition of assets acquired from Peoples and $281,000 related to branch consolidation.
Discussion of noninterest income for the year ended December 31, 2018 has been omitted as such discussion was provided in Part II, Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis,” under the heading “Noninterest Income” in the Corporation’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was filed with the SEC on March 3, 2020.
NONINTEREST EXPENSE
TABLE 4: Noninterest Expense
Total noninterest expense increased $18.6 million, or 23.3 percent, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in noninterest expenses was due primarily to (1) higher mortgage loan production volume at the mortgage banking segment, resulting in higher expenses related to production volume, included in salaries and employee benefits, data processing and mortgage banking loan processing expenses (2) higher operating expenses at the community banking segment, including the effects of (a) assuming certain salaries and employee benefits expense and data processing expense of Peoples, including some costs that have since been eliminated following the integration of its operations into the Bank’s, (b) occupancy expense related to opening two new financial centers in 2020 and (c) investing in technology infrastructure to support continued growth, (3) early debt repayment charges incurred in connection with the aggregate payoff of $44.5 million of convertible FHLB advances in 2020, (4) provision for indemnifications at the mortgage banking segment, included in “Other expenses,” of $881,000 for 2020 compared to no provision for indemnifications in 2019, (5) higher merger related expenses in connection with the acquisition of Peoples, and (6) higher expense associated with the FDIC insurance assessment at the community banking segment, included in “Other expenses,” as credits available to banks with less than $10 billion in consolidated assets were used to offset assessment expense for portions of 2019 and 2020 and were fully utilized by the end of the first quarter of 2020.
Merger related expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 included $1.3 million at the community banking segment, of which $501,000 was data processing expense, $236,000 was professional fees expense, $119,000 was salaries and employee benefits expense, $81,000 was occupancy expense, and $61,000 was included in all other noninterest expenses, while $298,000 was a loss on disposition of assets and was recorded in noninterest income. Merger related expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 also included $100,000 of professional fees expense recorded as a holding company expense and shown in the “Other and Eliminations” column in the tables above. Merger related expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 included $236,000 at the community banking segment, of which $173,000 was professional fees expense, $50,000 was data processing expense and $13,000 was included in all other noninterest expenses, and $473,000 at the Corporation, of which $441,000 was professional fees expense and $32,000 was included in all other noninterest expenses.
As of December 31, 2020, the community banking segment has realized substantially all of the cost savings associated with the integration of Peoples. Additionally, C&F Bank expects to realize annualized cost savings of approximately $220,000 in connection with the consolidation of its main office in West Point, VA by the end of the second quarter of 2021.
Discussion of noninterest expense for the year ended December 31, 2018 has been omitted as such discussion was provided in Part II, Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis,” under the heading “Noninterest Expense” in the Corporation’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was filed with the SEC on March 3, 2020.
INCOME TAXES
Income tax expense on 2020 earnings was $6.8 million, resulting in an effective tax rate of 23.3 percent, compared with $5.1 million, or 21.2 percent, in 2019 and $4.5 million, or 20.1 percent, in 2018. The higher effective income tax rate for 2020 compared to 2019 resulted primarily from higher state income taxes, as a greater share of income before taxes was earned at the mortgage banking segment, which is subject to state income tax, and a limitation on the deductibility of certain executive compensation, partially offset by income tax benefits of $326,000 in 2020 arising from a change in income tax law included in the provisions of the CARES Act, which provided income tax benefits in the current year related to prior tax years of Peoples.
Discussion of income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2018 has been omitted as such discussion was provided in Part II, Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis,” under the heading “Income Taxes” in the Corporation’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was filed with the SEC on March 3, 2020.
ASSET QUALITY
Allowance and Provision for Loan Losses
Allowance for Loan Losses Methodology - Community Banking and Mortgage Banking. We conduct an analysis of the collectibility of the loan portfolio on a regular basis. This analysis does not apply to PCI loans, loans carried at fair value, loans held for sale or off-balance sheet credit exposure (e.g., unfunded loan commitments and standby letters of credit). We use this analysis to assess the sufficiency of the allowance for loan losses and to determine the necessary provision for loan losses.
The analysis, at a minimum, considers the following factors:
● Changes in lending policies and procedures, including underwriting, collection, charge-off and recovery;
● Changes in international, national, regional and local economic and business conditions and developments that affect the collectability of the portfolio, including the condition of various market segments;
● Changes in the nature and volume of the portfolio and in the terms of loans;
● Changes in the experience, ability and depth of lending management and other relevant staff;
● Changes in the volume and severity of past due loans, the volume of nonaccrual loans and the volume and severity of adversely classified or graded loans;
● Changes in the quality of our loan review system;
● Changes in the value of the underlying collateral for collateral-dependent loans;
● The existence and effect of any concentrations of credit and changes in the level of such concentrations;
● The effect of other external factors, such as competition;
● Historical trends of actual loan losses based on volume and types of loans; and
● Significant one-time transactions affecting the allowance for loan losses.
In conjunction with the factors described above, we consider the following risk elements that are inherent in the loan portfolio as part of the analysis:
● Real estate residential mortgage loans carry risks associated with the continued credit-worthiness of the borrower and changes in the value of the collateral.
● Real estate construction loans carry risks that the project will not be finished according to schedule, the project will not be finished according to budget and the value of the collateral may, at any point in time, be less than the principal amount of the loan. Construction loans also bear the risk that the general contractor, who may or may not be a loan customer, may be unable to finish the construction project as planned because of financial pressure unrelated to the project.
● Commercial, financial and agricultural loans carry risks associated with the successful operation of a business or a real estate project, in addition to other risks associated with the ownership of real estate, because the repayment of these loans may be dependent upon the profitability and cash flows of the business or project. In addition, there is risk associated with the value of collateral other than real estate which may depreciate over time and cannot be appraised with as much precision.
● Equity lines of credit carry risks associated with the continued credit-worthiness of the borrower and changes in the value of the collateral.
● Consumer loans carry risks associated with the continued credit-worthiness of the borrower and the value of the collateral (e.g., rapidly-depreciating assets such as automobiles), or lack thereof. Consumer loans are more likely than real estate loans to be immediately adversely affected by job loss, divorce, illness or personal bankruptcy.
The review process generally begins with loan officers or management identifying problem loans to be reviewed on an individual basis for impairment. This review of individual loans is limited to those loans that have indications of probable loss or that may result in significant losses to the Corporation, while all other loans, which may include delinquent loans and loans classified as special mention or substandard, are evaluated as a group, as discussed below. In addition, all TDRs are considered impaired loans and are individually evaluated. We consider a loan impaired when it is probable that we will be unable to collect all interest and principal payments as scheduled in the loan agreement. A loan is not considered impaired during a period of delay in payment if the ultimate collectibility of all amounts due is expected. If a loan is considered impaired, impairment is measured by either the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate, the loan’s obtainable market price, or the fair value of the collateral if the loan is collateral dependent. A valuation allowance is established for an impaired loan to the extent that this measure of the impaired loan is less than the recorded investment in the loan. When a loan is determined to be impaired, we follow a consistent process to measure that impairment in our loan portfolio. For collateral dependent loans we obtain an updated appraisal if we do not have a current one on file. Appraisals are performed by independent third party appraisers with relevant industry experience. We may make adjustments to the appraised value based on recent sales of similar properties or general market conditions when appropriate. We also estimate costs to sell collateral in the measurement of impairment if those costs are expected to reduce the cash flows available to repay or otherwise satisfy the loan.
The remaining non-impaired loans are grouped by loan type (e.g., commercial real estate, commercial, residential mortgage, consumer). We assign each loan type an allowance factor based on the historical loss rate for that type of loan and an evaluation of the qualitative factors mentioned above to determine a general allowance. We assign classified loans (i.e., special mention, substandard, doubtful, loss) a higher allowance factor than non-classified loans within a particular loan type based on our concerns regarding collectibility. Our allowance factors increase with the severity of classification. Allowance factors used for unclassified loans are based on our analysis of charge-off history for relevant periods of time which can vary depending on economic conditions, and our judgment based on the overall analysis of the lending environment including the general economic conditions. Our analysis of charge-off history also considers economic cycles and the trends during those cycles. We may occasionally determine that certain groups of loans require no allowance for losses based on characteristics of those loans as a group, such as purchased loans that are initially recorded
at fair value or loans that are guaranteed by U.S. government agencies. Purchased loans other than PCI loans are evaluated in the manner described above, and an allowance is recorded to the extent that the recorded investment in such loans exceeds their outstanding principal net of the required allowance for loan losses. PPP loans require no allowance based on the explicit guarantee of the SBA. The allowance for loan losses is the aggregate of specific allowances and the general allowance for each portfolio type.
As discussed above we segregate loans meeting the criteria for special mention, substandard, doubtful and loss from non-classified, or pass rated, loans. We review the characteristics of each rating at least annually, generally during the first quarter. The characteristics of these loan ratings are as follows:
● Pass rated loans are to persons or business entities with an acceptable financial condition, appropriate collateral margins, appropriate cash flow to service the existing loan, and an appropriate leverage ratio. The borrower has paid all obligations as agreed and it is expected that this type of payment history will continue. When necessary, acceptable personal guarantors support the loan.
● Special mention loans have a specific, identified weakness in the borrower’s operations and in the borrower’s ability to generate positive cash flow on a sustained basis. The borrower’s recent payment history may be characterized by late payments. The Corporation’s risk exposure is mitigated by collateral supporting the loan. The collateral is considered to be well-margined, well maintained, accessible and readily marketable.
● Substandard loans are considered to have specific and well-defined weaknesses that jeopardize the viability of the Corporation’s credit extension. The payment history for the loan has been inconsistent and the expected or projected primary repayment source may be inadequate to service the loan. The estimated net liquidation value of the collateral pledged and/or ability of the personal guarantor(s) to pay the loan may not adequately protect the Corporation. There is a distinct possibility that the Corporation will sustain some loss if the deficiencies associated with the loan are not corrected in the near term. A substandard loan would not automatically meet the Corporation’s definition of impaired unless the loan is significantly past due and the borrower’s performance and financial condition provide evidence that it is probable that the Corporation will be unable to collect all amounts due.
● Substandard nonaccrual loans have the same characteristics as substandard loans; however, they have a nonaccrual classification because it is probable that the Corporation will not be able to collect all amounts due.
● Doubtful rated loans have all the weaknesses inherent in a loan that is classified substandard but with the added characteristic that the weaknesses make collection or liquidation in full, on the basis of currently existing facts, conditions, and values, highly questionable and improbable. The possibility of loss is extremely high.
● Loss rated loans are not considered collectible under normal circumstances and there is no realistic expectation for any future payment on the loan. Loss rated loans are fully charged off.
Allowance for Loan Losses Methodology - PCI Loans - As previously described, on a quarterly basis we evaluate our estimate of cash flows expected to be collected on PCI loans. These evaluations require the continued assessment of key assumptions and estimates similar to the initial estimate of fair value, such as the effect of collateral value changes, changing loss severities, estimated and experienced prepayment speeds and other relevant factors. Subsequent decreases to the expected cash flows to be collected on a PCI loan will generally result in a provision for loan losses resulting in an increase to the allowance for loan losses. For a more detailed description, see “Critical Accounting Policies” in this Item 7.
Allowance for Loan Losses Methodology - Consumer Finance. The consumer finance segment’s loans consist of non-prime automobile loans and prime marine and RV loans. These loans carry risks associated with (1) the continued credit-worthiness of borrowers and (2) the value of rapidly-depreciating collateral. These loans do not lend themselves to a classification process because of the short duration of time between default, repossession and charge-off. Therefore, the
loan loss allowance review process generally focuses on an analysis of charge-off history for relevant periods of time, which can vary depending on economic conditions. Further consideration is given to the following factors:
● Changes in lending policies and procedures, including underwriting, collection, charge-off and recovery;
● Changes in international, national, regional and local economic and business conditions and developments that affect the collectability of the portfolio, including the condition of various market segments;
● Changes in the volume and severity of past due loans;
● Changes in the value of the underlying collateral;
● The existence and effect of any concentrations of credit and changes in the level of such concentrations;
● The effect of other external factors, such as competition;
● An overall analysis of the lending environment;
● Historical trends of actual loan losses based on volume and types of loans; and
● Significant one-time transactions affecting the allowance for loan losses.
Loans are grouped by loan type (e.g., non-prime automobile loans and prime marine and RV loans). We assign each loan type an allowance factor based on the historical loss rate for that type of loan and an evaluation of the qualitative factors mentioned above to determine a general allowance. Loans are further segregated between performing and nonperforming loans. Performing loans are those that have made timely payments in accordance with the terms of the loan agreement and that are not past due 90 days or more. Nonperforming loans are those that do not accrue interest and are greater than 90 days past due.
In accordance with its policies and guidelines and consistent with industry practices, C&F Finance, at times, offers payment deferrals to non-prime automobile borrowers, whereby the borrower is allowed to move up to two payments within a twelve-month rolling period to the end of the loan. A fee will be collected for extensions only in states that permit it. An account for which all delinquent payments are deferred is classified as current at the time the deferment is granted and therefore is not included as a delinquent account. Thereafter, such an account is aged based on the timely payment of future installments in the same manner as any other account. We evaluate the results of this deferment strategy based upon the amount of cash installments that are collected on accounts after they have been deferred versus the extent to which the collateral underlying the deferred accounts has depreciated over the same period of time. Based on this evaluation, we believe that payment deferrals granted according to our policies and guidelines are an effective portfolio management technique and result in higher ultimate cash collections. Payment deferrals may affect the ultimate timing of when an account is charged off. Increased use of deferrals may result in a lengthening of the loss confirmation period, which would increase expectations of credit losses inherent in the portfolio and therefore increase the allowance for loan losses and related provision for loan losses. The average amounts deferred on a monthly basis, as a percentage of average non-prime automobile loans outstanding, during the fourth quarter of 2020 and the year ended December 31, 2020 was 1.56 percent and 2.93 percent, respectively, compared to 1.87 percent and 1.90 percent in the fourth quarter of 2019 and the year ended December 31, 2019, respectively, and 2.53 percent and 2.30 percent in the fourth quarter of 2018 and the year ended December 31, 2018, respectively. Payment deferrals increased for 2020 as the COVID-19 pandemic affected the ability of some borrowers to make timely payments.
The allowance for loan losses represents an amount that, in our judgment, will be adequate to absorb probable losses inherent in the loan portfolio. The provision for loan losses increases the allowance, and loans charged off, net of recoveries, reduce the allowance. The following table presents the Corporation’s loan loss experience for the periods indicated:
TABLE 5: Allowance for Loan Losses
Includes the Corporation’s commercial real estate lending, land acquisition and development lending, builder line lending and commercial business lending.
For further information regarding the adequacy of our allowance for loan losses, refer to “Nonperforming Assets” within this Item 7.
The allocation of the allowance for loan losses at December 31 for the years indicated and the ratio of corresponding outstanding loan balances to total loans are as follows:
TABLE 6: Allocation of Allowance for Loan Losses
1 Includes the Corporation’s real estate construction lending and consumer real estate lot lending.
2 Includes the Corporation’s commercial real estate lending, land acquisition and development lending, builder line lending and commercial business lending.
Loans by credit quality indicators as of December 31, 2020 were as follows:
TABLE 7A: Credit Quality Indicators
Included in the table above are loans purchased in connection with the acquisition of Peoples of $53.0 million pass rated, $695,000 special mention and $3.0 million substandard.
1 At December 31, 2020, the Corporation did not have any loans classified as Doubtful or Loss.
2 Includes the Corporation’s real estate construction lending and consumer real estate lot lending.
3 Includes the Corporation’s commercial real estate lending, land acquisition and development lending, builder line lending and commercial business lending.
Loans by credit quality indicators as of December 31, 2019 were as follows:
TABLE 7B: Credit Quality Indicators
1 At December 31, 2019, the Corporation did not have any loans classified as Doubtful or Loss.
2 Includes the Corporation’s real estate construction lending and consumer real estate lot lending.
3 Includes the Corporation’s commercial real estate lending, land acquisition and development lending, builder line lending and commercial business lending.
The increase in loans rated Special Mention and Substandard at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 is related primarily to three commercial relationships which were rated Pass at December 31, 2019, as well as loans that were acquired from Peoples, partially offset by one commercial relationship that was classified as Special Mention at December 31, 2019 and rated Pass at December 31, 2020. Of the three loan relationships that were rated Pass at December 31, 2019 and were subsequently downgraded, one was classified as Special Mention, one was classified as Substandard and one was classified as Substandard Nonaccrual at December 31, 2020 partially as a result of effects on these borrowers of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans at the community banking segment, excluding PCI loans, increased to 1.46 percent at December 31, 2020, compared to 1.32 percent at December 31, 2019. The allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans excluding all purchased loans and loans originated under the PPP was 1.74 percent at December 31, 2020, compared to 1.36 percent at December 31, 2019. The community banking segment recorded provision for loan losses of $4.6 million in 2020, primarily to add to reserves based on qualitative adjustments as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and due to loan growth, compared to provision for loan losses of $360,000 for 2019. As of December 31, 2020, there have not been significant changes in the overall credit quality of the loan portfolio compared to December 31, 2019, although management believes the effects of PPP loans, payment deferrals and government stimulus may be delaying signs of credit deterioration. Management believes that the level of the allowance for loan losses is sufficient to absorb losses inherent in the portfolio. However, if there is further deterioration in economic conditions, additional provision may be required in future periods.
The consumer finance segment’s allowance for loan losses increased by $1.7 million to $23.5 million at December 31, 2020 from $21.8 million at December 31, 2019, and its provision for loan losses decreased $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019. Total delinquent loans, which does not include loans that have been granted a payment deferral, as a percentage of total loans decreased to 3.08 percent at December 31, 2020 compared to 4.17 percent at December 31, 2019. The consumer finance segment’s net charge-off ratio for 2020 decreased to 1.54 percent from 3.05 percent for 2019 due to a lower number of charge-offs during 2020, as a result of improvement in loan performance and lower losses per loan charged off as a result of a strong used car market. Improvement in loan performance has resulted from the consumer finance segment continuing to purchase higher quality loans, including marine and RV loans, as well as borrowers benefitting from the government’s stimulus measures in response to the pandemic. The Corporation can give no assurance as to the continuation of government stimulus measures or the extent to which they will result in supporting borrowers’ ability to continue making their contractual loan payments. The allowance for loan losses as a percentage of loans increased to 7.53 percent at December 31, 2020,
compared to 6.96 percent at December 31, 2019. The increase in the level of the allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans reflects losses that are probable as a result of the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Management believes that the level of the allowance for loan losses is sufficient to absorb losses inherent in the portfolio. However, if there is further deterioration in economic conditions, additional provision may be required in future periods.
As previously described, the consumer finance segment, at times, offers payment deferrals to non-prime automobile borrowers as a management technique to achieve higher ultimate cash collections on select loan accounts. Payment deferrals may affect the ultimate timing of when an account is charged off. A significant reliance on deferrals as a means of managing collections may result in a lengthening of the loss confirmation period, which would increase expectations of credit losses inherent in the portfolio. Monthly payment deferrals, as a percentage of non-prime automobile loans outstanding, rose to as high as 8.25 percent during the second quarter of 2020 and returned to normal levels by the end of 2020; the average amount deferred on a monthly basis during the fourth quarter of 2020 as a percentage of non-prime automobile loans was 1.56 percent. The average amounts deferred on a monthly basis during 2020 were 2.93 percent of non-prime automobile loans outstanding, compared to 1.90 percent during 2019 and 2.30 percent during 2018. Payment deferrals increased for 2020 compared to 2019 as the COVID-19 pandemic affected the ability of some borrowers to make timely payments.
Because C&F Finance primarily focuses on non-prime borrowers, the anticipated rates of delinquencies, defaults, repossessions and losses on the consumer finance loans are higher than those experienced in the general automobile finance industry and could be more dramatically affected by changes in general economic conditions. Changes in economic conditions may also affect consumer demand for used automobiles and values of automobiles securing outstanding loans, due to changes in demand or changes in levels of inventory of used automobiles, which may directly affect the amount of a loss incurred by C&F Finance in the event of default. While we manage the higher risk inherent in loans made to non-prime borrowers through the underwriting criteria, portfolio management and collection methods employed by C&F Finance, we cannot guarantee that these criteria or methods will afford adequate protection against these risks. Beginning in 2016 with C&F Finance’s implementation of a scorecard model for purchasing loan contracts, the credit worthiness of borrowers at origination has improved for automobile loans purchased by C&F Finance and the level of credit losses experienced has decreased. We cannot provide any assurance that C&F Finance’s net charge-off ratio will not increase in future periods. However, we believe that the current allowance for loan losses is adequate to absorb probable losses that have been incurred on existing consumer finance segment loans that may become uncollectible. If factors influencing the consumer finance segment result in higher net charge-off ratios in future periods, the consumer finance segment may need to increase the level of its allowance for loan losses through additional provisions for loan losses, which could negatively affect future earnings of the consumer finance segment.
Nonperforming Assets
A loan’s past due status is based on the contractual due date of the most delinquent payment due. Loans are generally placed on nonaccrual status when the collection of principal or interest is 90 days or more past due, or earlier, if collection is uncertain based on an evaluation of the net realizable value of the collateral and the financial strength of the borrower. Loans greater than 90 days past due may remain on accrual status if management determines it has adequate collateral to cover the principal and interest. For those loans that are carried on nonaccrual status, payments are first applied to principal outstanding. A loan may be returned to accrual status if the borrower has demonstrated a sustained period of repayment performance in accordance with the contractual terms of the loan and there is reasonable assurance the borrower will continue to make payments as agreed. These policies are applied consistently across our loan portfolio.
Assets acquired through, or in lieu of, foreclosure are held for sale and are initially recorded at fair value less estimated costs to sell at the date of foreclosure. Subsequent to foreclosure, management periodically performs valuations of the foreclosed assets based on updated appraisals, general market conditions, recent sales of like properties, length of time the properties have been held, and our ability and intention with regard to continued ownership of the properties. We may incur additional write-downs of foreclosed assets to fair value less estimated costs to sell if valuations indicate a further deterioration in market conditions. Revenue and expenses from operations and changes in the property valuations are included in net expenses from foreclosed assets and improvements are capitalized.
At the consumer finance segment, the repossession process is generally initiated after a loan becomes more than 60 days delinquent. Borrowers have an opportunity to redeem their repossessed vehicles by paying all outstanding balances, including finance charges and fees. Vehicles that are not redeemed within the prescribed waiting period before C&F Finance has the legal right to sell the repossessed vehicle then become available-for-sale at the end of that period and are reclassified from loans to other assets and are recorded initially at fair value less estimated costs to sell. The difference between the carrying amount of each loan and the fair value of the vehicle (i.e. the deficiency) is charged against the allowance for loan losses. Accounts still in process of collection or for which the Corporation does not have the legal right to sell continue to be classified as loans until such legal authority is obtained. After the vehicles have been sold in third-party auctions, we credit the proceeds from the sale of the vehicles, and any other recoveries, to the carrying value of the repossessed vehicles. C&F Finance pursues collection of deficiencies, as allowed by state law, when it deems such action to be appropriate.
Table 8 summarizes nonperforming assets at December 31 of each of the past five years.
TABLE 8: Nonperforming Assets
Community Banking Segment
1 Acquired loans are tracked in two separate categories - “purchased performing” and “purchased credit impaired.” The remaining discount for the purchased performing loans was $1.8 million at December 31, 2020, $1.4 million at December 31, 2019, $1.9 million at December 31, 2018, $2.3 million at December 31, 2017 and $2.9 million at December 31, 2016. The remaining discount for the purchased credit impaired loans was $5.9 million at December 31, 2020, $5.6 million at December 31, 2019, $7.9 million at December 31, 2018, $9.8 million at December 31, 2017 and $10.5 million at December 31, 2016. The increase in remaining discount on purchased performing loans and purchased credit impaired loans from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 is due primarily to loans acquired in the acquisition of Peoples.
2 OREO includes $835,000 at both December 31, 2020 and 2019 related to the land and buildings of the Bellgrade branch, which was consolidated into a nearby branch in 2019.
3 Nonaccrual loans include nonaccrual TDRs of $257,000 at December 31, 2020, $254,000 at December 31, 2019, $166,000 at December 31, 2018, $3.9 million at December 31, 2017 and $2.0 million at December 31, 2016.
4 The ratio of ALL to total loans, excluding purchased credit impaired loans, includes purchased performing loans and loans originated under the PPP for which no allowance for loan losses is required.
Mortgage Banking Segment
Consumer Finance Segment
Table 9 presents the changes in the OREO balance for 2020 and 2019.
TABLE 9: OREO Changes
Nonperforming assets of the community banking segment totaled $3.9 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $2.6 million at December 31, 2019. Nonperforming assets included $3.0 million in nonaccrual loans at December 31, 2020 compared to $1.5 million at December 31, 2019, and included $907,000 in other real estate owned at December 31, 2020, compared to $1.1 million at December 31, 2019. The increase in nonaccrual loans at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 was due primarily to the downgrading of one commercial relationship in 2020, partially offset by payoffs. Nonaccrual loans were comprised primarily of commercial business loans at December 31, 2020 and residential mortgages and equity lines at December 31, 2019. If interest on loans on nonaccrual at December 31, 2020 had been recognized throughout the year, the community banking segment would have recorded additional gross interest income in 2020 of $30,000.
Nonaccrual loans at the consumer finance segment decreased to $402,000 at December 31, 2020 from $611,000 at December 31, 2019. As noted above, the allowance for loan losses at the consumer finance segment increased from $21.8 million at December 31, 2019 to $23.5 million at December 31, 2020, and the ratio of the allowance for loan losses to total consumer finance loans was 7.53 percent as of December 31, 2020, compared to 6.96 percent at December 31, 2019. Nonaccrual consumer finance loans remain low relative to the allowance for loan losses and the total consumer finance loan portfolio because the consumer finance segment generally initiates repossession of loan collateral once a loan
becomes more than 60 days delinquent. Repossessed vehicles of the consumer finance segment are classified as other assets and consist only of vehicles the Corporation has the legal right to sell. Prior to the reclassification from loans to repossessed vehicles, the difference between the carrying amount of each loan and the fair value of each vehicle (i.e. the deficiency) is charged against the allowance for loan losses. At December 31, 2020, repossessed vehicles at fair value less estimated costs to sell included in other assets totaled $291,000, compared to $410,000 at December 31, 2019. If interest on loans on nonaccrual at December 31, 2020 had been recognized throughout the year, the consumer finance segment would have recorded additional gross interest income in 2020 of $4,000.
As discussed above, we measure impaired loans either based on fair value of the loan using the loan’s obtainable market price or the fair value of the collateral if the loan is collateral dependent, or using the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate. We maintain a valuation allowance to the extent that the measure of the impaired loan is less than the recorded investment in the loan. TDRs occur when we agree to significantly modify the original terms of a loan by granting a concession due to the deterioration in the financial condition of the borrower. These concessions typically are made for loss mitigation purposes and could include reductions in the interest rate, payment extensions, forgiveness of principal, forbearance or other actions. TDRs are considered impaired loans.
Impaired loans, which included TDRs of $3.6 million, and the related allowance at December 31, 2020, were as follows:
TABLE 10A: Impaired Loans
Impaired loans, which included TDRs of $4.4 million, and the related allowance at December 31, 2019, were as follows:
TABLE 10B: Impaired Loans
TDRs at December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
TABLE 11: Troubled Debt Restructurings
1 Included in nonaccrual loans in Table 8: Nonperforming Assets.
2 Included in impaired loans in Tables 10A and 10B: Impaired Loans.
While TDRs are considered impaired loans, not all TDRs are on nonaccrual status. If a loan was on nonaccrual status at the time of the TDR modification, the loan will remain on nonaccrual status following the modification and may be returned to accrual status based on the Corporation’s policy for returning loans to accrual status. If a loan was accruing prior to being modified as a TDR and if management concludes that the borrower is able to make such modified payments, and there are no other factors or circumstances that would cause management to conclude otherwise, the TDR will remain on an accruing status.
The Corporation has accommodated certain borrowers affected by the COVID-19 pandemic by granting short-term payment deferrals or periods of interest-only payments on loans with aggregate balances of $104.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Generally, a short-term payment deferral does not result in a loan modification being classified as a TDR. As of December 31, 2020, there were $30.7 million of loans whose modification periods had not ended or had been extended. Of these loans, $30.2 million were not required to be evaluated as TDRs as a result of the CARES Act; however, management believes that these loans have been risk rated appropriately. Management cannot predict the overall impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on its loan portfolio or the extent of payment deferrals or other modifications that may be granted. Depending on the severity and duration of the economic disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Corporation may experience an increase in delinquencies that may lead to further loan modifications, including loan modifications that may be classified as TDRs.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
SUMMARY
A financial institution’s primary sources of revenue are generated by its earning assets and sales of financial assets, while its major expenses are produced by the funding of those assets with interest-bearing liabilities, provisions for loan losses and compensation to employees. Effective management of these sources and uses of funds is essential in attaining a financial institution’s maximum profitability while maintaining an acceptable level of risk.
At December 31, 2020, the Corporation had total assets of $2.09 billion compared to $1.66 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase resulted primarily from increases in loans and securities and the acquisition of Peoples on January 1, 2020, which added total assets of $190.5 million, funded primarily by deposit growth. The significant components of the Corporation’s Consolidated Balance Sheets are discussed below.
LOAN PORTFOLIO
General
Through the community banking segment, we engage in a wide range of lending activities, which include the origination, primarily in the community banking segment’s market area, of (1) one-to-four family and multi-family residential mortgage loans, (2) commercial real estate loans, (3) construction loans, (4) land acquisition and development
loans, (5) consumer loans and (6) commercial business loans. We engage in non-prime automobile, and marine and RV lending through the consumer finance segment and in residential mortgage lending through the mortgage banking segment with substantially all of the loans originated through the mortgage banking segment sold to third-party investors. At December 31, 2020, the Corporation’s loans held for investment in all categories, net of the allowance for loan losses, totaled $1.31 billion and loans held for sale had a fair value of $214.3 million.
Tables 12 and 13 present information pertaining to the composition of loans held for investment and the maturity/repricing of certain loans held for investment.
TABLE 12: Summary of Loans Held for Investment
1 Includes the Corporation’s real estate construction lending and consumer real estate lot lending.
2 Includes the Corporation’s commercial real estate lending, land acquisition and development lending, builder line lending and commercial business lending (which includes loans originated under the PPP during 2020).
TABLE 13: Maturity/Repricing Schedule of Loans Held for Investment
Beginning in April 2020, the community banking segment originated loans under the PPP which are guaranteed by the SBA, and in some cases borrowers may be eligible to obtain forgiveness of the loans, in which case loans would be repaid by the SBA. Aggregate fees from the SBA of $3.7 million, net of direct costs, will be recognized in interest income over the life of the loans, of which $2.2 million remains unrecognized as of December 31, 2020. As repayment of the loans is guaranteed by the SBA, the community banking segment does not recognize a reserve for PPP loans in its allowance for loan losses. Table 14 presents the outstanding principal of loans originated under the PPP at December 31, 2020, which are recorded in the Consolidated Balance Sheet net of unrecognized net deferred fees of $2.2 million.
TABLE 14: Paycheck Protection Loans as of December 31, 2020
In evaluating the allowance for loan losses, the community banking segment considered its exposure to segments of the economy that it believes have been or will be most sensitive to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Table 15 presents balances of loans to borrowers in these sensitive industries at December 31, 2020, excluding PPP loans, and the exposure of the community banking segment to those borrowers, which includes available credit.
TABLE 15: Sensitive Industries and Exposure
________________________
1 Includes primarily loans secured by medical office buildings and assisted living facilities.
2 Includes loans secured by commercial real estate used or being constructed for use in a retail business, a majority of which are leased to unrelated retail tenants.
The increase in total loans from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 was primarily due to commercial loan growth at the community banking segment resulting from loans acquired in the acquisition of Peoples, loans originated under the PPP, and growth in the commercial real estate and commercial business lending segments of the portfolio.
Total loans at December 31, 2020 and 2019 included loans purchased in connection with the Corporation’s acquisitions. These loans were recorded at estimated fair value on the date of acquisition without the carryover of the related allowance for loan losses. The following tables present the outstanding principal balance and the carrying amount of purchased loans that are included in the Corporation’s Consolidated Balance Sheets at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
TABLE 16: PCI and Purchased Performing Loans
For a description of the Corporation’s accounting for purchased performing and PCI loans, see “Critical Accounting Policies” in this Item 7.
Credit Policy
The Corporation’s credit policy establishes minimum requirements and provides for appropriate limitations on overall concentration of credit within the Corporation. The policy provides guidance in general credit policies, underwriting policies and risk management, credit approval, and administrative and problem asset management policies. The overall goal of the Corporation’s credit policy is to ensure that loan growth is accompanied by acceptable asset quality with uniform and consistently applied approval, administration, and documentation practices and standards.
Residential Mortgage Lending - Held for Sale
The mortgage banking segment’s guidelines for underwriting conventional conforming loans comply with the underwriting criteria established by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and/or the applicable third party investor. The guidelines for non-conforming conventional loans are based on the requirements of private investors and information provided by third-party investors. The guidelines used by C&F Mortgage to originate FHA-insured, USDA-guaranteed and VA-guaranteed loans comply with the criteria established by HUD, the USDA, the VA and/or the applicable third party investor. The conventional loans that C&F Mortgage originates that have loan-to-value ratios greater than 80 percent at origination are generally insured by private mortgage insurance.
Residential Mortgage Lending - Held for Investment
The community banking segment originates residential mortgage loans secured by first and second liens on properties located in its primary market area in the Hampton to Charlottesville corridor in Virginia. The Bank offers various types of residential first mortgage loans in addition to traditional long-term, fixed-rate loans. The majority of such loans include 10, 15 and 30 year amortizing mortgage loans with fixed rates of interest and fixed-rate mortgage loans with terms of 20, 25 and 30 years but subject to call after five years at the Bank’s option. Second mortgage loans are offered with fixed and adjustable rates. Second mortgage loans are granted for a fixed period of time, usually between 5 and 20 years. Call option provisions are included in the loan documents for some longer-term, fixed-rate second mortgage loans, and these provisions allow the Bank to make interest rate adjustments for such loans.
Loans associated with residential mortgage lending are included in the real estate-residential mortgage category in Table 12: Summary of Loans Held for Investment.
Construction Lending
The community banking segment has a real estate construction lending program. We make loans primarily for the construction of one-to-four family residences and, to a lesser extent, multi-family dwellings. The Bank also makes construction loans for office and warehouse facilities and other nonresidential projects, generally limited to borrowers that present other business opportunities for the community banking segment.
The amounts, interest rates and terms for construction loans vary, depending upon market conditions, the size and complexity of the project, and the financial strength of the borrower and any guarantors of the loan. The term for a typical construction loan ranges from 9 months to 15 months for the construction of an individual residence and from 15 months to a maximum of 3 years for larger residential or commercial projects. We do not typically amortize construction loans, and the borrower pays interest monthly on the outstanding principal balance of the loan. The Bank offers fixed and variable interest rates on construction loans. We do not generally finance the construction of commercial real estate projects built on a speculative basis. For residential builder loans, we limit the number of models and/or speculative units allowed depending on market conditions, the builder’s financial strength and track record and other factors. Generally, the maximum loan-to-value ratio for one-to-four family residential construction loans is 80 percent of the property’s fair market value, or 85 percent of the property’s fair market value if the property will be the borrower’s primary residence. The fair market value of a project is determined on the basis of an appraisal of the project conducted by an appraiser approved by the Bank. For larger projects where unit absorption or leasing is a concern, we may also obtain a feasibility study or other acceptable information from the borrower or other sources about the likely disposition of the property following the completion of construction.
Construction loans for nonresidential projects and multi-unit residential projects are generally larger and involve a greater degree of risk to the Bank than residential mortgage loans. We attempt to minimize such risks (1) by making construction loans in accordance with our underwriting standards and to established customers in our primary market area and (2) by monitoring the quality, progress and cost of construction. Generally, our maximum loan-to-value ratio for non-residential projects and multi-unit residential projects is 80 percent; however, this maximum can be waived for particularly strong borrowers on an exception basis.
Loans associated with construction lending are included in the real estate-construction category in Table 12: Summary of Loans Held for Investment.
Consumer Lot Lending
The community banking segment’s consumer lot loans are made to individuals for the purpose of acquiring an unimproved building site for the construction of a residence that generally will be occupied by the borrower. Consumer lot loans are made only to individual borrowers, and each borrower generally must certify his or her intention to build and occupy a single-family residence on the lot. These loans typically have a maximum term of either three or five years with a balloon payment of the entire balance of the loan being due in full at the end of the initial term. The interest rate for these
loans is fixed or variable at a rate that is slightly higher than prevailing rates for one-to-four family residential mortgage loans. We do not believe consumer lot loans bear as much risk as land acquisition and development loans because such loans are not made for the construction of residences for immediate resale, are not made to developers and builders, and are not concentrated in any one subdivision or community.
Loans associated with consumer lot lending are included in the real estate-construction category in Table 12: Summary of Loans Held for Investment.
Commercial Real Estate Lending
The community banking segment’s commercial real estate loans are primarily secured by the value of real property. The proceeds of commercial real estate loans are generally used by the borrower to finance or refinance the cost of acquiring and/or improving a commercial property. The properties that typically secure these loans are office and warehouse facilities, hotels, apartment complexes, retail facilities, restaurants and other commercial properties. Present policy authorizes commercial real estate loans to borrowers who will occupy or use the financed property in connection with their normal business operations. We also will consider making commercial real estate loans secured by non-owner-occupied properties under the following two conditions: (1) the borrower is in strong financial condition and presents a substantial business opportunity for the Corporation and (2) the borrower has substantially pre-leased the property to high-caliber tenants.
Our commercial real estate loans are usually amortized over a period of time ranging from 15 years to 30 years and usually have a term to maturity ranging from 5 years to 15 years. These loans normally have provisions for interest rate adjustments after the loan is three to five years old. The maximum loan-to-value ratio for a commercial real estate loan is 80 percent; however, this maximum can be waived for particularly strong borrowers on an exception basis. Most commercial real estate loans are further secured by one or more unconditional personal guarantees.
In recent years, we have structured a portion of our commercial real estate loans as mini-permanent loans. The amortization period, term and interest rates for these loans vary based on borrower preferences and our assessment of the loan and the degree of risk involved. If the borrower prefers a fixed rate of interest, we usually offer a loan with a fixed rate of interest for a term of 3 to 10 years with an amortization period of up to 30 years. The remaining balance of the loan is due and payable in a single balloon payment at the end of the initial term. We believe these loan terms provide some protection from changes in the borrower’s business and income as well as changes in general economic conditions. In the case of fixed-rate commercial real estate loans, shorter maturities also provide an opportunity to adjust the interest rate on this type of interest-earning asset in accordance with our asset and liability management strategies. Certain commercial customers qualify for participation in an interest rate swap program. This program provides flexible pricing structures for our larger borrowers who wish to pay a fixed rate of interest, while preserving a floating rate for the Bank, which protects C&F Bank from exposure to rising interest rates.
Loans secured by commercial real estate are generally larger and involve a greater degree of risk than residential mortgage loans. Because payments on loans secured by commercial real estate are usually dependent on successful operation or management of the properties securing such loans, repayment of such loans is subject to changes in both general and local economic conditions and the borrower’s business and income. As a result, events beyond our control, such as a downturn in the local economy, could adversely affect the performance of the commercial real estate loan portfolio. We seek to minimize these risks by lending to established customers and generally restricting our commercial real estate loans to our primary market area. Emphasis is placed on the income producing characteristics and quality of the collateral.
Loans associated with commercial real estate lending are included in the commercial, financial and agricultural category in Table 12: Summary of Loans Held for Investment.
Land Acquisition and Development Lending
The community banking segment makes land acquisition and development loans to builders and developers for the purpose of acquiring unimproved land to be developed for residential building sites, residential housing subdivisions, multi-family dwellings and a variety of commercial uses. Our policy is to make land acquisition loans to borrowers for the purpose of acquiring developed lots for single-family, townhouse or condominium construction. We will make both land acquisition and development loans to residential builders, experienced developers and others in strong financial condition to provide additional construction and mortgage lending opportunities for the Bank.
We underwrite and process land acquisition and development loans in much the same manner as commercial construction loans and commercial real estate loans. For land acquisition and development loans, we use lower loan-to-value ratios, which are a maximum of 65 percent for raw land, 75 percent for land development and improved lots and 80 percent of the discounted appraised value of the property as determined in accordance with the appraisal policies for developed lots for single-family or townhouse construction. We can waive the maximum loan-to-value ratio for particularly strong borrowers on an exception basis. The term of land acquisition and development loans ranges from a maximum of two years for loans relating to the acquisition of unimproved land to, generally, a maximum of three years for other types of projects. All land acquisition and development loans generally are further secured by one or more unconditional personal guarantees. Because these loans are usually larger in amount and involve more risk than consumer lot loans, we carefully evaluate the borrower’s assumptions and projections about market conditions and absorption rates in the community in which the property is located and the borrower’s ability to carry the loan if the borrower’s assumptions prove inaccurate.
Loans associated with land acquisition and development lending are included in the commercial, financial and agricultural category in Table 12: Summary of Loans Held for Investment.
Builder Line Lending
The community banking segment offers builder lines of credit to residential home builders to support their land and lot inventory needs. A construction loan facility for a builder will typically have an expiration of 12 months or less. Each loan that is made under the master loan facility will have a stated maturity that allows time for the residential unit to be constructed and sold to a homebuyer under prevailing market conditions. Specific terms vary based on the purpose of the loan (e.g., lot inventory, spec or non pre-sold units, pre-sold units) and previous sales activity to new homebuyers in the particular development. Repayment relies upon the successful performance of the underlying residential real estate project. This type of lending carries a higher level of risk related to residential real estate market conditions, a functioning first and secondary market in which to sell residential properties, and the borrower’s ability to manage inventory and run projects. We manage this risk by lending to experienced builders and by using specific underwriting policies and procedures for these types of loans.
Loans associated with builder line lending are included in the commercial, financial and agricultural category in Table 12: Summary of Loans Held for Investment.
Commercial Business Lending
The community banking segment’s commercial business loan products include revolving lines of credit to provide working capital, term loans to finance the purchase of vehicles and equipment, letters of credit to guarantee payment and performance, and other commercial loans. In general, these credit facilities carry the unconditional guaranty of the owners and/or stockholders.
Revolving and operating lines of credit are typically secured by all current assets of the borrower, provide for the acceleration of repayment upon any event of default, are monitored monthly or quarterly to ensure compliance with loan covenants, and are re-underwritten or renewed annually. Interest rates generally will float at a spread tied to the Bank’s prime lending rate. Term loans are generally advanced for the purchase of, and are secured by, vehicles and equipment and are normally fully amortized over a term of two to five years, on either a fixed or floating rate basis.
Loans associated with commercial business lending are included in the commercial, financial and agricultural category in Table 12: Summary of Loans Held for Investment.
Equity Line Lending
The community banking segment offers its customers home equity lines of credit that enable customers to borrow funds secured by the equity in their homes. Currently, home equity lines of credit are offered with adjustable rates of interest that are generally priced at a spread to the prime lending rate. Home equity lines of credit are made on an open-end, revolving basis. Home equity loans generally do not present as much risk to the Bank as other types of consumer loans. These loans must satisfy our underwriting criteria, including loan-to-value and credit score guidelines.
Loans associated with equity line lending are included in the equity lines category in Table 12: Summary of Loans Held for Investment.
Consumer Lending
The community banking segment offers a variety of consumer loans, including automobile, personal secured and unsecured, and loans secured by savings accounts or certificates of deposit. The shorter terms and generally higher interest rates on consumer loans help the Bank maintain a profitable spread between its average loan yield and its cost of funds. Consumer loans secured by collateral other than a personal residence generally involve more credit risk than residential mortgage loans because of the type and nature of the collateral or, in certain cases, the absence of collateral. However, we believe the higher yields generally earned on such loans compensate for the increased credit risk associated with such loans. These loans must satisfy our underwriting criteria, including loan-to-value, debt ratio and credit score guidelines.
Loans associated with consumer lending are included in the consumer category in Table 12: Summary of Loans Held for Investment.
Consumer Finance
The consumer finance segment has an extensive automobile dealer network through which it purchases installment contracts throughout its markets. Credit approval is centralized in two locations, which along with the application processing system, ensures that contract purchase decisions comply with C&F Finance’s underwriting policies and procedures.
Finance contract application packages completed by prospective borrowers are submitted by the automobile dealers electronically through a third-party online automotive sales and finance platform to C&F Finance’s automated origination and application system, which processes the credit bureau report, generates all relevant loan calculations and displays the requested contract structure. C&F Finance personnel with credit authority review the transaction and determine whether to approve or deny the purchase of the contract. The purchase decision is based primarily on the applicant’s credit history with emphasis on prior auto loan history, current employment status, income, collateral type and mileage, and the loan-to-value ratio.
The consumer finance segment’s underwriting and collateral guidelines form the basis for the purchase decision. Exceptions to credit policies and authorities must be approved by a designated credit officer. C&F Finance’s typical automobile customers have experienced prior credit difficulties. Because C&F Finance serves customers who are unable to meet the credit standards imposed by most traditional automobile financing sources, we expect C&F Finance to sustain a higher level of credit losses in the automobile portfolio than traditional financing sources. However, C&F Finance generally purchases these contracts with interest at higher rates than those charged by traditional financing sources. These higher rates should more than offset the increase in the provision for loan losses for this segment of the Corporation’s loan portfolio. Beginning in 2016 with C&F Finance’s implementation of a scorecard model for purchasing loan contracts, the credit worthiness of borrowers at origination has improved for automobile loans purchased by C&F Finance and both the interest rates charged and level of credit losses experienced have decreased.
In addition to purchasing automobile contracts through a dealer network, C&F Finance began purchasing marine and RV contracts, also on an indirect basis, through a third party provider in 2018. While the approval process is generally the same as the automobile approval process described above, borrowers on marine and RV contracts purchased by C&F Finance have not had prior credit issues and these contracts are considered prime. The rates charged on these loans are significantly less than the automobile portfolio with a much lower expected level of credit losses.
Loans associated with indirect automobile and marine and recreational vehicle financing are included in the consumer finance category in Table 12: Summary of Loans Held for Investment.
SECURITIES
The investment portfolio plays a primary role in the management of the Corporation’s interest rate sensitivity. In addition, the portfolio serves as a source of liquidity and is used as needed to meet collateral requirements. The investment portfolio consists of securities available for sale, which may be sold in response to changes in market interest rates, changes in prepayment risk, increases in loan demand, general liquidity needs and other similar factors. These securities are carried at estimated fair value. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, all securities in the Corporation’s investment portfolio were classified as available for sale.
Table 17 sets forth the composition of the Corporation’s securities available for sale in dollar amounts at fair value and as a percentage of the Corporation’s total securities available for sale at the dates indicated.
TABLE 17: Securities Available for Sale
The Corporation seeks to diversify its portfolio to minimize risk, including by purchasing (1) shorter-duration mortgage-backed securities to reduce interest rate risk and for cash flow and reinvestment opportunities and (2) securities issued by states and political subdivisions due to the tax benefits and the higher tax-adjusted yield obtained from these securities. All of the Corporation’s mortgage-backed securities are direct issues of United States government agencies or government-sponsored enterprises. At December 31, 2020, all of the Corporation’s obligations of states and political subdivisions that were in a net unrealized loss position were rated “A” or better by Standard & Poor’s or Moody’s Investors Service. The Corporation also invests in the debt securities of corporate issuers, primarily financial institutions, that the Corporation views as having a strong financial position and earnings potential.
Table 18 presents additional information pertaining to the composition of the securities portfolio at amortized cost, by the earlier of contractual maturity or expected maturity. Expected maturities will differ from contractual maturities because borrowers may have the right to prepay obligations with or without call or prepayment penalties.
TABLE 18: Maturity of Securities
1. Yields on tax-exempt securities have been computed on a taxable-equivalent basis using the federal corporate income tax rate of 21 percent.
DEPOSITS
The Corporation’s predominant source of funds is depository accounts, which are comprised of demand deposits, savings and money market accounts, and time deposits. The Corporation’s deposits are principally provided by individuals and businesses located within the communities served.
Deposits totaled $1.75 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $1.29 billion at December 31, 2019. This increase resulted from deposit growth, including the effect of PPP loans and direct government payments received by depositors, and the addition of $171.8 million of deposits in connection with the acquisition of Peoples.
The Corporation had $6.1 million in brokered money market deposits outstanding at December 31, 2020, compared to $2.0 million in brokered money market deposits at December 31, 2019. The source of these brokered deposits is uninvested cash balances held in third-party brokerage sweep accounts. The Corporation uses brokered deposits as a means of diversifying liquidity sources, as opposed to a long-term deposit gathering strategy.
Table 19 presents the average deposit balances and average rates paid for the years 2020, 2019 and 2018.
TABLE 19: Average Deposits and Rates Paid
Table 20 details maturities of certificates of deposit with balances of $100,000 or more at December 31, 2020.
TABLE 20: Maturities of Certificates of Deposit with Balances of $100,000 or More
BORROWINGS
In addition to deposits, the Corporation utilizes short-term and long-term borrowings as sources of funds. Short-term borrowings from the Federal Reserve Bank and the FHLB may be used to fund the Corporation’s day-to-day operations. Short-term borrowings also include securities sold under agreements to repurchase, which are secured transactions with customers and generally mature the day following the day sold, as well as overnight unsecured fed funds lines with correspondent banks. Long-term borrowings consist of subordinated notes which rank junior to all future senior indebtedness of the Corporation and are structurally subordinated to all existing and future debt and liabilities of the Corporation and its subsidiaries. C&F Finance also has a non-recourse revolving bank line of credit secured by its consumer finance loans.
Trust I, Trust II and CVBK Trust I are wholly-owned non-operating subsidiaries of the Corporation, formed for the purpose of issuing trust preferred capital securities. Collectively, these trusts have issued $25.0 million of trust preferred capital securities to institutional investors through private placements and $775,000 in common equity that is held by the Corporation. Trust preferred capital securities of $5.0 million issued by CVBK Trust I, $10.0 million issued by Trust I, and $10.0 million issued by Trust II mature in 2033, 2035 and 2037, respectively, and are redeemable at the Corporation’s option. The principal assets of CVBK Trust I, Trust I and Trust II are trust preferred capital notes of the Corporation of $5.2 million, $10.3 million and $10.3 million, respectively, which have like maturities and like interest rates to the trust preferred capital securities. The interest payments by the Corporation on the notes will be used by the trusts to pay the quarterly distributions on the trust preferred capital securities.
For further information concerning the Corporation’s borrowings, refer to Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” under the heading “Note 12: Borrowings.”
OFF-BALANCE-SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
To meet the financing needs of customers, the Corporation is a party, in the normal course of business, to financial instruments with off-balance-sheet risk. These financial instruments include commitments to extend credit, commitments to sell loans and standby letters of credit. These instruments involve elements of credit and interest rate risk in addition to the amount on the balance sheet. The Corporation’s exposure to credit loss in the event of nonperformance by the other party to the financial instrument for commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit written is represented by the contractual amount of these instruments. We use the same credit policies in making these commitments and conditional obligations as we do for on-balance-sheet instruments. We obtain collateral based on our credit assessment of the customer in each circumstance.
Loan commitments are agreements to extend credit to a customer provided that there are no violations of the terms of the contract prior to funding. Commitments have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee by the customer. Since many of the commitments may expire without being completely drawn upon, the total commitment amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. The total amount of unused loan commitments at the Bank was $327.0 million at December 31, 2020, and $256.2 million at December 31, 2019.
Standby letters of credit are written conditional commitments issued by the Bank to guarantee the performance of a customer to a third party. The credit risk involved in issuing letters of credit is essentially the same as that involved in extending loans to customers. The total contract amount of standby letters of credit was $19.1 million at December 31, 2020 and $16.6 million at December 31, 2019.
The mortgage banking segment enters into interest rate lock commitments (IRLCs) with customers to originate loans for which the interest rates are determined (or “locked”) prior to funding. The mortgage banking segment is exposed to interest rate risk through fixed-rate IRLCs and mortgage loans from the time that interest rates are locked until the loans are sold in the secondary market. The mortgage banking segment mitigates this interest rate risk by either (1) entering into forward sales contracts with investors at the time that interest rates are locked for loans to be delivered on a best efforts basis or (2) entering into forward sales contracts for unspecified mortgage backed securities (TBA securities) until it can enter into forward sales contracts with investors for mortgage loans to be delivered on a mandatory basis. IRLCs, forward sales of loans and forward sales of TBA securities are derivative financial instruments.
At December 31, 2020, the mortgage banking segment had $190.9 million of IRLCs and $200.9 million of unpaid principal on mortgage loans held for sale for which it managed interest rate risk using best-efforts forward sales contracts for $391.8 million in mortgage loans. Also at December 31, 2020, the mortgage banking segment had $7.7 million of IRLCs and $5.6 million of unpaid principal on mortgage loans held for sale for which it managed interest rate risk using forward sales of $8.0 million of TBA securities and mandatory-delivery forward sales contracts for $3.9 million in mortgage loans.
At December 31, 2019, the mortgage banking segment had $63.3 million of IRLCs and $65.8 million of unpaid principal on mortgage loans held for sale for which it managed interest rate risk using best-efforts forward sales contracts for $129.1 million in mortgage loans. Also at December 31, 2019, the mortgage banking segment had $11.7 million of IRLCs and $22.0 of unpaid principal on mortgage loans held for sale for which it managed interest rate risk using forward sales of $24.0 million of TBA securities and mandatory-delivery forward sales contracts for $6.7 million in mortgage loans. At December 31, 2018, C&F Mortgage had best-efforts forward sales contracts for all of its IRLCs and mortgage loans held for sale.
The mortgage banking segment sells substantially all of the residential mortgage loans it originates to third-party investors. As is customary in the industry, the agreements with these investors require the mortgage banking segment to extend representations and warranties with respect to program compliance, borrower misrepresentation, fraud, and early payment performance. Under the agreements, the investors are entitled to make loss claims and repurchase requests of the mortgage banking segment for loans that contain covered deficiencies. The mortgage banking segment has obtained early payment default recourse waivers for a significant portion of its business. Recourse periods for early payment default for the remaining investors vary from 90 days up to one year. Recourse periods for borrower misrepresentation or fraud, or
underwriting error do not have a stated time limit. The mortgage banking segment maintains an allowance for indemnifications that represents management’s estimate of losses that are probable of arising under these recourse provisions. As performance data for loans that have been sold is not made available to the mortgage banking segment by the investors, the estimate of potential losses is inherently subjective and is based on historical indemnification payments and management’s assessment of current conditions that may contribute to indemnified losses on mortgage loans that have been sold in the secondary market, including the volume of loans sold, historical experience, current economic conditions, changes in operational and compliance processes, and information provided by investors. Actual indemnification payments may differ materially from management’s estimates, which may result in additional provision for indemnification losses in future periods. Payments made under these recourse provisions were $66,000 in 2019. There were no payments made in 2020 or 2018.
Risks also arise from the possible inability of investors to meet the terms of their contracts. The mortgage banking segment has procedures in place to evaluate the credit risk of investors and does not expect any counterparty to fail to meet its obligations.
The Corporation uses derivatives to manage exposure to interest rate risk through the use of interest rate swaps. Interest rate swaps involve the exchange of fixed and variable rate interest payments between two parties, based on a common notional principal amount and maturity date with no exchange of underlying principal amounts.
The Corporation has interest rate swaps that qualify and are designated as cash flow hedges. The Corporation’s cash flow hedges effectively modify the Corporation’s exposure to interest rate risk by converting variable rates of interest on $25.0 million of the Corporation’s trust preferred capital notes to fixed rates of interest for periods that end between June 2024 and June 2029. The cash flow hedges’ total notional amount is $25.0 million. At December 31, 2020, the cash flow hedges had a fair value of $1.9 million, which is recorded in other liabilities. The net gain/loss on the cash flow hedges is recognized as a component of other comprehensive income and reclassified into earnings in the same period(s) during which the hedged transactions affect earnings.
The Corporation also enters into interest rate swaps with certain qualifying commercial loan customers to meet their interest rate risk management needs. The Corporation simultaneously enters into interest rate swaps with dealer counterparties, with identical notional amounts and terms. The net effect of these interest rate swaps and the related loans is that the customer pays a fixed rate of interest and the Corporation receives a floating rate. At December 31, 2020, the total notional amount of the interest rate swaps related to these loans was $169.5 million, and the interest rate swaps had a net fair value of zero, with $8.2 million recognized in other assets and $8.2 million recognized in other liabilities. These swaps are not designated as hedging instruments; therefore, changes in fair value are recorded in other noninterest expense.
The Corporation’s contracts with dealer counterparties for interest rate swaps and forward sales of TBA securities require the Corporation to post collateral for derivative instruments in a loss position, subject to certain thresholds and offsets. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, $9.9 million and $2.5 million, respectively, of cash collateral was maintained with dealer counterparties and was included in “Other assets” in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
LIQUIDITY
The objective of the Corporation’s liquidity management is to ensure the continuous availability of funds to satisfy the credit needs of our customers and the demands of our depositors, creditors and investors. Stable core deposits and a strong capital position are the components of a solid foundation for the Corporation’s liquidity position. Additional sources of liquidity available to the Corporation include cash flows from operations, loan payments and payoffs, deposit growth, maturities, calls and sales of securities, the issuance of brokered certificates of deposit and the capacity to borrow additional funds.
Liquid assets, which include cash and due from banks, interest-bearing deposits at other banks, federal funds sold and nonpledged securities available for sale, totaled $222.9 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $227.7 million at December 31, 2019. The Corporation’s funding sources, including capacity, amount outstanding and amount available at December 31, 2020 are presented in Table 21.
TABLE 21: Funding Sources
We have no reason to believe these arrangements will not be renewed at maturity. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Corporation pledged additional loans as collateral in order to increase available liquidity at the Federal Reserve Bank that had been unpledged as of December 31, 2019. Additional loans and securities are available that can be pledged as collateral for future borrowings from the Federal Reserve Bank or the FHLB above the current lendable collateral value. Our ability to maintain sufficient liquidity may be affected by numerous factors, including economic conditions nationally and in our markets. Depending on our liquidity levels, our capital position, conditions in the capital markets, our business operations and initiatives, and other factors, we may from time to time consider the issuance of debt, equity or other securities or other possible capital market transactions, the proceeds of which could provide additional liquidity for our operations.
Time deposits of $100,000 or more, maturing in less than a year, totaled $134.0 million at December 31, 2020; time deposits of $100,000 or more, maturing in more than one year, totaled $335.6 million.
The Corporation’s contractual obligations and scheduled payment amounts due at various intervals over the next five years and beyond as of December 31, 2020 are presented in Table 22.
TABLE 22: Contractual Obligations
1 At December 31, 2020, there were no outstanding Federal Funds purchased or borrowings from the Federal Reserve Bank.
As a result of the Corporation’s management of liquid assets and the ability to generate liquidity through liability funding, management believes that the Corporation maintains overall liquidity sufficient to satisfy its operational requirements and contractual obligations.
CAPITAL RESOURCES
Total equity was $194.5 million at year-end 2020, compared with $165.3 million at year-end 2019. During 2020, the Corporation declared common stock dividends of $1.52 per share, compared to $1.49 per share declared in 2019 and $1.41 per share declared in 2018.
The assessment of capital adequacy depends on such factors as asset quality, liquidity, earnings performance, and changing competitive conditions and economic forces. We regularly review the adequacy of the Corporation’s and the Bank’s capital. We maintain a structure that will assure an adequate level of capital to support anticipated asset growth
and to absorb potential losses. While we will continue to look for opportunities to invest capital in profitable growth, share repurchases are another tool that facilitates improving shareholder return, as measured by ROE and earnings per share.
Under the small bank holding company policy statement of the Federal Reserve Board, which applies to certain bank holding companies with consolidated total assets of less than $3 billion, the Corporation is not subject to regulatory capital requirements. The disclosure below reflects the Corporation’s consolidated capital as determined under regulations that apply to bank holding companies that are not small bank holding companies and minimum capital requirements that would apply to the Corporation if it were not a small bank holding company.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Corporation’s CET1 to total risk-weighted assets ratio was 10.9 percent and 11.7 percent, respectively; the Corporation’s Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets ratio was 12.5 percent and 13.6 percent, respectively; the Corporation’s total capital to risk-weighted assets ratio was 15.2 percent and 14.9 percent, respectively; and the Corporation’s Tier 1 leverage ratio was 9.6 percent and 11.1 percent, respectively. These ratios include $25.0 million of trust preferred capital securities in tier 1 capital of the Corporation and $24.0 million of subordinated notes in Tier 2 capital. Additionally, all applicable regulatory capital ratios of C&F Bank were in excess of mandated minimum requirements at December 31, 2020 and 2019. Total regulatory capital of the Corporation increased during 2020 by $44.1 million, due primarily to the issuance of subordinated notes, undistributed net income and the acquisition of Peoples. Risk-weighted assets also increased during 2020 due primarily to growth in loans held for investment, loans held for sale, securities available for sale and other assets, and the acquisition of Peoples.
In addition to the regulatory risk-based capital requirements, the Bank must maintain a capital conservation buffer of additional capital of 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets as required by the Basel III Final Rule. At December 31, 2020, the Bank exceeded the total capital conservation buffer and the tier 1 capital conservation buffer by 328 basis points and 402 basis points, respectively. At December 31, 2019, the Bank exceeded the total capital conservation buffer and the tier 1 capital conservation buffer by 355 and 428 basis points, respectively.
The Corporation's capital resources may be affected by the Corporation's Repurchase Program, which was authorized by the Corporation's Board of Directors during the fourth quarter of 2020. Under the Repurchase Program the Corporation is authorized to purchase up to 365,000 shares of its common stock. Repurchases under the program may be made through privately negotiated transactions or open market transactions, including pursuant to a trading plan in accordance with Rule 10b5-1 and/or Rule 10b-18 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and shares repurchased will be returned to the status of authorized and unissued shares of common stock. The timing, number and purchase price of shares repurchased under the program will be determined by management in its discretion and will depend on a number of factors, including the market price of the shares, general market and economic conditions, applicable legal requirements and other conditions, and there is no assurance that the Corporation will purchase any shares under the Repurchase Program. The Repurchase Program is authorized through November 30, 2021. The Corporation’s previous share repurchase program expired on May 31, 2020.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Recent accounting pronouncements affecting the Corporation are described in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” under the heading “Note 1: Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Recent Significant Accounting Pronouncements.”
EFFECTS OF INFLATION AND CHANGING PRICES
The Corporation’s financial statements included herein have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (U.S. GAAP). U.S. GAAP presently requires the Corporation to measure financial position and operating results primarily in terms of historic dollars. Changes in the relative value of money due to inflation or recession are generally not considered. The primary effect of inflation on the operations of the Corporation is reflected in increased operating costs. In management’s opinion, changes in interest rates affect the financial condition of a financial institution to a far greater degree than changes in the inflation rate. While interest rates are greatly influenced by changes in the inflation rate, they do not necessarily change at the same rate or in the same magnitude as the inflation
rate. Interest rates are highly sensitive to many factors that are beyond the control of the Corporation, including changes in the expected rate of inflation, the influence of general and local economic conditions and the monetary and fiscal policies of the United States government, its agencies and various other governmental regulatory authorities.
USE OF CERTAIN NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
The accounting and reporting policies of the Corporation conform to U.S. GAAP and prevailing practices in the banking industry. However, certain non-GAAP measures are used by management to supplement the evaluation of the Corporation’s performance. These include adjusted net income; adjusted earnings per share; adjusted ROE; and adjusted ROA, (all of which are adjusted to exclude the one-time effect of a gain upon sale of a pool of PCI loans in 2020, charges related to early repayment of borrowings in 2020, merger related expenses in connection with the acquisition of Peoples recorded in 2020 and 2019, impairment charges related to branch consolidation in 2020, and provisions of the CARES Act, enacted in 2020, which provided income tax benefits related to prior tax years), tangible book value per share and the following fully-taxable equivalent (FTE) measures: interest income on loans-FTE, interest income on securities-FTE, total interest income-FTE and net interest income-FTE.
Management believes that the use of these non-GAAP measures provide meaningful information about operating performance by enhancing comparability with other financial periods and other financial institutions. The non-GAAP measures used by management enhance comparability by excluding the effects of items that do not reflect ongoing operating performance, including non-recurring gains or charges, balances of intangible assets, including goodwill, that vary significantly between institutions and tax benefits that are not consistent across different opportunities for investment. These non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered an alternative to U.S. GAAP-basis financial statements, and other bank holding companies may define or calculate these or similar measures differently.
A reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measures used by the Corporation to evaluate and measure the Corporation’s performance to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures is presented below.
________________________
1 Sale of PCI loans is net of related income taxes of $733,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
2 Early debt repayment charges are net of related income tax benefits of $462,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
3 Merger related expenses are net of related income tax benefits of $264,000 and $56,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
4 Branch consolidation charges are net of related income taxes of $59,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
5 Assuming a tax rate of 21%.