Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis is intended to assist in understanding the financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and capital resources of the Company. The Bank comprises almost all of the consolidated assets and liabilities of the Company and the Company is dependent primarily upon the performance of the Bank for the results of its operations. Because of this relationship, references to management actions, strategies and results of actions apply to both the Bank and the Company.
Executive Summary
The following summary should be read in conjunction with the Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section in its entirety.
Net income for fiscal year 2021 increased $11.5 million, or 17.9% compared to the prior year, due primarily to recording a $22.3 million provision for credit losses during the prior year compared to recording a negative provision for credit losses of $8.5 million in the current year, as a result of improvements in economic conditions between periods. This was partially offset by a decrease in net interest income and an increase in income tax expense.
The net interest margin was 1.90% for the current year compared to 2.12% in the prior year. The decrease in the net interest margin was due primarily to a reduction in asset yields due to the low interest rate environment, partially offset by a decrease in the cost of deposits and borrowings. Additionally, cash flows from the one-to four-family loan portfolio not reinvested into loans were used to purchase lower yielding securities, which also decreased the overall asset yield. During the latter portion of the current year, the pace of loan refinance and payoff activity slowed, resulting in lower premium amortization related to correspondent one- to four-family loans compared to earlier in the year, and there was a reduction in the purchases of lower-yielding securities as cash flows from the loan and deposit portfolios slowed, all of which helped stabilize the net interest margin.
As discussed above, the Bank experienced high levels of loan refinance and payoff activity for the majority of the current year, before slowing later in the year. This was a trend continued from the last half of the prior year. Additionally, there was significant deposit growth during the latter part of the prior year and the first half of the current year due to a reduction in customer spending and high levels of government assistance. The loan portfolio decreased $121.7 million, or 1.7%, during the current year, primarily in the correspondent one-to four-family loan portfolio, while the securities portfolio increased $453.7 million, or 29.1%. Deposit growth during the current year was used to pay down certain maturing advances and purchase securities. The deposit portfolio increased $406.0 million, or 6.6%, during the current year, while borrowings decreased $206.5 million, or 11.5%. The deposit growth was primarily in non-maturity deposit accounts, partially offset by a decrease in retail certificates of deposit as customers moved some of the funds from maturing certificates into more liquid investment options such as the Bank's retail money market accounts. There is some uncertainty regarding how long the increased balance of non-maturity deposits will be retained by the Bank as customers return to more normal spending habits and/or choose to invest in higher-yielding investment options outside of the Bank. The Bank may be required to replace deposit outflows with higher costing borrowings, which would increase the cost of funds over time.
The Bank's asset quality continued to remain strong during the current fiscal year, reflected in low delinquency and charge-off ratios. At September 30, 2021, loans 30 to 89 days delinquent were 0.11% of total loans receivable, net, and loans 90 or more days delinquent or in foreclosure were 0.16% of total loans receivable, net. The ratio of net charge-offs (recoveries) ("NCOs") during the current year to average loans outstanding during the current year was 0.01%. In March 2020, the Bank initiated loan modification programs to support and provide relief to borrowers during the COVID-19 pandemic ("COVID-19 modifications"). As of September 30, 2021, $2.7 million of one- to four-family loans and $146.4 million of commercial loans with COVID-19 modifications were still in their deferral period, compared to $39.8 million and $367.4 million, respectively, as of September 30, 2020. We have observed very low delinquency rates for loans that were previously subject to COVID-19 modifications and have since resumed full payments. Additionally, in March 2020, the Bank suspended the initiation of foreclosure proceedings for owner-occupied one- to four-family loans, and this suspension remained in place at September 30, 2021. Approximately 75% of non-performing one- to four family loans at September 30, 2021 either had foreclosure proceedings initiated prior to the foreclosure suspension or would have had foreclosure proceedings initiated if the suspension were not in place.
At September 30, 2021, the Bank had a one-year gap position of $(664.1) million, or (6.9)% of total assets, meaning the amount of interest-bearing liabilities exceeds the amount of interest-earning assets maturing or repricing during the same period. Despite the negative gap, net interest income is projected to increase in a rising interest rate environment due to the assumption that the Bank's deposit balances are not expected to reprice to the full extent of the interest rate change. This assumption is based on a historical analysis of the Bank's deposit pricing behavior. See additional discussion in "Part II,