Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to CF Acquisition Corp. IV. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on January 23, 2020 for the purpose of effecting an initial business combination. Our sponsor is CFAC Holdings IV, LLC.
Although we are not limited to a particular industry or sector for purpose of consummating an initial business combination, we are focusing our search on companies operating in the financial services, healthcare, real estate services, technology and software industries. We are an early stage and emerging growth company and, as such, subject to all of the risks associated with early stage and emerging growth companies.
Our Registration Statement for our initial public offering became effective on December 22, 2020. On December 28, 2020, we consummated the initial public offering of 50,000,000 units, including 5,000,000 units sold upon the exercise of the underwriter’s overallotment option, at a purchase price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $500,000,000. Each unit consists of one share of Class A common stock and one-third of one redeemable warrant. Each whole warrant entitles the holder to purchase one share of Class A common stock at a price of $11.50. Each warrant will become exercisable on the later of 30 days after the completion of the initial business combination and December 28, 2021 and will expire 5 years after the completion of the initial business combination, or earlier upon redemption or liquidation.
Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 1,000,000 units at a price of $10.00 per private placement unit to the sponsor in a private placement, generating gross proceeds of $10,000,000.
Following the closing of the initial public offering and sale of private placement units on December 28, 2020, an amount of $500,000,000 ($10.00 per unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of the units in the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement units was placed in a trust account located in the United States at J.P. Morgan Chase Bank, N.A., with Continental acting as trustee, which may be invested only in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less or in any open-ended investment company that holds itself out as a money market fund selected by us meeting the conditions of paragraphs (d)(2), (d)(3) and (d)(4) of Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of an initial business combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account, as described below.
We have until December 28, 2022 to consummate an initial business combination (the “Combination Period”). If we are unable to complete an initial business combination by the end of the Combination Period, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account and not previously released to the Company to pay taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii) to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions with respect to our warrants, which will expire worthless if we fail to complete an initial business combination within the Combination Period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $469,000 of cash in our operating account and working capital of approximately $219,000.
Our liquidity needs through December 31, 2020 have been satisfied through a contribution of $25,000 from the sponsor in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares, a loan of approximately $158,000 from the sponsor pursuant to a promissory note (the “Pre-IPO Note”), the proceeds from the consummation of the private placement with the sponsor not held in the trust account, and the Sponsor Loan (as defined below). We fully repaid the Pre-IPO Note upon completion of the initial public offering. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our sponsor has committed up to $1,750,000 to be provided to us to fund our expenses relating to investigating and selecting a target business and other working capital requirements after the initial public offering and prior to the Company’s initial business combination (the “Sponsor Loan”). If the Sponsor Loan is insufficient, the sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors intend, but are not obligated to, provide us additional loans. As of December 31, 2020, there was no outstanding balance under the Sponsor Loan.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from the sponsor to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of an initial business combination or one year from the date of this Report. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective target businesses, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the initial business combination.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from inception through December 31, 2020 related to our formation, the preparation for the initial public offering, and since the closing of the initial public offering, the search for a prospective initial business combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on investments held in trust account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from January 23, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we incurred a net loss of approximately $48,000, which consisted of approximately $46,000 in general and administrative expenses, and approximately $2,000 of franchise tax expense.
Contractual Obligations
Business Combination Marketing Agreement
We engaged Cantor, an affiliate of the sponsor, as an advisor in connection with the Company’s initial business combination to assist us in holding meetings with our stockholders to discuss the initial business combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing the Company’s securities, assist us in obtaining stockholder approval for the initial business combination and assist us with our press releases and public filings in connection with the initial business combination. We will pay Cantor a cash fee (“Marketing Fee”) for such services upon the consummation of the initial business combination in an amount equal to, in the aggregate, 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the base offering in the initial public offering, and 5.5% of the gross proceeds from the exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option.
Related Party Loans
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, the sponsor has committed up to $1,750,000 in the Sponsor Loan to be provided to us to fund expenses relating to investigating and selecting a target business and other working capital requirements, including $10,000 per month for office space, administrative and shared personnel support services that will be paid to the sponsor, after the initial public offering and prior to the Company’s initial business combination. As of December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding balance under the Sponsor Loan.
The sponsor pays expenses on our behalf. We reimburse the sponsor for such expenses paid on our behalf. As of December 31, 2020, we had accounts payable outstanding to the sponsor for such expenses paid on our behalf of approximately $413,000.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The Company has identified the following as its critical accounting polices:
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates.
Emerging Growth Company
Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. The Company has elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, the Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Shares of conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2020, 49,542,045 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Common Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss applicable to common stockholders by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for the period. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the initial public offering and the concurrent private placement to purchase an aggregate of 17,000,000 shares of Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted earnings per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted earnings per common share is the same as basic earnings per common share for the period.
Our statement of operations includes a presentation of income per share for common stock subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income per common share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted for shares of Class A common stock are calculated by dividing the interest income earned on cash equivalents and investments and held in the trust account, net of applicable taxes available to be withdrawn from the trust account, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A common stock outstanding for the applicable period, excluding 1,000,000 shares of Class A common stock held by the sponsor, which are not subject to redemption. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for shares of Class B common stock is calculated by dividing the net income, less income attributable to the shares of redeemable Class A common stock by the weighted average number of shares of Class B common stock and 1,000,000 shares of Class A common stock held by the sponsor outstanding for the period.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe there are any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, that would have a material effect on our financial statements.