ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the ‘‘Risk Factors’’ section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described, in or implied, by these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a medical technology company that uses our proprietary iFit Image-to-Implant technology platform to develop, manufacture and sell joint replacement implants and instruments that are individually sized and shaped, which we refer to as personalized, individualized, or sometimes as customized, to fit each patient's unique anatomy. The worldwide market for joint replacement products is approximately $19.5 billion annually and growing, and we believe our iFit technology platform is applicable to all major joints in this market. We offer a broad line of personalized knee implants and instruments designed to restore the natural shape of a patient’s knee. As of December 31, 2020, we had sold a total of more than 125,000 knee implants, including more than 100,000 total knee implants and 25,000 partial knee implants. In multiple clinical studies, iTotal CR, our cruciate-retaining total knee replacement implant and best-selling product, demonstrated superior clinical outcomes, including better function, including kinematics and objective functional measures, and greater patient satisfaction compared to those of standard, or “off-the-shelf,” implants that it was tested against. In 2016, we initiated the broad commercial launch of the iTotal PS, our posterior-stabilized total knee replacement implant which addresses the largest segment of the knee replacement market. In July 2018, our first Conformis Hip Systems were implanted in a limited commercial launch. On November 11, 2019, we entered full commercial launch of the Conformis Hip System. We are planning for a limited commercial launch of a second stem for the Conformis Hip System in the first half of 2022. In the second half of 2021, we plan to launch a new standard knee offering, which is being designed to provide a lower-cost alternative to hospitals, outpatient surgery centers, and ASCs, while still taking full advantage of years of patient data collected through Conformis’ unique business model. We are planning for a limited commercial launch of our cementless or Press Fit option for our iTotal Identity knee implant beginning during the fourth quarter of 2021 and/or first quarter of 2022, with the full commercial launch planned by the second half of 2022.
Our iFit technology platform comprises three key elements:
•iFit Design, our proprietary algorithms and computer software that we use to design personalized implants and associated single-use patient-specific instrumentation, which we refer to as iJigs, based on computed tomography, or CT scans of the patient and to prepare a surgical plan customized for the patient that we call iView.
•iFit Printing, a three-dimensional, or 3D, printing technology that we use to manufacture iJigs and that we may extend to manufacture certain components of our personalized knee replacement implants.
•iFit Just-in-Time Delivery, our just-in-time manufacturing and delivery capabilities.
We believe our iFit technology platform enables a scalable business model that greatly lowers our inventory requirements, reduces the amount of working capital required to support our operations and allows us to launch new products and product improvements more rapidly, as compared to manufacturers of off-the-shelf implants. Manufacturers of traditional knee replacement implants offer products with a limited range of sizes and geometries, which we refer to as off-the-shelf implants. Off-the-shelf implants are not designed to restore a particular patient's unique anatomy.
All of our joint replacement products have been cleared by the FDA under the premarket notification process of Section 510(k) of the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, or the FDCA, and have received certification to CE Mark. We market our products to orthopedic surgeons, hospitals and other medical facilities and patients. We use direct sales representatives, independent sales representatives and distributors to market and sell our products in the United States, Germany, the United Kingdom and other markets.
We were incorporated in Delaware and commenced operations in 2004.
COVID-19 Pandemic
In December 2019, a human infection originating in China was traced to a novel strain of coronavirus. The virus subsequently spread to other parts of the world, including the United States and Europe, and caused unprecedented disruptions in the global economy as efforts to contain the spread of the virus intensified. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared this coronavirus outbreak (COVID-19) to be a pandemic. The future progression of the pandemic, including the scope, severity and duration of the pandemic, potential resurgences, the speed and effectiveness of vaccine and treatment developments, and the direct and indirect economic effects of the pandemic and containment measures, and its effects on our business and operations remain uncertain. We have experienced significantly decreased demand for our products during the pandemic as healthcare providers and individuals have de-prioritized and deferred medical procedures deemed to be elective, such as joint replacement procedures, which has had and is expected to continue to have a significant negative effect on our revenue.
Such negative effects were most pronounced during the second quarter of 2020, when a significant number of hospitals were either closed for elective procedures or otherwise operating at significantly reduced volumes. Generally, we saw an increase in procedure volumes during the summer, as many regions were able to reopen for elective procedures, with an existing patient backlog.
Within the U.S. and Germany, which are our major sales markets, estimated case counts have increased since November 2020, though cases have begun to substantially decline again in recent weeks. While elective surgery sites generally remain open and operational, we believe that the increased hospital burden has negatively impacted surgical demand and capacity, temporarily delaying many procedures. In addition, there are concerns about future strains of COVID-19. We expect that these negative effects will continue in the near-term until infection rates decline from their current level, and more of the country's population is vaccinated. However, the future progression of the pandemic remains uncertain. To the extent that individuals in these markets continue to de-prioritize or delay deferrable procedures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic or otherwise, our business, cash flows, financial condition and results of operations could be negatively affected.
On March 20, 2020, we provided notice to our employees of a furlough of approximately 80 employees effective as of March 23, 2020 to help address decreased demand for our products. The furlough resulted in reduced production capacity at our manufacturing facilities, but sufficient to meet demand. While we have not experienced and do not currently anticipate significant interruptions in our supply chain, extended or additional quarantines, travel restrictions and other measures may significantly impact the ability of employees of our third-party suppliers to get to their places of work to manufacture the key components and materials necessary for our products. Any delay or shortage of materials or delays in delivering our products may result in our inability to satisfy consumer demand for our products in a timely manner or at all, which could harm our reputation, future sales, profitability and financial condition. On April 17, 2020, we entered into an approximately $4.7 million promissory note, or the PPP Note, with East West Bank under the Paycheck Protection Program, or the PPP offered by the U.S. Small Business Administration, or the SBA, to mitigate the negative financial and operational impacts of the pandemic. On April 23, 2020, we accelerated a plan to return to full-time employment the vast majority of those employees who were furloughed on March 23, 2020. This plan was completed at the end of April 2020.
Components of our results of operations
The following is a description of factors that may influence our results of operations, including significant trends and challenges that we believe are important to an understanding of our business and results of operations.
Revenue
Our product revenue is generated from sales to hospitals and other medical facilities that are served through a direct sales force, independent sales representatives and distributors in the United States, Germany, the
United Kingdom, Austria, Ireland, Switzerland, Spain, Portugal, the Netherlands, Belgium, the Dutch Antilles, Suriname, Australia, Argentina, the United Arab Emirates, the Sultanate of Oman, Italy, San Marino, Poland and other markets. In order for surgeons to use our products, the medical facilities where these surgeons treat patients typically require us to enter into pricing agreements. The process of negotiating a pricing agreement can be lengthy and time-consuming, requiring extensive management time and may not be successful.
Revenue from sales of our products fluctuates principally based on the selling price of the joint replacement product, as the sales price of our products varies among hospitals and other medical facilities as well as health insurance coverage and reimbursement rates. In addition, our product revenue may fluctuate based on the product sales mix and mix of sales by geography. Our product revenue from international sales can be significantly impacted by fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, as our sales are typically denominated in the local currency in the countries in which we sell our products. We expect our product revenue to fluctuate from quarter-to-quarter due to a variety of factors, including seasonality, as we have historically experienced lower sales in the summer months, the timing of the introduction of our new products, if any, and the impact of the buying patterns and implant volumes of medical facilities.
Royalty and licensing revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes revenue of $9.6 million generated from our settlement with Zimmer Biomet for a royalty-free, non-exclusive, worldwide license to certain patents for the exploitation of patient-specific or partially patient-specific instrumentation for knee, shoulder or hip replacement and releases and other immunities. Under Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers ("Topic 606" or "ASC 606"), these individual rights are accounted for as a single performance obligation. The earnings process is complete and revenue is recognized upon the execution of the contract, when collectability is probable and all other revenue recognition criteria have been met. Ongoing royalty revenue is generated from our agreement with MicroPort Orthopedics Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of MicroPort Scientific Corporation, or collectively, MicroPort. The license agreement with MicroPort will expire upon the expiration of the last to expire of our patents and patent applications licensed to MicroPort, which currently is expected to occur in 2031.
We provide certain information regarding our financial results or projected financial results on a non-GAAP "constant currency basis." This information estimates the impact of changes in foreign currency rates on the translation of our current or projected future period financial results as compared to the applicable comparable period. This impact is derived by taking the adjusted current or projected local currency results and translating them into U.S. Dollars based upon the foreign currency exchange rates for the applicable comparable period. It does not include any other effect of changes in foreign currency rates on our results or business. Non-GAAP information is not a substitute for, and is not superior to, information presented on a GAAP basis.
This non-GAAP financial measure may be different from non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies, limiting its usefulness for comparison purposes. Moreover, presentation of revenue on a constant currency basis is provided for year-over-year comparison purposes, and investors should be cautioned that the effect of changing foreign currency exchange rates has an actual effect on our operating results. We consider the use of a period over period revenue comparison on a constant currency basis to be helpful to investors, as it provides a revenue growth measure free of positive or negative volatility due to currency fluctuations.
Cost of revenue
We produce our computer aided designs, or CAD, in-house and in India and use them to direct most of our product manufacturing efforts. We manufacture all of our patient-specific instruments, or iJigs, tibial trays used in our total knee implants, and polyethylene tibia tray inserts for our iTotal CR and our iTotal PS product, in our facility in Wilmington, Massachusetts. We polish our femoral implants used in our total and partial knee products in our facility in Wallingford, Connecticut. Starting in 2019, we began to manufacture the lateral partial tibial tray components in our facility in Wilmington, Massachusetts. We outsource the production of the remainder of the partial knee tibial components, femoral castings, and other knee and hip components to third-party suppliers. Our suppliers make our personalized implant components using the CAD designs we supply. Cost of revenue consists primarily of costs of raw materials, manufacturing personnel, outsourced CAD labor, manufacturing supplies, inbound freight, manufacturing overhead, and depreciation expense. Also included in cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, are legal fees payable to external counsel in connection with our patent licensing and enforcement activities related to the Settlement and License Agreement with Zimmer Biomet.
We calculate gross margin as revenue less cost of revenue divided by revenue. Our gross margin has been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, including primarily volume of units produced, mix of product components manufactured by us versus sourced from third parties, our average selling price, the geographic mix of sales, product sales mix, the number of cancelled sales orders resulting in wasted implants, and royalty revenue.
We expect our gross margin from the sale of our products, which excludes royalty and licensing revenue, to expand over time to the extent we are successful in continuing to reduce our manufacturing costs per unit and increasing our manufacturing efficiency as sales volume increases. We believe that areas of opportunity to expand our gross margin in the future, if and as the volume of our product sales increases, include the following:
•absorbing overhead costs across a larger volume of product sales;
•obtaining more favorable pricing for the materials used in the manufacture of our products;
•obtaining more favorable pricing of certain components of our products manufactured for us by third parties;
•increasing the proportion of certain components of our products that we manufacture in-house, which we believe we can manufacture at a lower unit cost than vendors we currently use; and
•developing new versions of our software used in the design of our personalized joint replacement implants, which we believe will reduce costs associated with the design process.
We also continue to explore other opportunities to reduce our manufacturing costs. However, these and the above opportunities may not be realized. In addition, our gross margin may fluctuate from period to period.
Operating expenses
Our operating expenses consist of sales and marketing, research and development and general and administrative expenses. Personnel costs are the most significant component of operating expenses and consist of salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation and sales commissions.
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expense consists primarily of personnel costs, including salary, employee benefits and stock-based compensation for personnel employed in sales, marketing, customer service, medical education and training, as well as investments in surgeon training programs, industry events and other promotional activities. In addition, our sales and marketing expense includes sales commissions and bonuses, generally based on a percentage of sales, to our sales managers, direct sales representatives and independent sales representatives. Recruiting, training and retaining productive sales representatives and educating surgeons about the benefits of our products are required to generate and grow revenue. We expect sales and marketing expense to increase as we build up our sales and support personnel and expand our marketing efforts. Our sales and marketing expense may fluctuate from period to period due to the seasonality of our revenue and the timing and extent of our expenses.
Research and development. Research and development expense consists primarily of personnel costs, including salary, employee benefits and stock-based compensation for personnel employed in research and development, regulatory and clinical areas. Research and development expense also includes costs associated with product design, product refinement and improvement efforts before and after receipt of regulatory clearance, development of prototypes, testing, clinical study programs and regulatory activities, contractors and consultants, and equipment and software to support our development. As our revenue increases, we will also incur additional expense for revenue share payments to our past and present scientific advisory board members, including one of our past directors. We expect research and development expense to increase in absolute dollars as we develop new products to expand our product pipeline, add research and development personnel and conduct clinical activities.
General and administrative. General and administrative expense consists primarily of personnel costs, including salary, employee benefits and stock-based compensation for our administrative personnel that support our general operations, including executive management, general legal and intellectual property, finance and accounting, information technology and human resources personnel. General and administrative expense also includes outside legal costs associated with intellectual property and general legal matters, financial audit fees, insurance, fees for other consulting services, depreciation expense, long-lived asset impairment charges, freight, facilities expense, allocation of manufacturing training costs, and severance expense. We expect our general and administrative expense will increase in absolute dollars as we increase our headcount and expand our infrastructure to support growth in our business and our operations as a public company. As our revenue increases we also will
incur additional expenses for freight. Our general and administrative expense may fluctuate from period to period due to the timing and extent of the expenses.
Total other income (expenses), net
Total other income (expenses), net consists primarily of interest expense and amortization of debt discount associated with our term loans outstanding during the year, debt extinguishment loss, and gains (losses) from foreign currency transactions. The effect of exchange rates on our foreign currency-denominated asset and liability balances are recorded as foreign currency translation adjustments in the consolidated statements of comprehensive loss.
Income tax provision
Income tax provision consists primarily of a provision for income taxes in foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We maintain a full valuation allowance for deferred tax assets including net operating loss carryforwards and research and development credits and other tax credits.
Consolidated results of operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth our results of operations expressed as dollar amounts, percentage of total revenue and year-over-year change (in thousands):
Product revenue. Product revenue was $58.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $76.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $18.1 million or 24%. We believe the decline is primarily due to the postponement of elective surgeries as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, our product revenue by geography expressed as U.S. dollar amounts, percentage of product revenue and year-over-year change (in thousands):
Product revenue in the United States was generated through our direct sales force and independent sales representatives. Product revenue outside the United States was generated through our direct sales force and distributors. The percentage of product revenue generated in the United States was 87% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 88% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
United States product revenue decreased $16.4 million to $50.7 million or 24% year over year. We believe the decline in revenue inside the United States was primarily due to the postponement of elective surgeries due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Germany product revenue decreased $1.1 million to $6.5 million, or 14% year over year
on a reported basis and 16% on a constant currency basis. Rest of World product revenue decreased $0.6 million to $1.3 million, or 33% year-over-year on a reported basis and 34% on a constant currency basis, we believe primarily due to restrictions of elective surgeries in the UK related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The impact of COVID-19 is affecting all geographies.
Royalty and licensing revenue. Royalty and licensing revenue was $10.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $9.4 million or 1,210%. The increase in royalty and licensing revenue was driven by $9.6 million in revenue recognized in the second quarter of 2020 under the Settlement and License Agreement with Zimmer Biomet.
Cost of revenue, gross profit and gross margin. Cost of revenue was $35.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $40.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $5.6 million or 14%. The decrease was due primarily to lower volumes due to the postponement of elective surgeries we believe as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as higher cancelled case expense as a percent of revenue. Gross profit was $33.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $36.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $3.0 million or 8%. Gross margin was 49% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 47% for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of 200 basis points. This increase in gross margin was driven primarily by the $9.6 million licensing revenue as a result of the Settlement and License Agreement with Zimmer Biomet. Also included in cost of revenue are legal fees payable to external counsel in connection with alternative fee arrangements relating to patent licensing and enforcement activities related to the Zimmer Biomet settlement.
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expense was $22.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $28.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $5.9 million or 21%. The decrease was due primarily to lower commissions of $3.9 million, personnel costs of $1.0 million, travel and entertainment of $0.7 million and marketing programs of $0.6 million. The decline in expenses were due to lower variable costs associated with the reduction in revenue and targeted expense reduction efforts to partially offset the negative impact of COVID-19. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in depreciation expense of $0.5 million. Sales and marketing expense decreased as a percentage of total revenue to 33% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 37% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Research and development. Research and development expense was $11.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $12.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $0.5 million or 4%. The decrease was due to allocated cost to the advance on research and development of $1.5 million, a decrease in revenue share and clinical trial expenses of $0.5 million, a decrease in travel and entertainment of $0.2 million, partially offset by an increase of $1.7 million in personnel costs. Research and development expense increased as a percentage of total revenue to 17% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 16% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
General and administrative. General and administrative expense was $24.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $20.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $3.3 million or 16%. The increase was primarily due to higher personnel related costs of $1.4 million, legal expense of $1.1 million, severance expense of $0.3 million, insurance expense of $0.3 million, professional service expense of $0.2 million, and taxes and fees of $0.2 million. These increases were partially offset by decreases in outbound freight costs of $0.1 million as a result of the lower revenue and a decrease in travel and entertainment of $0.1 million. General and administrative expense increased as a percentage of total revenue to 35% for the years ended December 31, 2020 from 27% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Total other income (expenses), net. Total other income (expenses), net was $0.9 million of other income for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to other expense of $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a change of $4.2 million, or 126%. The change was primarily due to lower interest expense, net of $0.3 million and a $3.9 million increase in foreign currency exchange transaction income.
Income taxes. Income tax provision was $42,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $45,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. We continue to generate losses for U.S. federal and state tax purposes and have net operating loss carryforwards creating a deferred tax asset. We maintain a full valuation allowance for deferred tax assets.
Liquidity, capital resources and plan of operations
Sources of liquidity and funding requirements
From our inception in June 2004 through the year ended December 31, 2020, we have financed our operations primarily through private placements of preferred stock, our initial public offering in 2015, other equity financings, debt and convertible debt financings, equipment purchase loans, patent licensing, and product revenue beginning in 2007. We have not yet attained profitability and continue to incur operating losses and negative operating cash flows.
At December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $528.4 million.
In January 2017, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3, which was declared effective by the SEC on May 9, 2017, or the 2017 Shelf Registration Statement. The 2017 Shelf Registration Statement allows us to sell from time to time up to $200 million of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, or units comprised of any combination of these securities, for our own account in one or more offerings. On May 10, 2017, we filed with the SEC a prospectus supplement, pursuant to which we could issue and sell up to $50 million of our common stock and entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement with Canaccord Genuity LLC (formerly Canaccord Genuity Inc.) or Canaccord, pursuant to which Canaccord agreed to sell shares of our common stock from time to time, as our agent in an “at-the-market”, or ATM, offering as defined in Rule 415 promulgated under the U.S. Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Act. We are not obligated to sell any number of shares under the Distribution Agreement. On August 4, 2020, we and Canaccord mutually agreed to terminate the Distribution Agreement, and as of that date, we had sold 2,663,000 shares under the Distribution Agreement resulting in net proceeds of $4.4 million.
On March 23, 2020, we filed a new shelf registration statement on Form S-3 or the New Shelf Registration Statement, which was declared effective by the SEC on August 5, 2020. Under the New Shelf Registration Statement, we will be permitted to sell from time to time up to $200 million of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, or units comprised of any combination of these securities, for its own account in one or more offerings. The New Shelf Registration Statement is intended to provide us flexibility to conduct sales of our registered securities, subject to market conditions and our future capital needs. On August 5, 2020, we filed with the SEC a prospectus supplement, for the sale and issuance of up to $25 million of its common stock and entered into an at-the-market issuance sales agreement, or the Sales Agreement, with Cowen and Company, LLC, or Cowen, pursuant to which we may offer and sell shares of the our common stock to or through Cowen, acting as agent and/or principal, from time to time in an “at-the-market” offering as defined in Rule 415 promulgated under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, including without limitation sales made by means of ordinary brokers’ transactions on the NASDAQ Capital Market or otherwise at market prices prevailing at the time of sale, in block transactions, or as otherwise directed by us. Cowen will use commercially reasonable efforts to sell the Common Stock from time to time, based upon instructions from us (including any price, time or size limits or other customary parameters or conditions we may impose). We will pay Cowen a commission of up to 3.0% of the gross sales proceeds of any Common Stock sold through Cowen under the Sales Agreement, and we also provided Cowen with customary indemnification rights. The shares of Common Stock being offered pursuant to the Sales Agreement will be offered and sold pursuant to the New Shelf Registration Statement. We are not obligated to make any sales of Common Stock under the Sales Agreement. The offering of shares of Common Stock pursuant to the Sales Agreement will terminate upon the earlier of (i) the sale of all Common Stock subject to the Sales Agreement or (ii) termination of the Sales Agreement in accordance with its terms. As of December 31, 2020, we had not sold any shares under the Sales Agreement.
On December 17, 2018, we entered into a stock purchase agreement, or the "Stock Purchase Agreement," with Lincoln Park Capital, or "LPC." Upon entering into the Stock Purchase Agreement, we sold 1,921,968 shares of common stock for $1.0 million to LPC, representing a premium of 110% to the previous day's closing price. Additionally, as consideration for LPC’s commitment to purchase shares of common stock under the LPC Agreement, we issued 354,430 shares to LPC. We have the right at our sole discretion to sell to LPC up to $20.0 million worth of shares over a 36-month period subject to the terms of the Stock Purchase Agreement. We will control the timing of any sales to LPC and LPC will be obligated to make purchases of our common stock upon receipt of requests from us in accordance with the terms of the Stock Purchase Agreement. There are no upper limits to the price per share LPC may pay to purchase the up to $20.0 million worth of common stock subject to the Stock Purchase Agreement, and the purchase price of the shares will be based on the then prevailing market prices of our shares at the time of each sale to LPC as described in the Stock Purchase Agreement, provided that LPC will not be obligated to make purchases of our common stock pursuant to receipt of a request from us on any business day on which the last closing trade price of our common stock on the NASDAQ Capital Market (or alternative
national exchange in accordance with the Stock Purchase Agreement) is below a floor price of $0.25 per share. No warrants, derivatives, financial or business covenants are associated with the Stock Purchase Agreement and LPC has agreed not to cause or engage in any manner whatsoever, any direct or indirect short selling or hedging of shares of our common stock. The Stock Purchase Agreement may be terminated by us at any time, at our sole discretion, without any cost or penalty. On August 5, 2020, we filed with the SEC a prospectus supplement, for the sale and issuance of up to $17.6 million of our common stock pursuant to the Stock Purchase Agreement dated December 17, 2018. As of December 31, 2020, we have sold 4,521,968 shares under the Stock Purchase Agreement resulting in proceeds of $3.4 million.
On September 23, 2020, we and a healthcare-focused institutional investor entered into a subscription agreement the "Subscription Agreement", pursuant to which we sold (i) 8,512,088 shares of its common stock and accompanying warrants to purchase up to 8,512,088 shares of common stock and (ii) pre-funded warrants to purchase up to 9,492,953 shares of common stock and accompanying warrants to purchase up to 9,492,953 shares of common stock in a registered direct offering for gross proceeds of approximately $17.3 million. The common stock (or one pre-funded warrants in lieu thereof) and accompanying warrants were sold as units, each consisting of one share (or one pre-funded warrant to purchase one share of common stock in lieu thereof) and one warrant to purchase one share of common stock, at an offering price of $0.9581 per unit. The net proceeds to us from the offering, after deducting the placement agent's fees and other estimated offering expenses payable by us, was approximately $15.9 million.
The pre-funded warrants became exercisable immediately upon issuance, have an exercise price of $0.0001 per share and will be exercisable until all of the pre-funded warrants are exercised in full. As of December 31, 2020, all pre-funded warrants have been fully exercised. The warrants became exercisable immediately upon issuance, have an exercise price of $0.8748 per share, and will expire five years from the date of issuance. As of March 3, 2021, approximately 6.0 million of these warrants have been exercised. The pre-funded warrants and the warrants each prohibit the holder from exercising any portion thereof to the extent that the holder would own more than 9.99% of the number of shares of common stock outstanding immediately after exercise. The number of shares issuable upon exercise of the warrants and pre-funded warrants and the exercise price of the warrants and pre-funded warrants is adjustable in the event of stock splits, stock dividends, combinations of shares and similar recapitalization transactions.
On June 25, 2019, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement or the 2019 Secured Loan Agreement with Innovatus Life Sciences Lending Fund I, LP or Innovatus, as collateral agent and lender, East West Bank and the other lenders party thereto from time to time, or Lenders, pursuant to which the Lenders agreed to make term loans and to provide a revolving credit facility to us to repay existing indebtedness, for working capital and general business purposes, in a principal amount of up to $30 million. We used the proceeds from the 2019 Secured Loan Agreement to pay off the $15 million term loan from Oxford Finance LLC. In addition, Innovatus purchased approximately $3 million of our common stock at the previous day's closing price. During the first quarter of 2020, we reported that we may not be able to meet our second quarter revenue covenant and would work with Innovatus with the goal of adjusting the revenue covenants under the 2019 Secured Loan Agreement. On July 1, 2020, we entered into a third amendment to the 2019 Secured Loan Agreement, which, among other things, waived the trailing six-month revenue covenant milestones that applied to the quarters ended June 30, September 30 and December 31, 2020 under the agreement, reduced the revenue covenant milestones that apply thereafter, and delays until June 25, 2021 our option to prepay all, but not less than all, of the term loans advanced under the 2019 Secured Loan Agreement. On August 20, 2020, we entered into a fourth amendment to the 2019 Secured Loan Agreement, which, among other things, waived certain provisions of the agreement that apply to Conformis India LLP. As of December 31, 2020, we were not in breach of covenants under the 2019 Secured Loan Agreement.
On March 1, 2021, we entered into a fifth amendment to the 2019 Secured Loan Agreement, which, among other things, waives the trailing six-month revenue covenant milestones that apply to the quarters ending March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31, 2021 and reduces the revenue covenant milestones that apply in 2022. The revenue covenant milestones remain unchanged for 2023 and 2024. The amendment also increases our minimum cash covenant to $5 million until December 31, 2021. For further information regarding the 2019 Secured Loan Agreement and the fifth amendment, see “Note I-Debt and Notes Payable” in the financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On September 30, 2019, we entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with Howmedica Osteonics Corp., a subsidiary of Stryker Corporation also known as Stryker Orthopaedics, or Stryker. In connection with entering into the Asset Purchase Agreement, we also entered into a Development Agreement, a License Agreement, and other ancillary agreements contemplated by the Asset Purchase Agreement with Stryker. Under the terms of the
agreements, we agreed to sell and license to Stryker certain assets relating to our patient-specific instrumentation technology, and to develop, manufacture, and supply patient-specific instrumentation for use in connection with Stryker's "off-the-shelf" non-personalized knee implant offerings. We received $14 million upfront and became eligible to receive up to an additional $16 million in milestone payments pursuant to the License Agreement and the Development Agreement. As of December 31, 2020, we had successfully completed two of three milestones with Stryker and received $5.0 million in the aggregate for achievement of these milestones. Under the long-term Distribution Agreement, we will supply patient-specific instrumentation to Stryker. We may be required to pay back a portion of the initial payment as it is contingent on successful completion of the milestones set forth in the Development Agreement and License Agreement.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act, was enacted on March 27, 2020 in the United States. On April 17, 2020, we entered into an approximately $4.7 million promissory note, or the PPP Note, with East West Bank as the lender under the PPP offered by the SBA, to mitigate the negative financial and operational impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. The interest rate on the PPP Note is a fixed rate of 1% per annum. We are required to make one payment of all outstanding principal plus all accrued unpaid interest on April 9, 2022, or the Maturity Date. We will pay regular monthly payments in an amount equal to one month’s accrued interest commencing on August 2, 2021, with all subsequent interest payments to be due on the same day of each month after that. All interest which accrues during the deferral period will be payable on the Maturity Date. According to the terms of the PPP, all or a portion of the loan as well as any accrued interest may be fully forgiven if the funds are used for payroll costs (and at least 60% of the forgiven amount must have been used for payroll), interest on certain other outstanding debt, rent, and utilities. In accordance with the CARES Act, we used the proceeds of the loan primarily for payroll costs. We submitted the loan forgiveness application to the lender on December 11, 2020. We resubmitted the application on February 23, 2021 with additional supporting documentation as requested by the lender. We're currently waiting for a final decision from the lender regarding approval of the application.
On May 22, 2020, we entered into a Settlement and License Agreement with Zimmer Biomet, Zimmer US, Inc. and Biomet Manufacturing, LLC, or collectively, Zimmer Biomet, pursuant to which the parties agreed to terms for resolving then-existing patent disputes. Under the Settlement and License Agreement, we and Zimmer Biomet agreed to dismiss both outstanding patent infringement lawsuits between the parties; we granted to Zimmer Biomet a royalty-free, non-exclusive, worldwide license to certain of our patents for Zimmer Biomet’s patient-specific instrumentation used with off-the-shelf knee, hip, and shoulder implants; and Zimmer Biomet granted us a fully paid-up, royalty-free, non-exclusive, worldwide license to certain Zimmer Biomet patents for our implants and patient-specific instruments for the knee. Under the agreement, Zimmer Biomet was required to pay us a total of $9.6 million in installments through January 15, 2021, and all such payments were made and received by such date. No payment was due from us to Zimmer Biomet.
On February 17, 2021, we closed an offering of our common stock off of the Shelf Registration Statement and issued and sold 80,952,381 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $1.05 per share, for aggregate net proceeds of approximately $79.6 million. For further information regarding this public offering, see "Note O-Subsequent Events - 2021 Common Stock Offering" in the financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We expect to incur substantial expenditures in the foreseeable future in connection with the following:
•expansion of our sales and marketing efforts;
•expansion of our manufacturing capacity;
•funding research, development and clinical activities related to our existing products and product platform, including iFit design software and product support;
•funding research, development and clinical activities related to new products that we may develop, including other joint replacement products;
•pursuing and maintaining appropriate regulatory clearances and approvals for our existing products and any new products that we may develop; and
•preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, and maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and position.
We anticipate that our principal sources of funds in the future will be revenue generated from the sales of our products, including the successful full commercial launch of the Conformis Hip System, successful completion of the milestones set forth in the Development Agreement and License Agreement, potential payments from Stryker
pursuant to the Distribution Agreement, funds from the February 17, 2021 common stock offering, available sales of shares under the Sales Agreement and the Stock Purchase Agreement, and revenues that we may generate in connection with licensing our intellectual property. Additionally, in order for us to meet our long-term operating plan, revenue growth, gross margin improvements and leveraging operating expenses will be necessary to reduce cash used in operations. We will need to generate significant additional revenue to achieve and maintain profitability, and even if we achieve profitability, we cannot be sure that we will remain profitable for any substantial period of time. It is also possible that we may allocate significant amounts of capital toward products or technologies for which market demand is lower than anticipated and, as a result, abandon such efforts. If we are unable to obtain adequate financing or financing on terms satisfactory to us when we require it, or if we expend capital on projects that are not successful, our ability to continue to support our business growth and to respond to business challenges could be significantly limited, and we may even have to scale back our operations. Our failure to become and remain profitable could impair our ability to raise capital, expand our business, maintain our research and development efforts or continue to fund our operations.
We may need to engage in additional equity or debt financings to secure additional funds. We may not be able to obtain additional financing on terms favorable to us, or at all. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the future sales of equity or debt, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted. The terms of these future or debt securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our existing common stockholders or involve negative covenants that restrict our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt or making capital expenditures.
At December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $28.7 million and $0.5 million in restricted cash allocated to lease deposits. Based on our current operating plan, we expect to fund our operations, capital expenditure requirements and debt service with existing cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020, funds from the February 17, 2021 common stock offering, anticipated revenue from operations, the successful completion of the milestones set forth in the Development Agreement and License Agreement, revenue that may be generated in connection with licensing intellectual property, available sales of shares under the Sales Agreement and the Stock Purchase Agreement and funds from potential exercises of our common stock warrants. We have based this expectation on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, such as the revenue that we expect to generate from the sale of our products, the gross profit we expect to generate from those revenues, and the fact that we could use our capital resources sooner than we expect.
The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted and will continue to impact our business, operations and financial condition. As part of our response to COVID-19, we took certain measures in preserving liquidity. In addition to the furlough implemented in March 2020, we have eliminated, reduced, or are deferring significant non-essential expense including sales, marketing, quality, clinical, regulatory and general and administrative expense. Non-essential programs have been eliminated or deferred where possible. In addition, we are working with suppliers to help match future revenue and expense.
Cash flows
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows for the periods indicated, as well as the year-over-year change (in thousands):
Net cash used in operating activities. Net cash used in operating activities was $18.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $15.5 million. These amounts primarily reflect net losses of $24.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $28.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was affected by a decrease in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities of $4.8 million, a decrease in contract liability of $10.0 million and advances for research and development of $4.5
million under the Asset Purchase Agreement with Stryker, a decrease in inventory of $2.0 million, and a decrease in prepaid and other assets of $2.1 million, partially offset by an increase in royalty and licensing receivable of $1.1 million. Non-cash reconciling items include an increase in unrealized foreign exchange income/loss of $3.8 million, partially offset by a decrease from loss from debt extinguishment of $1.1 million.
Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $4.3 million cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $7.6 million. These amounts primarily reflect a decrease in cash provided from matured investments of $7.3 million, and an increase in cost related to the acquisition of property and equipment of $0.3 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was $23.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $15.2 million. The increase is due to $15.9 million of proceeds from the issuance of common stock and prefunded warrants under the registered direct offering, $4.7 million of proceeds from the issuance of the PPP loan and net proceeds of $3.1 million from issuance of common stock, compared to the net proceeds of $3.3 million from the refinancing of the Oxford debt, and net proceeds of $5.0 million from issuance of common stock for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Revenue share agreements
We are party to revenue share agreements with certain past and present members of our scientific advisory boards under which these advisors agreed to participate on our scientific advisory board and to assist with the development of our personalized implant products and related intellectual property. These agreements provide that we will pay the advisor a specified percentage of our net revenue, ranging from 0.1% to 1.33%, with respect to our products on which the advisor made a technical contribution or, in some cases, which are covered by a claim of one of our patents on which the advisor is a named inventor. The specific percentage is determined by reference to product classifications set forth in the agreement and may be tiered based on the level of net revenue collected by us on such product sales. Our payment obligations under these agreements typically expire a fixed number of years after expiration or termination of the agreement, but in some cases expire on a product-by-product basis or expiration of the last to expire of our patents for which the advisor is a named inventor that has claims covering the applicable product.
The aggregate revenue share percentage of net revenue from our currently marketed knee replacement products, including percentages under revenue share agreements with all of our scientific advisory board members, ranges, depending on the particular product, from 2.5% to 5.6%. We incurred aggregate revenue share expense, included in research and development, including all amounts payable under our scientific advisory board revenue share agreements of $1.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, and representing 2.7% of product revenue, $2.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, representing 2.6% of product revenue. For further information, see “Note H-Commitments and Contingencies-Revenue Share Agreements” in the financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Segment information
We have one primary business activity and operate as one reportable segment.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
Through December 31, 2020, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated organizations or financial partnerships, such as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Critical accounting policies and estimates
We have prepared our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Our preparation of these financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. We believe the critical accounting policies and estimates that require the use
of significant estimates and judgments in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements include revenue recognition, inventory valuations, impairment assessments, and income tax reserves and related allowances. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Our critical accounting policies and estimates are more fully described in "Note B - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" to the consolidated financial statements appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue recognition
Our product revenue is generated from sales to hospitals and other medical facilities that are served through a direct sales force, independent sales representatives and distributors in the United States, Germany, the United Kingdom, Austria, Ireland, Switzerland, Spain, Portugal, the Netherlands, Belgium, the Dutch Antilles, Suriname, Australia, Argentina, the United Arab Emirates, the Sultanate of Oman, Italy, San Marino, Poland and other markets. In order for surgeons to use our products, the medical facilities where these surgeons treat patients typically require us to enter into pricing agreements. The process of negotiating a pricing agreement can be lengthy and time-consuming, require extensive management time and may not be successful.
Revenue from sales of our products fluctuates principally based on the selling price of the joint replacement product, as the sales price of our products varies among hospitals and other medical facilities. In addition, our product revenue may fluctuate based on the product sales mix and mix of sales by geography. Our product revenue from international sales can be significantly impacted by fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, as our sales are denominated in the local currency in the countries in which we sell our products. We expect our product revenue to fluctuate from quarter-to-quarter due to a variety of factors, including seasonality, as we have historically experienced lower sales in the summer months, the timing of the introduction of our new products, if any, and the impact of the buying patterns and implant volumes of medical facilities.
Product revenue is recognized when, or as, obligations under the terms of a contract are satisfied, which occurs when control of the promised products or services is transferred to customers. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for transferring products or services to a customer (“transaction price”). When determining the transaction price of a contract, an adjustment is made if payment from a customer occurs either significantly before or significantly after performance, resulting in a significant financing component. Applying the practical expedient in paragraph 606-10-32-18, the Company does not assess whether a significant financing component exists if the period between when the Company performs its obligations under the contract and when the customer pays is one year or less. None of the Company’s contracts contained a significant financing component as of December 31, 2020. Payment is typically due between 30 - 60 days from invoice.
To the extent that the transaction price includes variable consideration, such as prompt-pay discounts or rebates, the Company estimates the amount of variable consideration that should be included in the transaction price utilizing the expected value to which the Company expects to be entitled. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price if, in the Company’s judgment, it is probable that a significant future reversal of cumulative revenue under the contract will not occur. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from the Company's estimates. Estimates of variable consideration and determination of whether to include estimated amounts in the transaction price are based largely on an assessment of the Company’s anticipated performance and all information (historical, current and forecasted) that is reasonably available.
If the contract contains a single performance obligation, the entire transaction price is allocated to the single performance obligation. Contracts that contain multiple performance obligations require an allocation of the transaction price based on the estimated relative standalone selling prices of the promised products or services underlying each performance obligation. The Company determines standalone selling prices based on observable prices or a cost-plus margin approach when one is not available. Revenue is recognized at the time the related performance obligation is satisfied by transferring control of a promised good or service to a customer. The Company's performance obligations are satisfied at the same time, typically upon surgery, therefore, product revenue is recognized at a point in time upon completion of the surgery. Since the Company does not have contracts that extend beyond a duration of one year, there is no transaction price related to performance obligations that have not been satisfied.
Certain customer contracts include terms that allow the Company to bill for orders that are cancelled after the product is manufactured and could result in revenue recognition over time. However, the impact of applying over time revenue recognition was deemed immaterial.
Royalty and licensing revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes revenue of $9.6 million generated from our settlement with Zimmer Biomet for a royalty-free, non-exclusive, worldwide license to certain patents for the exploitation of patient-specific or partially patient-specific instrumentation for knee, shoulder or hip replacement and releases and other immunities. Under ASC 606, these individual rights are accounted for as a single performance obligation. The earnings process is complete and revenue is recognized upon the execution of the contract, when collectability is probable and all other revenue recognition criteria have been met. Ongoing royalty revenue is generated from our agreement with MicroPort Orthopedics Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of MicroPort Scientific Corporation, or collectively, MicroPort. Under ASC 606, the license agreement with MicroPort indicates that the licenses are functional and thus revenue recognition is upon the license execution date.
On September 30, 2019, we entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with Howmedica Osteonics Corp., a subsidiary of Stryker Corporation also known as Stryker Orthopaedics, or Stryker. In connection with entering into the Asset Purchase Agreement, we also entered into a Development Agreement, a License Agreement, and other ancillary agreements contemplated by the Asset Purchase Agreement with Stryker. Under the terms of the agreements, we agreed to sell and license to Stryker certain assets relating to our patient-specific instrumentation technology, and to develop, manufacture, and supply patient-specific instrumentation for use in connection with Stryker's "off-the-shelf" non-personalized knee implant offerings. We received $14 million upfront and became eligible to receive up to an additional $16 million in milestone payments pursuant to the License Agreement and the Development Agreement. As of December 31, 2020, we had successfully completed two of three milestones with Stryker and received $5.0 million in the aggregate for achievement of these milestones and advances for research and development. Under the long-term Distribution Agreement, we will supply patient-specific instrumentation to Stryker. We may be required to pay back a portion of the initial payment as it is contingent on successful completion of the milestones set forth in the Development Agreement and License Agreement.
We determined that the Asset Purchase Agreement and the License Agreement is within the scope of ASC 606. Under the Asset Purchase and License Agreements, we are required to provide certain assets and the right to use the license for a specific purpose. The assets and the right to use the license are highly interdependent and is considered one performance obligation. The transaction price of $25.0 million was determined using the residual approach under ASC 606 by deducting the other services (development) performed under the agreement noting the arrangement does not contain a significant financing component.
We recognize a contract liability when there is an obligation to transfer goods or services and consideration has already been received from the customer. At December 31, 2020 we had $14.0 million recognized as a short-term contract liability related to consideration received from Stryker under the Asset Purchase and Development Agreements. We concluded the license rights under the License Agreement is functional and will be recognized at the point in time when FDA 510(k) clearance is received as required under Milestone 3 in the License Agreement, or upon Stryker's election to terminate and purchase the license rights.
Inventories
Inventories consist of raw materials, work-in-process components and finished goods. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost, determined using the first-in first-out method, or net realizable value. We regularly review our inventory quantities on hand and related cost and record a provision for any excess or obsolete inventory based on its estimated forecast of product demand and existing product configurations. We also review our inventory value to determine if it reflects the lower of cost or net realizable value. Appropriate consideration is given to inventory items sold at negative gross margin, purchase commitments and other factors in evaluating net realizable value. During the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, we recognized provisions of $2.7 million, and $2.8 million, respectively, to adjust our inventory value to the lower of cost or net realizable value for estimated unused product related to known and potential cancelled cases, which is included in cost of revenue.
Long-lived assets
We test impairment of long-lived assets when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the assets might be impaired. The asset group is tested for recoverability by comparing the net carrying value of the asset group to the undiscounted net cash flows to be generated from the use and eventual disposition of that asset group.
During the quarters ended March 31, 2020, June 30, 2020, September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020, there were changes in circumstances that led us to believe that our long-lived assets may be impaired. We had experienced a significant decrease in demand for our products we believe as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and as such, an assessment for recoverability was performed. We evaluated whether the estimated undiscounted cash flows, including estimated terminal value, generated from the asset group were sufficient to support the carrying value of the assets. If the carrying amount of the asset group is not recoverable, an impairment loss is recognized if the carrying amount exceeds the fair value. During the year ended December 31, 2020, no such impairment charges were recognized. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we identified long-lived assets that have become impaired and recorded $0.1 million in impairment charges. Impairment charges are included in General and administrative expense.
Income taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the consolidated financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, operating losses and tax credit carry forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized as income in the period that includes the enactment date.
In evaluating the need for a valuation allowance, we consider all reasonably available positive and negative evidence, including recent earnings, expectations of future taxable income and the character of that income. In estimating future taxable income, we rely upon assumptions and estimates of future activity including the reversal of temporary differences. Presently, we believe that a full valuation allowance is required to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
The tax benefit from an uncertain tax position is only recognized if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the consolidated financial statements from these positions are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate resolution. We review our tax positions on an annual basis and more frequently as facts surrounding tax positions change. Based on these future events, we may recognize uncertain tax positions or reverse current uncertain tax positions, the impact of which would affect the consolidated financial statements.
We have operations in Germany, the United Kingdom, and since November 6, 2020, India. The operating results of these operations will be permanently reinvested in those jurisdictions. As a result, we have only provided for income taxes at local rates when required. In April 2020, new interpretations of a German law related to intellectual property and withholding tax were released. We are currently evaluating whether the interpretations will have an impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Accounting Standard Update ("ASU") No. 2016-09, "Compensation - Stock Compensation," was issued and adopted in January 2017. ASU 2016-09 eliminates additional paid in capital ("APIC") pools and requires excess tax benefits and tax deficiencies to be recorded in the income statement when the awards vest or are settled. In addition, modified retrospective adoption of ASU 2016-09 eliminates the requirement that excess tax benefits be realized (i.e., through a reduction in income taxes payable) before we can recognize them and therefore, we have accounted for a cumulative-effect adjustment of $7.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 to record excess tax benefits. Since we have a full valuation allowance on all deferred taxes, this has no impact on retained earnings or our tax position.
On March 27, 2020, the U.S. government enacted the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the "CARES Act") which included modifications to the limitation on business interest expense, net operating loss provisions, and other various U.S. tax law updates. We do not expect that these aspects of the CARES Act will have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
On December 27, 2020, the U.S government enacted the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 "the Act", which included various tax extenders, an update to meals and entertainment expensing, and the deductibility of expenses related to PPP loan proceeds. We applied the Act in regards to expenses related to the PPP loan proceeds, which previously would have been non-deductible.