Item 7.Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Statistical Information
The information noted below is provided pursuant to Guide 3 -- Statistical Disclosure by Bank Holding Companies.
Description of Information
Page
Reference
1. Distribution of Assets, Liabilities and Stockholders'
Equity; Interest Rates and Interest Differential
a. Average Balance Sheets 34
b. Analysis of Net Interest Earnings 35
c. Rate Volume Analysis of Changes in Interest Income and Expense 35
2. Investment Portfolio
a. Book Value of Investments 42
b. Maturity Schedule of Investments 42
c. Securities of Issuers Exceeding 10% of Stockholders’ Equity 42
3. Loan Portfolio
a. Types of Loans 44
b. Maturities and Sensitivity to Changes in Interest Rates 44
c. Risk Elements 48
d. Other Interest Bearing Assets None
4. Summary of Loan Loss Experience 48
5. Deposits
a. Breakdown of Deposits by Categories, Average Balance and Average Rate Paid 34
b. Maturity Schedule of Time Certificates of Deposit and Other Time Deposits of $100,000 or More 52
6. Return on Equity and Assets 27
7. Short-term Borrowings 52
CITY HOLDING COMPANY
City Holding Company (the "Company"), a West Virginia corporation headquartered in Charleston, West Virginia, is a registered financial holding company under the Bank Holding Company Act and conducts its principal activities through its wholly owned subsidiary, City National Bank of West Virginia ("City National"). City National is a retail and consumer-oriented community bank with 94 bank branches in West Virginia (58), Kentucky (19), Virginia (13) and Ohio (4). City National provides credit, deposit, and trust and investment management services to its customers in a broad geographical area that includes many rural and small community markets in addition to larger cities including Charleston (WV), Huntington (WV), Martinsburg (WV), Ashland (KY), Lexington (KY), Winchester (VA) and Staunton (VA). In the Company's key markets, the Company's primary subsidiary, City National, generally ranks in the top three relative to deposit market share and the top two relative to branch share (Charleston/Huntington MSA, Beckley/Lewisburg counties, Staunton MSA and Winchester, VA/WV Eastern Panhandle counties). In addition to its branch network, City National's delivery channels include automated-teller-machines ("ATMs"), interactive-teller-machines ("ITMs"), mobile banking, debit cards, interactive voice response systems, and Internet technology. The Company’s business activities are currently limited to one reportable business segment, which is community banking.
In December 2018, the Company acquired Poage Bankshares, Inc., of Ashland, Kentucky and its principal banking subsidiary, Town Square Bank (collectively, "Poage") and Farmers Deposit Bancorp, Inc., of Cynthiana, Kentucky and its principal banking subsidiary, Farmers Deposit Bank (collectively, "Farmers Deposit").
In July 2019, the Company sold its Virginia Beach, Virginia, branch to Select Bank & Trust Company.
COVID-19 Pandemic/Update
The COVID-19 pandemic has placed significant health, economic and other major pressure throughout the communities the Company serves, the United States and the entire world. The Company has implemented a number of procedures in response to the pandemic to support the safety and well-being of our employees, customers and shareholders that continue through the date of this report:
•We have addressed the safety of our branches and while the branches generally remain open to customers, we have taken steps, and continue to evaluate, to push as much traffic and transactions as possible to our drive-thru facilities;
•Provided extensions and deferrals to loan customers affected by COVID-19 provided such customers were not 30 days past due at March 19, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company granted deferrals of approximately $135 million to its mortgage customers. These deferral arrangements ranged from 30 days to 90 days. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $9 million of these loans were still deferring, while approximately $126 million have resumed making their normal loan payment. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company granted deferrals of approximately $455 million to its commercial customers. These deferral arrangements ranged from one month to six months. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $99 million of these loans were still deferring (including $88 million for hotel and lodging related loans), while approximately $356 million have resumed making their normal loan payment;
•We have chosen to participate in the CARES Act Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP") that will provide government guaranteed and forgivable loans to our customers. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has funded approximately $90 million of Small Business Administration ("SBA")-approved PPP loans to over 1,500 customers.
The Company continues to closely monitor this pandemic and expects to make future changes to respond to the pandemic as this situation continues to evolve.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The accounting policies of the Company conform to U.S. generally accepted accounting principles and require management to make estimates and develop assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and related footnotes. These estimates and assumptions are based on information available to management as of the date of the financial statements. Actual results could differ significantly from management’s estimates. As this information changes, management’s estimates and assumptions used to prepare the Company’s financial statements and related disclosures may also change. The most significant accounting policies followed by the Company are presented in Note One of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein. Based on the valuation techniques used and the sensitivity of financial statement amounts to the methods, assumptions, and estimates underlying those amounts, management has identified: (i) the determination of the allowance for credit losses and (ii) income taxes to be the accounting areas that require the most subjective or complex judgments and, as such, could be most subject to revision as new information becomes available.
The Allowance for Credit Losses section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K provides management’s analysis of the Company’s allowance for credit losses and related provision. The allowance for credit losses is a valuation account that is deducted from the loans' amortized cost basis to present the net amount expected to be collected on the loans. Loans are charged off against the allowance when management believes the uncollectibility of a loan balance is confirmed. Expected recoveries do not exceed the aggregate of amounts previously charged-off and expected to be charged-off. Management estimates the allowance balance using relevant available information, from internal and external sources, relating to past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. Historical credit loss experience provides the basis for the estimation of expected credit losses. Adjustments to historical loss information are made for differences in current loan-specific risk characteristics, such as differences in underwriting standards, portfolio mix, delinquency level, or term as well as for changes in environmental conditions, such as changes in unemployment rates, property values, or other relevant factors. These evaluations are conducted at least quarterly and more frequently if deemed necessary. Additionally, all commercial loans within the portfolio are subject to internal risk grading. Risk grades are generally assigned by the primary lending officer and are periodically evaluated by the Company’s internal loan review process.
In evaluating the appropriateness of its allowance for loan losses, the Company stratifies the loan portfolio into six major groupings. The Company has identified the following portfolio segments and measures the allowance for credit losses using the following methods:
Migration is an analysis that tracks a closed pool of loans for a configurable period of time and calculates a loss ratio on only those loans in the pool at the start date based on outstanding balance. Vintage is a predictive loss model that includes a reasonable approximation of probable and estimable future losses by tracking each loan's net losses over the life of the loan as compared to its original balance. For demand deposit overdrafts, the allowance for credit losses is measured using the historical loss rate. Loans that do not share risk characteristics are evaluated on an individual basis. Loans evaluated individually are not included in the collective evaluation. When management determines that foreclosure is probable, the expected credit losses are based on the fair value of the collateral at the reporting date, adjusted for selling costs as appropriate.
Expected credit losses are estimated over the contractual term of the loan, adjusted for expected prepayments when appropriate. The contractual term excludes expected extensions, renewals, and modifications unless either of the following applies: management has a reasonable expectation at the reporting date that a troubled-debt restructuring will be executed with an individual borrower or the extension or renewal options are included in the original or modified contract at the reporting date and are not unconditionally cancellable by the Company.
The Income Taxes section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K provides management’s analysis of the Company’s income taxes. The Company is subject to federal and state income taxes in the jurisdictions in which it conducts business. In computing the provision for income taxes, management must make judgments regarding interpretation of laws in those jurisdictions. Because the application of tax laws and regulations for many types of transactions is susceptible to varying interpretations, amounts reported in the financial statements could be changed at a later date upon final determinations by taxing authorities. On a quarterly basis, the Company estimates its annual effective tax rate for the year and uses that rate to provide for income taxes on a year-to-date basis. The Company's unrecognized tax benefits could change over the next twelve months as a result of various factors. The Company is currently open to audit under the statute of limitations by the Internal Revenue Service and various state taxing authorities for the years ended December 31, 2017 and forward.
FINANCIAL SUMMARY
The Company’s financial performance over the previous three years is summarized in the following table:
*ROA (Return on Average Assets) is a measure of the effectiveness of asset utilization. ROE (Return on Average Equity) is a measure of the return on shareholders’ investment. ROATCE (Return on Average Tangible Common Equity) is a measure of the return on shareholders’ equity less intangible assets.
BALANCE SHEET ANALYSIS
Selected balance sheet fluctuations are summarized in the following table (in millions):
Cash and cash equivalents increased $389 million from December 31, 2019 to $529 million at December 31, 2020, due to an increase in deposit balances and weak loan demand environment.
Investment securities increased $319 million, from $888 million at December 31, 2019, to $1.21 billion at December 31, 2020 due to the increase in deposit balances and weak loan demand environment.
Gross loans increased $6.0 million (0.2%) from December 31, 2019 to $3.62 billion at December 31, 2020. Largely as a result of the Company’s participation in the PPP loans administered by the SBA, commercial and industrial loans increased $65.0 million. The Company originated $88.5 million of PPP loans, with $33.1 million of these loans being repaid by the SBA as of December 31, 2020. Excluding outstanding PPP loans, total loans decreased $49.4 million, (1.4%), from December 31, 2019 to $3.57 billion at December 31, 2020. Residential real estate loans decreased $52.7 million (3.2%), home equity loans decreased $12.5 million (8.4%) and consumer loans decreased $6.6 million (12.1%). These decreases were partially offset by an increase in commercial real estate loans of $15.0 million (1.0%) and commercial and industrial loans of $9.5 million (3.1%) (excluding PPP loans). Decreases in loan outstandings are reflective of the low-interest rate environment driving residential mortgage originations toward fixed rate loans.
Other assets increased $41 million to $97 million and other liabilities increased $37 million to $106 million, respectively, at December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of market value changes in the Company's interest rate swap derivatives.
Total deposits increased $576 million from December 31, 2019 to $4.65 billion at December 31, 2020. This increase was largely attributable to the infusion of government transfer payments for unemployment insurance, stimulus checks received by the Company's customers from the CARES Act (approximately $90 million), proceeds from PPP loans, and decreased spending by customers due to COVID-19.
Customer repurchase agreements increased $85 million to $296 million at December 31, 2020, due to proceeds from PPP loans and due to the liquidity needs of the Company's customers, specifically customers leaving monies in these deposit accounts due to the security of these deposits.
Shareholders' equity increased $43 million from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, primarily due to net income of $90 million and other comprehensive income of $25 million, which were partially offset by cash dividends declared of $37 million and treasury stock purchases of $36 million.
TABLE TWO
AVERAGE BALANCE SHEETS AND NET INTEREST INCOME
(In thousands)
1.For purposes of this table, non-accruing loans have been included in average balances and the following net loan fees (in thousands) have been included in interest income:
2.Includes the Company's residential real estate and home equity loan categories.
3.Included in the above table are the following amounts (in thousands) for the accretion of the fair value adjustments related to the Company's acquisitions:
4.Includes the Company’s consumer and DDA overdrafts loan categories.
5.Effective January 1, 2012, the carrying value of the Company's previously securitized loans was reduced to $0.
6.Computed on a fully federal tax-equivalent basis assuming a tax rate of approximately 21%.
NET INTEREST INCOME
2020 vs. 2019
The Company’s net interest income decreased from $161.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $154.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company’s tax equivalent net interest income decreased $6.5 million, or 4.0%, from $162.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $155.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Lower loan yields (68 basis points) and investment yields (48 basis points) decreased net interest income by $24.5 million and $5.4 million, respectively. These decreases were partially offset by lower rates paid on interest bearing liabilities (40 basis points), higher investment balances ($195.9 million), and higher commercial loan balances ($99.3 million, driven largely by PPP loans) which increased net interest income by $13.1 million, $6.5 million, and $4.7 million, respectively. In addition, the Company recognized $1.6 million of loan fees associated with PPP loans during 2020. The Company’s reported net interest margin declined from 3.59% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 3.16% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Excluding the favorable impact of the accretion from the fair value adjustments, the net interest margin would have been 3.08% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 3.51% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
2019 vs. 2018
The Company’s net interest income increased from $138.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $161.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company’s tax equivalent net interest income increased $23.2 million, or 16.7%, from $139.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $162.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The acquisitions of Poage and Farmers Deposit accounted for $18.3 million of this increase, while higher loan yields on residential real estate and commercial loans increased net interest income $5.7 million and $1.5 million, respectively, and higher average balances on commercial loans ($51.7 million) increased interest income by $2.3 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. In addition, higher average investment balances ($98.1 million) increased investment income by $3.1 million and an increase in accretion from fair value adjustments increased interest income by $2.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. These increases were partially offset by increased interest expense on interest bearing liabilities ($8.5 million), primarily due to an increase in the cost of funds. The Company’s reported net interest margin increased from 3.52% for the year ended December 31, 2018 to 3.59% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Excluding the favorable impact of the accretion from the fair value adjustments, the net interest margin would have been 3.51% for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 3.49% for the year ended December 31, 2018.
TABLE THREE
RATE/VOLUME ANALYSIS OF CHANGES IN INTEREST INCOME AND INTEREST EXPENSE
(In thousands)
1.Fully federal taxable equivalent using a tax rate of approximately 21%.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Management of the Company uses measures in its analysis of the Company's performance other than those in accordance with generally accepted accounting principals in the United States of America ("GAAP"). These measures are useful when evaluating the underlying performance of the Company's operations. The Company's management believes that these non-GAAP measures enhance comparability of results with prior periods and demonstrate the effects of significant gains and charges in the current period. The Company's management believes that investors may use these non-GAAP financial measures to evaluate the Company's financial performance without the impact of those items that may obscure trends in the Company's performance. These disclosures should not be viewed as a substitute for financial measures determined in accordance with GAAP, nor are they comparable to non-GAAP financial measures that may be presented by other companies.
TABLE FOUR
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
(In thousands)
NON-INTEREST INCOME AND NON-INTEREST EXPENSE
2020 vs. 2019
Selected income statement fluctuations are summarized in the following table (dollars in millions):
Non-interest income was $82.7 million for 2020 as compared to $68.5 million for 2019. During 2020, the Company sold the entirety of its Visa Inc. Class B common shares (86,605 shares) in a cash transaction which resulted in a pre-tax gain of $17.8 million, or $0.84 diluted per share on an after-tax basis. Additionally, the Company reported $0.9 million of unrealized fair value losses on the Company’s equity securities compared to $0.9 million of unrealized fair value gains on the Company’s equity securities during 2019. Exclusive of these items, non-interest income decreased from $67.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $65.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was largely attributable to a decrease of $5.8 million, or 18.3%, in service charges as average deposit balances have increased during the COVID-19 pandemic. This decrease was partially offset by an increase of $2.0 million, or 9.3%, in bankcard revenues, an increase of $0.7 million, or 17.3%, in other income (largely due to fees from loan interest rate swap originations), an increase of $0.7 million in bank owned life insurance due to higher death benefit proceeds received during 2020 compared to 2019, and an increase of $0.6 million in trust and investment management fee income.
During 2019, the Company recognized $0.8 million of acquisition and integration expenses associated with the completed acquisitions of Poage Bankshares, Inc. ("Poage") and Farmers Deposit Bancorp, Inc. ("Farmers"). Excluding these expenses, non-interest expenses decreased from $116.8 million for 2019 to $115.3 million for 2020. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in occupancy related expense of $0.8 million, other expenses of $0.8 million (largely on the strength of a gain from the sale of a branch bank location acquired in connection with the acquisition of Farmers), advertising of $0.6 million, repossessed asset losses of $0.4 million, and telecommunication expense of $0.3 million. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in equipment and software related expenses ($1.2 million), bankcard expenses ($0.3 million), and FDIC insurance expense ($0.2 million).
2019 vs. 2018
Selected income statement fluctuations are summarized in the following table (dollars in millions):
Non-interest income was $68.5 million for 2019 as compared to $60.6 million for 2018. During 2019, the Company reported $0.9 million of unrealized fair value gains on the Company’s equity securities compared to $0.1 million of unrealized fair value losses on the Company’s equity securities during 2018. Exclusive of these unrealized fair value gains and losses, non-interest income increased from $60.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $67.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $2.7 million, or 14.8%, in bankcard revenues, and an increase of $1.8 million, or 6.1%, in service charges, with $1.4 million and $1.6 million, respectively, attributable to the late 2018 acquisitions of Poage and Farmers Deposit. Additionally, other income increased by $1.0 million (due largely to the $0.7 million gain from the sale of our Virginia Beach, VA branch to Select Bank & Trust Company during
the second quarter of 2019), bank owned life insurance revenues increased $0.7 million due to higher death benefit proceeds received during 2019 compared to 2018, and trust and investment management fee income increased $0.6 million.
During 2019 and 2018, the Company recognized $0.8 million and $13.3 million, respectively, of acquisition and integration expenses associated with the completed acquisitions of Poage and Farmers Deposit. Excluding these expenses, non-interest expenses increased from $99.8 million for 2018 to $116.8 million for 2019. This increase was primarily due to an increase in salaries and employee benefits of $7.7 million that was largely attributable to the acquisitions of Poage and Farmers Deposit ($4.3 million), annual salary adjustments, and increased incentive compensation. Primarily due to the acquisitions of Poage and Farmers Deposit, other expenses increased $4.5 million, occupancy related expenses increased $1.3 million, equipment and software related expenses increased $1.2 million and bankcard expenses increased $1.1 million, from 2018 to 2019. Partially offsetting these increases was a decrease of $0.6 million in FDIC insurance expense. As the Deposit Insurance Fund ("DIF") reserve ratio exceeded 1.38% at June 30, 2019, the Company received a Small Bank Assessment Credit for the full amount of its Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC") assessment for the third and fourth quarters of 2019.
INCOME TAXES
Selected information regarding the Company's income taxes is presented in the table below (dollars in millions):
A reconciliation of the effective tax rate to the statutory rate is included in Note Twelve of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. The Company was in a net deferred tax asset position ($6.7 million) at December 31, 2019 and a net deferred tax liability position ($3.2 million) at December 31, 2020.
The components of the Company’s net deferred tax assets/liabilities are disclosed in Note Twelve of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Realization of the most significant net deferred tax assets is primarily dependent on future events taking place that will reverse the current deferred tax assets. The deferred tax asset and/or liability associated with unrealized securities losses and/or gains is the tax impact of the unrealized gains and/or losses on the Company’s available-for-sale security portfolio. The impact of the Company’s unrealized losses is noted in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity as an adjustment to Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss). This deferred tax asset/liability would be realized if the unrealized securities gains/losses on the Company's securities were realized from either the sales or maturities of the related securities. The deferred tax asset associated with the allowance for credit losses is expected to be realized as additional loan charge-offs, which have already been provided for within the Company’s financial statements, are recognized for tax purposes. The Company believes that it is more likely than not that each of the deferred tax assets will be realized and that no significant valuation allowances were necessary as of December 31, 2020 or 2019.
LIQUIDITY
The Company evaluates the adequacy of liquidity at both the Parent Company level and at the banking subsidiary level. At the Parent Company level, the principal source of cash is dividends from its banking subsidiary, City National. Dividends paid by City National to the Parent Company are subject to certain legal and regulatory limitations. Generally, any dividends in amounts that exceed the earnings retained by City National in the current year plus retained net profits for the preceding two years must be approved by regulatory authorities. At December 31, 2020, City National could pay dividends up to $67.7 million without prior regulatory permission.
During 2020, the Parent Company used cash obtained from the dividends received primarily to: (1) pay common dividends to shareholders and (2) fund repurchases of the Company's common shares. Additional information concerning
sources and uses of cash by the Parent Company is discussed in Note Nineteen of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
During the first quarter of 2020, the Company repaid its Subordinated Debentures, assumed as part of its acquisition of Poage, at a price of 100% of the principal amount. These securities were issued in December 2006 and were callable in whole or in part any time after December 22, 2012.
The Parent Company anticipates continuing the payment of dividends, which are expected to approximate $36.6 million on an annualized basis for 2021 based on common shareholders of record at December 31, 2020 at a dividend rate of $2.32 per share for 2021. However, dividends to shareholders can, if necessary, be suspended. In addition to these anticipated cash needs, the Parent Company has operating expenses and other contractual obligations, which are estimated to require $1.3 million of additional cash over the next 12 months. As of December 31, 2020, the Parent Company reported a cash balance of $22.3 million and management believes that the Parent Company’s available cash balance, together with cash dividends from City National, will be adequate to satisfy its funding and cash needs over the next twelve months. Excluding the dividend payments discussed above, the Parent Company has no significant commitments or obligations in years after 2021.
City National manages its liquidity position in an effort to effectively and economically satisfy the funding needs of its customers and to accommodate the scheduled repayment of borrowings. Funds are available to City National from a number of sources, including depository relationships, sales and maturities within the investment securities portfolio, and borrowings from the Federal Home Loan Bank ("FHLB") and other financial institutions. As of December 31, 2020, City National’s assets are significantly funded by deposits and capital. City National maintains borrowing facilities with the FHLB and other financial institutions that can be accessed as necessary to fund operations and to provide contingency funding mechanisms. As of December 31, 2020, City National had the capacity to borrow an additional $2.0 billion from the FHLB and other financial institutions under existing borrowing facilities. City National maintains a contingency funding plan, incorporating these borrowing facilities, to address liquidity needs in the event of an institution-specific or systemic financial industry crisis. Also, although it has no current intention to do so, City National could liquidate its unpledged securities, if necessary, to provide an additional funding source. City National also segregates certain mortgage loans, mortgage-backed securities, and other investment securities in a separate subsidiary so that it can separately monitor the asset quality of these primarily mortgage-related assets, which could be used to raise cash through securitization transactions or obtain additional equity or debt financing if necessary.
The Company manages its asset and liability mix to balance its desire to maximize net interest income against its desire to minimize risks associated with capitalization, interest rate volatility, and liquidity. With respect to liquidity, the Company has chosen a conservative posture and believes that its liquidity position is strong. As illustrated in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, the Company generated $89.8 million of cash from operating activities during 2020, primarily from interest income received on loans and investments, net of interest expense paid on deposits and borrowings.
The Company has obligations to extend credit, but these obligations are primarily associated with existing home equity loans that have predictable borrowing patterns across the portfolio. The Company has investment security balances with carrying values that totaled $1.21 billion at December 31, 2020, and that greatly exceeded the Company’s non-deposit sources of borrowing, which totaled $296 million.
The Company’s net loan to asset ratio is 62.5% as of December 31, 2020 and deposit balances fund 80.8% of total assets as compared to 74.8% for its peers (Bank Holding Company Peer Group, as of the most recent data available as of September 30, 2020, which includes commercial banks with assets ranging from $3 billion to $10 billion). Further, the Company’s deposit mix has a very high proportion of transaction and savings accounts that fund 58.9% of the Company’s total assets and the Company uses time deposits over $250,000 to fund 2.9% of total assets compared to its peers, which fund 2.2% of total assets with such deposits.
INVESTMENTS
The Company’s investment portfolio increased $0.3 billion from $0.9 billion at December 31, 2019, to $1.2 billion at December 31, 2020.
The investment portfolio is structured to provide flexibility in managing liquidity needs and interest rate risk, while providing acceptable rates of return.
The majority of the Company’s investment securities continue to be mortgage-backed securities. The mortgage-backed securities in which the Company has invested are predominantly underwritten to the standards of, and guaranteed by, government-sponsored agencies such as Fannie Mae ("FNMA"), Freddie Mac ("FHLMC") and Ginnie Mae ("GNMA").
The Company's municipal bond portfolio of $278 million as of December 31, 2020 has an average tax equivalent yield of 2.58% with an average maturity of 14.8 years. The average dollar amount invested in each security is $1.1 million. The portfolio has 92% rated "A" or better and the remaining portfolio is unrated, as the issuances represented small issuances of revenue bonds. Additional credit support has been purchased by the issuer for 30% of the portfolio, while 70% has no additional credit support. Management re-underwrites 100% of the portfolio on an annual basis, using the same guidelines that are used to underwrite its commercial loans. Revenue bonds were 57% of the portfolio, while the remaining 43% were general obligation bonds. Geographically, the portfolio supports the Company's footprint, with 19% of the portfolio being from municipalities throughout West Virginia, and the remainder from communities in Texas, Washington, Ohio and various other states.
Effective January 1, 2020, the Company reclassified its held-to-maturity securities as available-for-sale utilizing the
transition guidance under ASU 2019-04, and the unrealized gains/losses on these investments will be recorded through Other
Comprehensive Income.
TABLE FIVE
INVESTMENT PORTFOLIO
The carrying value of the Company's securities are presented in the following table (in thousands):
The Company's mortgage-backed U.S. government agency securities consist of both residential and commercial securities, all of which are guaranteed by Fannie Mae ("FNMA"), Freddie Mac ("FHLMC"), or Ginnie Mae ("GNMA"). Marketable equity securities consist of investments made by the Company in equity positions of various community banks. Non-marketable equity securities consist of Federal Home Loan Bank ("FHLB") stock and Federal Reserve Bank ("FRB") stock.
At December 31, 2020, there were no securities of any non-governmental issuer whose aggregate carrying or estimated fair value exceeded 10% of shareholders’ equity.
The weighted average yield of the Company's investment portfolio is presented in the following table (dollars in thousands):
Weighted-average yields on tax-exempt obligations of states and political subdivisions have been computed on a taxable-equivalent basis using the federal statutory tax rate of 21%. Average yields on investments available-for-sale are computed based on amortized cost. Mortgage-backed securities have been allocated to their respective maturity groupings based on their contractual maturity.
TABLE SIX
LOAN PORTFOLIO
The composition of the Company’s loan portfolio as of the dates indicated follows (in thousands):
The commercial and industrial ("C&I") loan portfolio consists of loans to corporate and other legal entity borrowers, primarily small to mid-size industrial and commercial companies. C&I loans typically involve a higher level of risk than other loan types, including industry specific risks such as the pertinent economy, new technology, labor rates and cyclicality, as well as customer specific factors, such as cash flow, financial structure, operating controls and asset quality. Collateral securing these loans includes equipment, machinery, inventory, receivables and vehicles. C&I loans increased $65 million to $373 million at December 31, 2020, largely due to $55 million of PPP loans.
Commercial real estate loans consist of commercial mortgages, which generally are secured by nonresidential and multi-family residential properties, including hotel/motel and apartment lending. Commercial real estate loans are to many of the same customers and carry similar industry risks as C&I loans, but have different collateral risk. Commercial real estate loans increased $15 million to $1.47 billion at December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2020, $40 million of the commercial real estate loans were for commercial properties under construction.
In order to group loans with similar risk characteristics, the portfolio is further segmented by product types:
◦Commercial 1-4 Family loans consist of residential single-family, duplex, triplex, and fourplex rental properties and totaled $109.8 million as of December 31, 2020. Risk characteristics are driven by rental housing demand as well as economic and employment conditions. These properties exhibit greater risk than multi-family properties due to fewer income sources.
◦The Hotel portfolio is comprised of all lodging establishments and totaled $294.5 million as of December 31, 2020. Risk characteristics relate to the demand for both business and personal travel.
◦Multi-family consists of 5 or more family residential apartment lending. The portfolio totaled $215.7 million as of December 31, 2020. Risk characteristics are driven by rental housing demand as well as economic and employment conditions.
◦Non-residential commercial real estate includes properties such as retail, office, warehouse, storage, healthcare, entertainment, religious, and other nonresidential commercial properties. The non-residential product type is further segmented into owner- and non-owner occupied properties. Nonresidential non-owner occupied commercial real
estate totaled $641.4 million while nonresidential owner-occupied commercial real estate totaled $213.5 million as of December 31, 2020. Risk characteristics relate to levels of consumer spending and overall economic conditions.
The Company categorizes commercial loans by industry according to the North American Industry Classification System ("NAICS") to monitor the portfolio for possible concentrations in one or more industries. Management monitors industry concentrations against internally established risk-based capital thresholds. As of December 31, 2020, City National was within its internally designated concentration limits. As of December 31, 2020, City National's loans to borrowers within the Lessors of Nonresidential Buildings categories exceeded 10% of total loans (13%). No other NAICS industry classification exceeded 10% of total loans as of December 31, 2020. Management also monitors non-owner occupied commercial real estate as a percent of risk based capital (based upon regulatory guidance). At December 31, 2020, the Company had $1.3 billion of commercial loans classified as non-owner occupied and was within its designated concentration threshold.
Residential real estate loans decreased $53 million from December 31, 2019 to $1.59 billion at December 31, 2020. Residential real estate loans include loans for the purchase or refinance of consumers' residence and first-priority home equity loans allow consumers to borrow against the equity in their home. These loans primarily consist of single family three- and five-year adjustable rate mortgages with terms that amortize up to 30 years. City National also offers fixed-rate residential real estate loans and the majority of these loans are sold in the secondary market; once sold these loans are not included on the Company's balance sheet and City National does not retain the servicing rights to these loans. Residential purchase real estate loans are generally underwritten to comply with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac guidelines, while first priority home equity loans are underwritten with typically less documentation, lower loan-to-value ratios and shorter maturities. At December 31, 2020, $27 million of the residential real estate loans were for properties under construction.
Home equity loans decreased $12 million from December 31, 2019 to $136 million at December 31, 2020. City National's home equity loans represent loans to consumers that are secured by a second (or junior) priority lien on a residential property. Home equity loans allow consumers to borrow against the equity in their home without paying off an existing first priority lien. These loans include home equity lines of credit ("HELOC") and amortized home equity loans that require monthly installment payments. Second priority lien home equity loans are underwritten with less documentation than first priority lien residential real estate loans but typically have similar loan-to-value ratios and other terms as first priority lien residential real estate loans. The amount of credit extended is directly related to the value of the real estate securing the loan at the time the loan is made.
All mortgage loans, whether fixed rate or adjustable rate, are originated in accordance with acceptable industry standards and comply with regulatory requirements. Fixed rate mortgage loans are processed and underwritten in accordance with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac guidelines, while adjustable rate mortgage loans are underwritten in accordance with City National's internal loan policy.
Consumer loans may be secured by automobiles, boats, recreational vehicles, certificates of deposit and other personal property, or they may be unsecured. The Company manages the risk associated with consumer loans by monitoring such factors as portfolio size and growth, internal lending policies and pertinent economic conditions. City National's underwriting standards are continually evaluated and modified based upon these factors. Consumer loans decreased $7 million from 2019 to $48 million at December 31, 2020.
The following table shows the scheduled maturity of loans outstanding as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
ALLOWANCE FOR CREDIT LOSSES
The Company adopted ASU No. 2016-13, "Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments" effective January 1, 2020, using the modified retrospective method for all financial assets measured at amortized cost and off-balance sheet credit exposures. ASU No. 2016-13 replaced the incurred loss impairment methodology with a methodology that reflects expected credit losses and requires consideration of a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to inform credit loss estimates. The new current expected credit losses model ("CECL") will apply to the allowance for credit losses, available-for-sale and held-to-maturity debt securities, purchased financial assets with credit deterioration and certain off-balance sheet credit exposures. Results for reporting periods beginning after January 1, 2020 are presented under ASU No. 2016-13, while prior period amounts continue to be reported in accordance with previously applicable GAAP. As a result of adopting CECL, the Company increased its allowance for credit losses ("ACL") by $3.0 million and decreased retained earnings by $2.3 million on January 1, 2020. In addition, the adoption required the Company to "gross up" its previously purchased credit impaired loans through the allowance at January 1, 2020. As a result, the Company increased its ACL and loan balances as of January 1, 2020 by $2.7 million.
Management systematically monitors the loan portfolio and the appropriateness of the allowance for credit losses on a quarterly basis to provide for expected losses inherent in the portfolio. Management assesses the risk in each loan type based on historical trends, the general economic environment of its local markets, individual loan performance and other relevant factors. The Company's estimate of future economic conditions utilized in its provision estimate is primarily dependent on expected unemployment ranges over a two-year period. Beyond two years, a straight line reversion to historical average loss rates is applied over the life of the loan pool in the migration methodology. The vintage methodology applies future average loss rates based on net losses in historical periods where the unemployment rate was within the forecasted range. As a result of COVID-19, expected unemployment ranges have significantly increased and resulted in an increase in the Company's provision for credit losses.
Individual credits in excess of $1 million are selected at least annually for detailed loan reviews, which are utilized by management to assess the risk in the portfolio and the appropriateness of the allowance.
Determination of the ACL is subjective in nature and requires management to periodically reassess the validity of its assumptions. Differences between actual losses and estimated losses are assessed such that management can timely modify its evaluation model to ensure that adequate provision has been made for risk in the total loan portfolio.
As a result of the Company’s analysis of the adequacy of the ACL, the Company recorded a provision for credit losses of $10.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a recovery of credit losses of $1.3 million for the comparable period in 2019. The provision for credit losses recorded during 2020 largely reflects the expected economic impact from the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company’s estimate of future economic conditions used in its CECL estimates is primarily dependent on expected unemployment ranges. As a result of COVID-19, expected unemployment ranges have significantly increased and resulted in an increase in the Company’s ACL of $4.1 million. Additionally, adjustments in
qualitative and other factors due to COVID-19 added $3.4 million. Due to changes in the Company’s loan portfolio and their associated loss rates, exclusive of COVID-19, the Company’s ACL increased by $3.1 million during 2020, while downgrades of certain credit relationships resulted in an increase in the ACL of $2.9 million during 2020. Partially offsetting these increases in the ACL, was a decrease in the ACL due to the upgrade of a specific credit that was downgraded in 2017, but has since seen improved financial performance. This upgrade released $2.2 million of ACL reserves during 2020.
The Company had net charge-offs of $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net charge-offs for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of net charge-offs of residential real estate loans ($1.1 million), DDA overdrafts ($0.9 million), and commercial and industrial loans ($0.8 million).
Based on the Company’s analysis of the adequacy of the allowance for credit losses and in consideration of the known factors utilized in computing the allowance, management believes that the allowance for credit losses as of December 31, 2020 is adequate to provide for expected losses inherent in the Company’s loan portfolio. Future provisions for credit losses will be dependent upon trends in loan balances including the composition of the loan portfolio, changes in loan quality and loss experience trends, and recoveries of previously charged-off loans, among other factors.
TABLE SEVEN
ANALYSIS OF THE ALLOWANCE FOR CREDIT LOSSES
An analysis of changes in the Company's allowance for credit losses follows (dollars in thousands):
TABLE EIGHT
NON-PERFORMING LOANS
The Company's nonperforming assets and past-due loans were as follows (dollars in thousands):
The Company’s ratio of non-performing assets to total loans and other real estate owned decreased from 0.45% at December 31, 2019 to 0.38% at December 31, 2020. Excluded from this ratio are purchased credit deteriorated ("PCD") loans in which the Company estimated cash flows and estimated a credit mark. Such loans would be considered nonperforming loans if the loan's performance deteriorates below the Company's initial expectation. Total past due loans decreased from $11.4 million, or 0.32% of total loans outstanding, at December 31, 2019 to $8.9 million, or 0.25% of total loans outstanding, at December 31, 2020.
TABLE NINE
TROUBLED DEBT RESTRUCTURINGS ("TDRS")
The following table sets forth the Company’s TDRs (in thousands):
Regulatory guidance requires that loans be accounted for as collateral-dependent loans when borrowers have filed
Chapter 7 bankruptcy, the debt has been discharged by the bankruptcy court and the borrower has not reaffirmed the debt. The filing of bankruptcy is deemed to be evidence that the borrower is in financial difficulty and the discharge of debt by the
bankruptcy court is deemed to be a concession granted to the borrower.
The Company's troubled debt restructurings ("TDRs") related to its borrowers who had filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection made up 79% of the Company's total TDRs as of December 31, 2020. The average age of these TDRs was 13.2 years; the average current balance as a percentage of the original balance was 68.9%; and the average loan-to-value ratio was 63.3% as of December 31, 2020. Of the total 401 Chapter 7 related TDRs, 34 had an estimated loss exposure based on the current balance and appraised value at December 31, 2020.
COVID-19 Pandemic
In March of 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, regulatory guidance was issued that clarified the accounting for loan modifications. Modifications of loan terms do not automatically result in a TDR. Short-term modifications made on a good faith basis in response to COVID-19 to borrowers who were current prior to any relief, are not TDRs. This includes short-term (e.g., six months) modifications such as payment deferrals, fee waivers, extension of repayment terms, or other delays that are insignificant. Borrowers considered current are those that are less than 30 days past due on their contractual payments at the time the modification program was implemented. In addition, modifications or deferrals pursuant to the CARES Act do not represent TDRs. However, these deferrals do not absolve the company from performing its normal risk rating and therefore a loan could be current and have a less than satisfactory risk rating.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company granted deferrals of approximately $135 million to its mortgage customers. These deferral arrangements ranged from 30 days to 90 days. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $9 million of these loans were still deferring, while approximately $126 million have resumed making their normal loan payment. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $4 million of these deferrals were previously and currently considered TDRs due to Chapter 7 bankruptcies.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company granted deferrals of approximately $455 million to its commercial customers. These deferral arrangements ranged from one month to six months. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $99 million of these loans were still deferring (including $88 million for hotel and lodging related loans), while approximately $356 million have resumed making their normal loan payment.
TABLE TEN
ALLOCATION OF THE ALLOWANCE FOR CREDIT LOSSES
The allocation of the allowance for credit losses by portfolio segment and the percent of loans in each category to total loans is shown in the table below (dollars in thousands). The allocation of a portion of the allowance in one portfolio segment does not preclude its availability to absorb losses in other portfolio segments.
The ACL increased from $11.6 million at December 31, 2019 to $24.5 million at December 31, 2020. As previously discussed, the adoption of CECL comprised $5.8 million of the increase from December 31, 2019. Below is a summary of the changes in the components of the ACL from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020.
The allowance attributed to the commercial and industrial loan portfolio increased $1.5 million from $2.1 million at December 31, 2019 to $3.6 million at December 31, 2020. The adoption of CECL increased the allowance by $1.7 million.
The allowance attributed to the commercial real estate loan portfolio increased $8.4 million from $2.6 million at December 31, 2019 to $11.0 million at December 31, 2020. The adoption of CECL increased the allowance by $3.3 million. The remainder of the increase was largely attributable to a change in the unemployment forecast range due to COVID-19, changes in the migration within the portfolio and an increase to the qualitative factors utilized related to COVID-19.
The allowance attributed to the residential real estate portfolio increased $4.7 million from $3.4 million at December 31, 2019 to $8.1 million at December 31, 2020. The adoption of CECL increased the allowance by $2.1 million. The remainder of the increase was largely attributable to a change in the unemployment forecast range and an increase in the qualitative factors utilized due to COVID-19 as well as an increase in the historical loss rates associated with the portfolio.
GOODWILL
The Company evaluates the recoverability of goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets annually as of November 30th, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances warrant, such as a material adverse change in the Company's business. Goodwill is considered to be impaired when the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are considered impaired if their carrying value exceeds their estimated fair value. As described in Note One of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, the Company conducts its business activities through one reportable business segment - community banking. Fair values are estimated by reviewing the Company’s stock price as it compares to book value and the Company’s reported earnings. In addition, the impact of future earnings and activities is considered in the Company’s analysis. The Company had approximately $109 million of goodwill at December 31, 2020 and 2019, and no impairment was required to be recognized in 2020 or 2019, as the estimated fair value of the Company has continued to exceed its book value.
CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT
Scheduled maturities of time certificates of deposit of $100,000 or more at December 31, 2020 are summarized in the table below (in thousands). The Company has time certificates of deposit that meet or exceed the FDIC insurance limit of $250,000 totaling $171.3 million (approximately 14% of total time deposits).
TABLE ELEVEN
MATURITY DISTRIBUTION OF CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT OF $100,000 OR MORE
FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS
The Company determines the fair value of its financial instruments based on the fair value hierarchy established in ASC Topic 820, whereby the fair value of certain assets and liabilities is an exit price, representing the amount that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants. ASC Topic 820 establishes a three-level hierarchy for disclosure of assets and liabilities recorded at fair value. The hierarchy classification is based on whether the inputs in the methodology for determining fair value are observable or unobservable. Observable inputs reflect market-based information obtained from independent sources (Level 1 or Level 2), while unobservable inputs reflect management’s estimate of market data (Level 3). Assets and liabilities that are actively traded and have quoted prices or observable market data require a minimal amount of subjectivity concerning fair value. Management’s judgment is necessary to estimate fair value when quoted prices or observable market data are not available.
At December 31, 2020, approximately 22% of total assets, or $1,244 million, consisted of financial instruments recorded at fair value. Most of these financial instruments used valuation methodologies involving observable market data, collectively Level 1 and Level 2 measurements, to determine fair value. At December 31, 2020, approximately $53 million of derivative liabilities were recorded at fair value using methodologies involving observable market data. The Company does not believe that any changes in the unobservable inputs used to value the financial instruments mentioned above would have a material impact on the Company’s results of operations, liquidity, or capital resources. See Note Eighteen of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding ASC Topic 820 and its impact on the Company’s financial statements.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
The Company has various financial obligations that may require future cash payments according to the terms of the obligations. Demand, both noninterest- and interest-bearing, and savings deposits are, generally, payable immediately upon demand at the request of the customer. Therefore, the contractual maturity of these obligations is presented in the following table as "less than one year." Time deposits, typically certificates of deposit, are customer deposits that are evidenced by an agreement between the Company and the customer that specify stated maturity dates; early withdrawals by the customer are subject to penalties assessed by the Company. Short-term borrowings and long-term debt represent borrowings of the Company and have stated maturity dates. Operating leases between the Company and the lessor have stated expiration dates and renewal terms.
TABLE TWELVE
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
The composition of the Company's contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 is presented in the following table (in thousands):
(1)Includes interest on both fixed- and variable-rate obligations. The interest associated with variable-rate obligations is based upon interest rates in effect at December 31, 2020. The contractual amounts to be paid on variable-rate obligations are affected by market interest rates that could materially affect the contractual amounts to be paid.
The Company’s liability for uncertain tax positions at December 31, 2020 was $2.1 million pursuant to ASC Topic 740. This liability represents an estimate of tax positions that the Company has taken in its tax returns that may ultimately not be sustained upon examination by tax authorities. As the ultimate amount and timing of any future cash settlements cannot be predicted with reasonable reliability, this estimated liability has been excluded from the contractual obligations table.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
As disclosed in Note Fifteen of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, the Company has entered into agreements with its customers to extend credit or to provide conditional commitments to provide payment on drafts presented in accordance with the terms of the underlying credit documents (including standby and commercial letters of credit). The Company also provides overdraft protection to certain demand deposit customers that represent an unfunded commitment. As a result of the Company’s off-balance sheet arrangements for 2020 and 2019, no material revenue, expenses, or cash flows were recognized. In addition, the Company had no other indebtedness or retained interests nor entered into agreements to extend credit or provide conditional payments pursuant to standby and commercial letters of credit.
CAPITAL RESOURCES
During 2020, Shareholders’ Equity increased $45 million, or 6.9%, from $658 million at December 31, 2019 to $703 million at December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to net income of $90 million and other comprehensive income of $25 million, partially offset by cash dividends declared of $37 million and common share repurchases of $36 million.
On February 27, 2019, the Company announced that the Board of Directors rescinded the 2014 plan and authorized the Company to buy back up to 1,000,000 shares of its common stock (approximately 6% of the outstanding shares), in open market transactions, at prices that are accretive to continuing shareholders. No timetable was placed on the duration of this share repurchase program. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company repurchased approximately 573,000 common shares at a weighted average price of $63.68. At December 31, 2020, the Company could repurchase approximately 166,000 shares under the current plan.
As of January 1, 2019, the Basel III Capital Rules require City Holding and City National to maintain minimum CET 1, Tier 1 and Total Capital ratios, along with a capital conservation buffer, effectively resulting in new minimum capital ratios (which are shown in the table below). The capital conservation buffer is designed to absorb losses during periods of economic stress. Banking institutions with a ratio of CET 1 capital to risk-weighted assets above the minimum but below the conservation buffer (or below the combined capital conservation buffer and countercyclical capital buffer, when the latter is applied) will face constraints on dividends, equity repurchases and compensation based on the amount of the shortfall. The Basel III Capital Rules also provide for a "countercyclical capital buffer" that is applicable to only certain covered institutions and does not have any current applicability to City Holding Company or City National Bank.
The Company’s regulatory capital ratios for both City Holding and City National include the 2.5% capital conservation buffer and are illustrated in the following tables (in thousands):
As of December 31, 2020, management believes that City Holding Company, and its banking subsidiary, City National, were "well capitalized." City Holding is subject to regulatory capital requirements administered by the Federal Reserve, while City National is subject to regulatory capital requirements administered by the OCC and the FDIC. Regulatory agencies can initiate certain mandatory actions if either City Holding or City National fails to meet the minimum capital requirements, as shown above. As of December 31, 2020, management believes that City Holding and City National meet all capital adequacy requirements.
In November 2019, the federal banking regulators published final rules implementing a simplified measure of capital adequacy for certain banking organizations that have less than $10 billion in total consolidated assets. Under the final rules, which went into effect on January 1, 2020, depository institutions and depository institution holding companies that have less than $10 billion in total consolidated assets and meet other qualifying criteria, including a leverage ratio of greater than 9%, off-balance-sheet exposures of 25% or less of total consolidated assets and trading assets plus trading liabilities of 5% or less of total consolidated assets, are deemed "qualifying community banking organizations" and are eligible to opt into the "community bank leverage ratio framework." A qualifying community banking organization that elects to use the community bank leverage ratio framework and that maintains a leverage ratio of greater than 9% is considered to have satisfied the generally applicable risk-based and leverage capital requirements under the Basel III Rules and, if applicable, is considered to have met the "well capitalized" ratio requirements for purposes of its primary federal regulator’s prompt corrective action rules, discussed below. The final rules include a two-quarter grace period during which a qualifying community banking organization that temporarily fails to meet any of the qualifying criteria, including the greater-than-9% leverage capital ratio requirement, is generally still deemed "well capitalized" so long as the banking organization maintains a leverage capital ratio greater than 8%. A banking organization that fails to maintain a leverage capital ratio greater than 8% is not permitted to use the grace period and must comply with the generally applicable requirements under the Basel III Rules and file the appropriate regulatory reports. The Company and its subsidiary bank do not have any immediate plans to elect to use the community bank leverage ratio framework but may make such an election in the future.
LEGAL ISSUES
The Company is engaged in various legal actions that it deems to be in the ordinary course of business. As these legal actions are resolved, the Company could realize impacts to its financial performance in the period in which these legal actions are ultimately decided. There can be no assurance that current actions will have immaterial results, or that no material actions may be presented in the future.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS AND DEVELOPMENTS
Note Two, "Recent Accounting Pronouncements," of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, discusses recently issued new accounting pronouncements and their expected impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.