ITEM 7. Trustee's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Introduction
The following discussion and analysis is intended to help the reader understand the Trust's financial condition and results of operations. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the accompanying notes relating to the Trust and the Underlying Properties included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report and The Underlying Properties and the Royalty Interests and Discussion and Analysis of Results from the Underlying Properties included in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report.
Recent Developments
COVID-19 Pandemic and Impact on Global Demand for Oil and Natural Gas
The global spread of COVID-19 created significant volatility, uncertainty, and economic disruption during 2020. The pandemic has reached more than 200 countries and territories and has resulted in widespread adverse impacts on the global economy and on the Operator’s customers and other parties with whom it has business relations. There remains considerable uncertainty regarding how long the pandemic and related market conditions will persist. In certain cases, states that had begun taking steps to reopen their economies experienced a subsequent surge in cases of COVID-19, causing these states to cease such reopening measures in some cases and reinstitute restrictions in others. To date, the Operator has experienced limited operational impacts as a result of COVID-19 or the related governmental restrictions. As an essential business under the guidelines issued by each of the states in which it operates, the Operator has been allowed to continue operations. However, due to severe impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic on the global demand for oil and natural gas, financial results may not necessarily be indicative of operating results for the 2020 fiscal year or for any other future period. Moreover, future operations could be negatively affected if a significant number of the Operator's employees are quarantined as a result of exposure to the virus.
There is considerable uncertainty regarding how long the pandemic and related market conditions will persist and the extent and duration of governmental and other measures implemented to try to slow the spread of the virus, such as large-scale travel bans and restrictions, border closures, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders and business and government shutdowns. One of the largest impacts of the pandemic has been a significant reduction in global demand for oil and, to a lesser extent, natural gas. In addition, in the first half of 2020, oil prices declined significantly due to an increase in supply emanating from a disagreement on production cuts among members of OPEC+ and certain non-OPEC oil-producing countries. The resulting oversupply and the reduced demand in response to COVID-19 have together caused prices in the oil and gas market to remain depressed. Oil and gas prices are expected to continue to be volatile as a result of near-term production instability and the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and as changes in oil and natural gas inventories, industry demand and global and national economic performance are reported. The supply and demand imbalance has disrupted the oil and natural gas exploration and production industry and other industries that serve exploration and production companies.
We expect to see continued volatility in oil and natural gas prices for the foreseeable future, and such volatility, has impacted and is expected to continue to adversely impact the Operator’s business, financial condition and results of operations and proceeds to the Trust and the Trust’s reserves and quarterly cash distributions to unitholders. The continued low level of demand and prices for oil and natural gas or otherwise has had and will continue to have a material adverse effect on the Operator’s business, financial condition and results of operations and on proceeds to the Trust and the Trust’s reserves and quarterly cash distributions to unitholders.
We cannot predict the full impact that COVID-19 or the current significant disruption and volatility currently being experienced in the oil and natural gas markets will have on the Operator’s business, cash flows, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations or on proceeds to the Trust and the Trust’s reserves and quarterly cash distributions to unitholders due to numerous uncertainties. The ultimate impact of the pandemic will depend on future developments that cannot be anticipated, including, among others, the ultimate severity of the virus, the consequences of governmental and other measures designed to mitigate the spread of the virus, the development and availability of treatments and vaccines and the extent to which these treatments and vaccines may remain effective as potential new strains of the virus emerge, the duration of the pandemic, any actions taken by members of Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC+) and other foreign, oil-exporting countries, actions taken by governmental authorities, the Operator’s customers and other thirds parties, workforce availability, and the timing
and extent of any return to normal economic and operating conditions. For additional discussion regarding risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, see Item 1A “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report.
Chesapeake's Sale of the Underlying Properties to Tapstone
On December 11, 2020, Tapstone acquired the Underlying Properties of the Trust from Chesapeake in a 363 transaction under the Bankruptcy Code. All of Chesapeake’s responsibilities and obligations regarding the Trust transferred to Tapstone in connection with the acquisition pursuant to the Assignment Agreement.
Overview
The Trust is a statutory trust formed in June 2011 under the Delaware Statutory Trust Act. The business and affairs of the Trust are managed by the Trustee and, as necessary, the Delaware Trustee. The Trust does not conduct any operations or activities other than owning the Royalty Interests and activities related to such ownership. The Trust’s purpose is generally to own the Royalty Interests, to distribute to the Trust unitholders cash that the Trust receives in respect of the Royalty Interests and to perform certain administrative functions in respect of the Royalty Interests and the Trust units. The Trust derives all or substantially all of its income and cash flow from the Royalty Interests. The Trust is treated as a partnership for federal income tax purposes.
Concurrent with the Trust's initial public offering in November 2011, Chesapeake conveyed the Royalty Interests to the Trust effective July 1, 2011, which included interests in (a) 69 Producing Wells in the Colony Granite Wash play and (b) 118 Development Wells that have since been drilled in the Colony Granite Wash play on properties within the AMI. Chesapeake was obligated to drill, cause to be drilled or participate as a non-operator in the drilling of the Development Wells from drill sites in the AMI on or prior to June 30, 2016. Additionally, based on Chesapeake’s assessment of the ability of a Development Well to produce in paying quantities, Chesapeake was obligated to either complete and tie into production or plug and abandon each Development Well. As of June 30, 2016, Chesapeake had fulfilled its drilling obligation under the development agreement.
The Trust was not responsible for any costs related to the drilling of the Development Wells and is not responsible for any other operating or capital costs of the Underlying Properties, and Chesapeake was not permitted to drill and complete any well in the Colony Granite Wash formation on acreage included within the AMI for its own account until it satisfied its drilling obligation to the Trust.
The Royalty Interests entitle the Trust to receive 90% of the proceeds (after deducting certain post-production expenses and any applicable taxes) from the sales of production of oil, natural gas and NGL attributable to the Operator’s net revenue interest in the Producing Wells and 50% of the proceeds (after deducting certain post-production expenses and any applicable taxes) from the sales of oil, natural gas and NGL production attributable to the Operator’s net revenue interest in the Development Wells. Post-production expenses generally consist of costs incurred to gather, store, compress, transport, process, treat, dehydrate and market the oil, natural gas and NGL produced. However, the Trust is not responsible for costs of marketing services provided by the Operator or its affiliates.
The Trust is required to make quarterly cash distributions of substantially all of its cash receipts, after deducting the Trust’s administrative expenses, on or about 60 days following the completion of each calendar quarter through (and including) the quarter ending June 30, 2031. During the year ended December 31, 2020, four distributions were paid. See Liquidity and Capital Resources below and Note 5 to the financial statements contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for more information regarding the distributions.
The amount of Trust revenues and cash distributions to Trust unitholders fluctuates from quarter to quarter depending on several factors, including:
•timing of initial production and sales from the Development Wells;
•oil, natural gas and NGL prices received;
•volumes of oil, natural gas and NGL produced and sold;
•certain post-production expenses and any applicable taxes; and
•the Trust’s expenses.
Results of Trust Operations
Below is a discussion of changes in our results of operations for 2020 compared to 2019. A discussion of changes in our results of operations for 2019 compared to 2018 has been omitted from this Form 10-K, but may be found in Part II, Item 7. Trustee’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 as filed with the SEC on March 19, 2020.
The quarterly payments to the Trust with respect to the Royalty Interests are based on the amount of proceeds actually received by the Operator during the preceding calendar quarter. Proceeds from production are typically received by the Operator approximately one month after the month of production. Due to the timing of the payment of production proceeds, quarterly distributions made by the Operator to the Trust generally include royalties attributable to sales of oil, natural gas and NGL for three months, comprised of the first two months of the quarter just ended and the last month of the quarter prior to that one. The Operator is required to make the Royalty Interest payments to the Trust within 35 days of the end of each calendar quarter. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Trust received payments on the Royalty Interests representing royalties attributable to proceeds from sales of oil, natural gas and NGL for September 1, 2019 through August 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the payments received by the Trust represented royalties attributable to proceeds from sales of oil, natural gas and NGL for September 1, 2018 through August 31, 2019.
The Trust's revenues and distributable income available to unitholders have been adversely affected throughout 2020 by a decline in production. Due to natural declines, the Trust expects production to decline further and expects distributable income to continue to be adversely affected.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 the Trust recognized impairments of $6.5 million of the Royalty Interests as a result of lower commodity prices. During the year ended December 31, 2019 the Trust recognized no impairments of the Royalty Interests. If commodity prices do not improve going forward, the Trust may continue to record impairments in the future. See Note 2 to the financial statements contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for further discussion of the impairment analysis.
Distributable Income. The Trust's distributable income was $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $7.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The $4.2 million decrease from 2019 to 2020 was primarily due to a decrease in production volumes in the production period from September 1, 2019 to August 31, 2020 (the "2020 production period") as compared to the production period from September 1, 2018 to August 31, 2019 (the "2019 production period"), and a decrease in the average realized prices received from sales of oil, natural gas and NGL. See Royalty Income below for information regarding average prices received and sales volumes.
On a per unit basis, cash distributions during the year ended December 31, 2020 and attributable to the 2020 production period were $0.0727 per common unit as compared to $0.1632 per common unit for the year ended December 31, 2019 and attributable to the 2019 production period. Distributable income for the production periods described above was calculated as follows:
_____________________________________________________
(1)Net of certain post-production expenses.
(2)Includes cash advance.
(3)Commencing with the distribution to unitholders payable in the first quarter of 2019, the Trustee began withholding the greater of $70,000 or 3.5% of the funds otherwise available for distribution each quarter to gradually increase existing cash reserves by a total of approximately $850,000. The Trustee may increase or decrease the targeted amount at any time, and may increase or decrease the rate at which it is withholding funds to build the cash reserve at any time, without advance notice to the unitholders. Cash held in reserve for a payment of the quarterly cash distribution or sales proceeds amounts or for the payment of any liabilities other than routine administrative costs will be invested as required by the Trust Agreement. Any cash reserved in excess of the amount necessary to pay or provide for the payment of future known, anticipated or contingent expenses or liabilities eventually will be distributed to unitholders, together with interest earned on the funds.
Royalty Income. Royalty income to the Trust for the year ended December 31, 2020, and attributable to the 2020 production period, totaled $4.9 million based upon sales of production attributable to the Royalty Interests of 63 mbbls of oil, 1,708 mmcf of natural gas and 152 mbbls of NGL. Total production attributable to the Royalty Interests for the 2020 production period was 499 mboe. Average prices received for oil, natural gas and NGL production, including the impact of certain post-production expenses and excluding production taxes, during the 2020 production period were $41.41 per bbl of oil, $0.37 per mcf of natural gas and $11.26 per bbl of NGL, respectively.
Royalty income to the Trust for the year ended December 31, 2019, and attributable to the 2019 production period, totaled $9.8 million based upon sales of production attributable to the Royalty Interests of 91 mbbls of oil, 2,238 mmcf of natural gas and 186 mbbls of NGL. Total production attributable to the Royalty Interests for the 2019 production period was 650 mboe. Average prices received for oil, natural gas and NGL production, including the impact of certain post-production expenses and excluding production taxes, during the 2019 production period were $53.30 per bbl of oil, $0.87 per mcf of natural gas and $16.07 per bbl of NGL, respectively.
The decrease in the average price received per boe in the 2020 production period compared to the 2019 production period resulted in a $2.6 million decrease in royalty income. Decreased sales volumes resulted in a $2.3 million decrease in royalty income, for a net decrease in royalty income of $4.9 million.
Production Taxes. Production taxes are calculated as a percentage of oil, natural gas and NGL revenues, net of any applicable tax credits. Production taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020, and attributable to the 2020
production period, totaled a credit of $36 thousand, or a credit of $0.07 per boe, or approximately 0.7% of royalty income, as compared to production taxes of $0.5 million, or $0.81 per boe, or approximately 5.4% of royalty income for the year ended December 31, 2019, and attributable to the 2019 production period. The decrease in production taxes per boe from 2019 to 2020 was primarily due to prior period tax refunds received in 2020.
Trust Administrative Expenses. Trust administrative expenses, including additional cash reserves, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 totaled $1.3 million. Trust administrative expenses primarily consist of the administrative fees paid to the Trustee and the Administrative Servicer and costs for accounting and legal services.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Trust’s principal sources of liquidity and capital are cash flows generated from the Royalty Interests. The Trust’s primary uses of cash are distributions to Trust unitholders, payments of production taxes, payments of Trust administrative expenses, including any reserves established by the Trustee for future liabilities and repayment of loans and payments of expense reimbursements to the Operator for out-of-pocket expenses incurred on behalf of the Trust. Administrative expenses include payments to the Trustee and the Delaware Trustee as well as a quarterly fee of $50,000 to the Administrative Servicer pursuant to the Administrative Services Agreement. Each quarter, the Trustee determines the amount of funds available for distribution. Available funds are the excess cash, if any, received by the Trust from the sales of oil, natural gas and NGL production attributable to the Royalty Interests during the quarter, over the Trust’s expenses for the quarter and any cash reserve for the payment of liabilities of the Trust.
The Trust is required to make quarterly cash distributions of substantially all of its cash receipts, after deducting the Trust’s administrative expenses, on or about 60 days following the completion of each calendar quarter through (and including) the quarter ending June 30, 2031. During the year ended December 31, 2020, four distributions were paid. The 2020 first quarter distribution of $0.0371 per common unit to common unitholders consisting of proceeds attributable to production from September 1, 2019 through November 30, 2019, was made on March 2, 2020 to record unitholders as of February 19, 2020. The 2020 second quarter distribution of $0.0291 per common unit, consisting of proceeds attributable to production from December 1, 2019 through February 28, 2020, was made on June 1, 2020 to record unitholders as of May 20, 2020. The 2020 third quarter distribution of $0.0053 per common unit, consisting of proceeds attributable to production from March 1, 2020 through May 31, 2020, was made on August 31, 2020 to record unitholders as of August 19, 2020. The 2020 fourth quarter distribution of $0.0012 per common unit, consisting of proceeds attributable to production from June 1, 2020 through August 31, 2020, was made on November 29, 2020 to record unitholders as of November 19, 2020.
The following is a summary of distributable income and distributable income per common unit by quarter for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands except per unit amounts):
On February 2, 2021, the Trust announced that a cash distribution of $0.0063 per common unit consisting of proceeds attributable to production from September 1, 2020 to November 30, 2020, to common unitholders of record, as of February 19, 2021 would be paid on March 1, 2021. See Note 6 to the financial statements contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional information regarding the distribution paid on March 1, 2021 to record unitholders as of February 19, 2021.
Commencing with the distribution to unitholders payable in the first quarter of 2019, the Trustee began withholding the greater of $70,000 or 3.5% of the funds otherwise available for distribution each quarter to gradually increase existing cash reserves by a total of approximately $850,000. The Trustee may increase or decrease the targeted amount at any time, and may increase or decrease the rate at which it withholds funds to build the cash reserve at any time, without advance notice to the unitholders. Cash held in reserve for payment of the quarterly cash distribution or sales proceeds amounts or for the payment of any liabilities other than routine administrative costs will be invested as required by the Trust Agreement. Any cash reserved in excess of the amount necessary to pay or provide for the payment of future known, anticipated or contingent expenses or liabilities will eventually be distributed to unitholders, together with interest earned on the funds. As of December 31, 2020, $597,075 has been withheld to increase cash reserves.
The Trustee can authorize the Trust to borrow money to pay Trust expenses that exceed cash held by the Trust. The Trustee may authorize the Trust to borrow from the Trustee as a lender provided the terms of the loan are fair to the Trust unitholders. The Trustee may also deposit funds awaiting distribution in an account with itself, if the interest paid to the Trust at least equals amounts paid by the Trustee on similar deposits, and make other short-term investments with the funds distributed to the Trust. The Trustee may also hold funds awaiting distribution in a non-interest bearing account.
Pursuant to the Trust Agreement, if at any time the Trust’s cash on hand (including cash reserves) is not sufficient to pay the Trust’s ordinary course expenses as they become due, the Operator will loan funds to the Trust necessary to pay such expenses. Any funds loaned by the Operator pursuant to this commitment will be limited to the payment of current accounts payable or other obligations to trade creditors in connection with obtaining goods or services or the payment of other current liabilities arising in the ordinary course of the Trust’s business, and may not be used to satisfy Trust indebtedness for borrowed money of the Trust. If the Operator loans funds pursuant to this commitment, unless the Operator agrees otherwise, no further distributions will be made to unitholders (except in respect of any previously determined quarterly cash distribution amount) until such loan is repaid. In March 2019, the Trust's cash on hand (including cash reserves) was insufficient to pay the Trust's ordinary course expenses as they became due. The Operator loaned $275,000 to the Trust necessary to pay such expenses and agreed to permit the Trust to continue making distributions while the loan was outstanding. The Trust repaid the loan in the second quarter of 2019. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, there were no loans outstanding.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Trust has no off-balance sheet arrangements. The Trust has not guaranteed the debt of any other party, nor does the Trust have any other arrangements or relationships with other entities that could potentially result in unconsolidated debt, losses or contingent obligations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Basis of Accounting. Financial statements of the Trust differ from financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP as the Trust records revenues when received and expenses when paid and may also establish certain cash reserves for contingencies that would not be accrued in financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. This non-GAAP, comprehensive basis of accounting corresponds to the accounting principles permitted for royalty trusts by the SEC as specified by Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 12:E, Financial Statements of Royalty Trusts. The Trust's financial statements for all periods presented have been prepared by the Trust in accordance with the accounting policies noted below.
Oil and Natural Gas Reserves. Estimates of oil and natural gas reserves and their values, future production rates, future development costs and commodity pricing differentials are the most significant of our estimates. The accuracy of any reserve estimate is a function of the quality of data available and of engineering and geological interpretation and judgment. In addition, estimates of reserves may be revised based on actual production, results of subsequent exploration and development activities, recent commodity prices, operating costs and other factors. These revisions could materially affect our financial statements. The volatility of commodity prices results in increased uncertainty inherent in these estimates and assumptions. Changes in oil, natural gas or NGL prices could result in actual results differing significantly from our estimates. See Supplemental Disclosures About Oil, Natural Gas, and NGL Producing Activities included in Item 8 of this report for further information.
Investment in Royalty Interests. The conveyance of the Royalty Interests to the Trust was accounted for as a transfer of properties between entities under common control and recorded at the historical cost of Chesapeake (“Investment in Royalty Interests”), which was based on an allocation of the historical net book value of Chesapeake's full cost pool according to the fair value of the Royalty Interests relative to the fair value of Chesapeake's proved reserves. The carrying value of the Trust's Investment in Royalty Interests will not necessarily be indicative of the fair value of such Royalty Interests.
This investment is amortized as a single cost center on a units-of-production basis over total proved reserves. Such amortization does not reduce distributable income, rather it is charged directly to Trust corpus. Revisions to estimated future units-of-production are treated on a prospective basis beginning on the date significant revisions are known.
On a quarterly basis, the Trust evaluates the carrying value of the Investment in Royalty Interests under the full cost accounting method prescribed by the SEC. This quarterly review is referred to as a ceiling test. Under the ceiling test, the carrying value of the Investment in Royalty Interests may not exceed an amount equal to the PV-10 for the Trust's proved reserves. Any write-downs resulting from the ceiling test will be non-cash charges to Trust corpus and will not affect distributable income.
Use of Estimates. The preparation of financial statements requires the Trust to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and Trust corpus during the reporting period. Significant estimates that impact the Trust's financial statements include estimates of proved oil, natural gas and NGL reserves, which are used to compute the Trust's amortization of Investment in Royalty Interests and, as necessary, to evaluate potential impairment of Investment in Royalty Interests. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Revenues and Expenses. Revenues received by the Trust are net of existing royalties and overriding royalties associated with the Operator's interests and are reduced by certain post-production expenses, production taxes and other allowable expenses, such as the Trust's administrative expenses, in order to determine distributable income. The Royalty Interests are not burdened by field and lease operating expenses.