ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
OVERVIEW
AllyMe Group, Inc. was organized on August 13, 2014 as a Nevada corporation under Chapter 78 of the Nevada Revised Statutes. The Company’s principal office is located at 10250 Constellation Blvd., Suite 100, Los Angeles, CA 90067. The Company had two subsidiaries, AllyMe Groups, Inc., a Cayman Islands corporation (“AllyMe”) and China Info Technology Inc. (“China Info”). These subsidiaries were divested on September 30, 2020.
The Company qualifies as an “emerging growth company” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act which became law in April 2012. The definition of an “emerging growth company” is a company with an initial public offering of common equity securities which occurred after December 8, 2011 and has less than $1 billion of total annual gross revenues during last completed fiscal year.
Overview of the Business
The Company was formed as a US corporation to use as a vehicle for providing consulting services, primarily in China. In the second half of 2018, AllyMe Group, Inc. (also referred to as “the Company”) commenced providing consulting services in China principally focused on the development of new-high-tech products marketing and retail sales. As of the date of this report, it has provided services to four (4) clients and has generated approximately $17,000 in revenues. The Company intends to seek additional clients through direct marketing in China. The Company is currently in its early stages and there is no guarantee that it will be successful at any time in the near future or ever. The Company divested subsidiaries on Sep 30 2020, both subsidiaries discontinued operation since September 30, 2020.
The Company seeks to provide management advisory services to business organizations worldwide. The Company intends to assist smaller developing companies in the development of business models and strategies. The Company’s initial target markets are China and the United States.
AllyMe offers business consultancy, marketing consultancy, financial consultancy and business modeling support to its client organizations. It also seeks to provide merger and acquisition consultancy.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to December 31, 2019
The following table summarizes the results of our operations during the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and provides information regarding the dollar and percentage increase or (decrease) from the current 12-month period to the prior 12-month period:
*as reclassified after divestiture of discontinued operations
We recorded a net profit of $345,049 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 as compared with a net loss of $176,738 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 due primarily to a reclassification due to the divestiture of discontinued operations and a decrease in general and administrative expense.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had total assets of $46,761, a working capital deficit of $154,408 and an accumulated stockholders’ deficit of $154,408. Our operating activities generated $183,495 in cash for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, while our operations generated $376,965 cash in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019. Our revenues were $0 in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 compared to revenues of $1,429 in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019. These factors raised substantial doubts about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
Management believes that the Company’s cash on hand will be sufficient to fund all Company obligations and commitments for the next twelve months. Historically, we have depended on loans from our principal shareholders and their affiliated companies to provide us with working capital as required. There is no guarantee that such funding will be available when required and there can be no assurance that our stockholders, or any of them, will continue making loans or advances to us in the future.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had loans and advances from a related party shareholder in the aggregate amount of $59,895, which represents amounts loaned to the Company to pay the Company’s expenses of operation. These advances are payable on demand.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity or capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to an investor in our securities.
Seasonality
Our operating results are not affected by seasonality.
Inflation
Our business and operating results are not affected in any material way by inflation.
Critical Accounting Policies
The Securities and Exchange Commission issued Financial Reporting Release No. 60, “Cautionary Advice Regarding Disclosure About Critical Accounting Policies” suggesting that companies provide additional disclosure and commentary on their most critical accounting policies. In Financial Reporting Release No. 60, the Securities and Exchange Commission has defined the most critical accounting policies as the ones that are most important to the portrayal of a company’s financial condition and operating results and require management to make its most difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. The nature of our business generally does not call for the preparation or use of estimates. Due to the fact that the Company does not have any operating business, we do not believe that we do not have any such critical accounting policies.