Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References
to “we,” “us,” “our,” “Switchback” or the “Company” are to Switchback
Energy Acquisition Corporation, except where the context requires otherwise. The following discussion should be read in conjunction
with our financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this report.
Overview
We
are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on May 10, 2019 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange,
asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. Although we are
not limited to a particular industry or sector for purposes of consummating our initial business combination, we intend to focus
our search for a target business in the energy industry in North America. Our sponsor is NGP Switchback, LLC, a Delaware limited
liability company.
The Registration Statement for the Public Offering was declared effective on July 25, 2019. On July 30, 2019, we consummated the Public Offering of 30,000,000 units at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $300.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $17.7 million, inclusive of $10.9 million in deferred underwriting commissions. Certain of our officers and directors purchased 200,000 (the “Affiliated Units”) of the 30,000,000 Units sold in the Public Offering for an aggregate purchase price of $2.0 million. The underwriters were granted a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus relating to the Public Offering to purchase up to 4,500,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at $10.00 per Unit, less underwriting discounts and commissions. On September 4, 2019, the underwriters partially exercised the over-allotment option and, on September 6, 2019, the underwriters purchased an additional 1,411,763 units, generating gross proceeds of approximately $14.1 million. The remaining over-allotment option subsequently expired.
Simultaneously
with the closing of the Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 5,333,333 Private Placement Warrants at a price
of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $8.0
million. Simultaneously with the closing of the sale of the Over-allotment Units, our Sponsor purchased an additional 188,235
Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds of approximately $282,000.
Approximately
$314.1 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Public Offering (including the Over-allotment Units) and certain of
the proceeds of the Private Placement was placed in the Trust Account located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer
& Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested only in U.S. “government securities,” within the meaning set forth
in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or in money market funds meeting the conditions
of paragraphs (d)(1), (d)(2), (d)(3) and (d)(4) of Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S.
government treasury obligations, as determined by the Company, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of our initial business
combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
If
we are unable to complete an initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of the Public Offering, or July 30,
2021, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more
than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount
then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released
to us to pay our franchise and income taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number
of then-outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders
(including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as
reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and its board of directors,
dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the
requirements of other applicable law.
Results
of Operations
Our
only activities from inception through December 31, 2020 related to our formation and the Public Offering, and, since the closing
of the Public Offering, the search for a prospective initial business combination. We expect to incur increased expenses as a
result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as costs in the
pursuit of our acquisition plans.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $5 million, which consisted of approximately $1.2 million of gain on marketable securities, dividends and interest held in Trust Account, offset by approximately $5.7 million in general and administrative expenses, $200,000 in franchise tax expense, and approximately $202,000 in income tax expense.
For
the period from May 10, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, we had net income of approximately $780,000, which consisted
of approximately $2.3 million of gain on marketable securities, dividends and interest held in Trust Account, offset by approximately
$935,000 in general and administrative expenses, $88,000 in franchise tax expense, and approximately $479,000 in income tax expense.
Proposed
Business Combination
On
September 23, 2020, we entered into the Business Combination Agreement with Merger Sub and ChargePoint. Pursuant to the Business
Combination Agreement, among other things, Merger Sub will be merged with and into ChargePoint, with ChargePoint surviving the
Merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company. For more information regarding the Proposed Transactions, please refer to
our proxy statement, prospectus and consent solicitation statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on January
8, 2021.
Going
Concern Consideration
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern, which contemplates, among other things, the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $112,000 in our operating bank account, approximately $2.9 million of gain on marketable securities, dividends and interest held in Trust Account available to fund a business combination (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses and net of taxes payable), and a working capital deficit of approximately $5.6 million (including approximately $401,000 in tax obligations, which will be paid using investment income held in Trust Account). In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loan.
Our
liquidity needs up to December 31, 2020 were satisfied through receipt of a $25,000
capital contribution from our Sponsor in exchange for the issuance of shares of our Class B common stock to our Sponsor (the “Founder
Shares”), approximately $251,000 in loans from our Sponsor (which was fully repaid on August 12, 2019), the net proceeds
from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account and $1,270,000 of cash advanced from the Sponsor.
Management has determined that the Company has access to funds from our Sponsor, and the Sponsor has the financial wherewithal to fund the Company, that are sufficient to fund our working capital needs until the consummation of an initial business combination or for a minimum of one year from the date of issuance of the consolidated financial statements. However, in connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Update 2014-15, “Disclosure of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that the Company’s mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate and dissolve after July 30, 2021.
Contractual
Obligations
Registration
Rights
The
holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans,
if any, and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that
may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares will be entitled to registration
rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. These holders will be entitled to certain demand and “piggyback”
registration rights. However, the registration rights agreement provides that we will not permit any registration statement filed
under the Securities Act to become effective until the termination of the applicable lock-up period for the securities to be registered.
We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting
Agreement
Except
for the Affiliated Units, the underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $5.96 million
in the aggregate, paid upon closing of the Public Offering. An additional fee of approximately
$282,000 in the aggregate was due in connection with the closing of the sale of the Over-allotment Units.
In
addition, $0.35 per unit (but not including the Affiliated Units), or approximately $10.9 million in the aggregate will be
payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from
the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the
underwriting agreement.
Administrative
Services Agreement
Commencing on the date that our securities were first listed on the NYSE and continuing until the earlier of our consummation of an initial business combination or our liquidation, we have agreed to pay our Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, utilities, secretarial support and administrative services. We recorded an aggregate of $120,000 and $50,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and for the period from May 10, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, respectively, in general and administrative expenses in connection with the related agreement in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
As
of December 31, 2020, we recorded an aggregate of approximately $76,000 in related party accrued expenses.
Critical
Accounting Policies
Shares
of Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
Shares of our Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable shares of our Class A common stock (including shares of our Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of our Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Shares of our Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, 29,548,906 and 30,047,981 shares of our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption, respectively, are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s consolidated balance sheets.
Net
Income (Loss) Per Share of Common Stock
Net
income (loss) per share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding
during the periods. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Public Offering (including the consummation
of the over-allotment) and Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 15,992,155 shares of our Class A common stock in the
calculation of diluted income per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method.
Our consolidated statements of operations include a presentation of income per share for common stock subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income per share. Net income per share, basic and diluted for our Class A common stock for year ended December 31, 2020 is calculated by dividing (i) the gain on marketable securities, dividends and interest held in Trust Account of approximately $1.2 million, net of applicable taxes and funds available to be withdrawn from the Trust Account for franchise and income tax obligations of approximately $401,000, resulting in an aggregate of approximately $758,000, by (ii) the weighted average number of shares of our Class A common stock outstanding for the period of 31,411,763 shares. Net loss per share, basic and diluted for our Class B common stock for the year ended December 31, 2020 is calculated by dividing (i) the net loss of approximately $5 million, less income attributable to public shares of approximately $758,000, resulting in a net loss of approximately $5.7 million, by (ii) the weighted average number of shares of our Class B common stock outstanding for the period of 7,852,941 shares.
Net
income per share, basic and diluted for our Class A common stock for the period from May 10, 2019 (inception) through December
31, 2019 is calculated by dividing (i) the gain on marketable securities, dividends and interest held in Trust Account of approximately
$2.3 million, net of applicable taxes and funds available to be withdrawn from the Trust Account for franchise and income tax
obligations of approximately $567,000, resulting in an aggregate of approximately $1.7 million, by (ii) the weighted average number
of shares of our Class A common stock outstanding for the period of 31,092,978 shares. Net loss per share, basic and diluted for
our Class B common stock for the period from May 10, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019 is calculated by dividing (i)
the net income of approximately $780,000, less income attributable to public shares of approximately $1.7 million, resulting in
a net loss of approximately $935,000, by (ii) the weighted average number of shares of our Class B common stock outstanding for
the period of 7,852,941 shares.
Recent
Accounting Pronouncements
We
do not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a
material impact on our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As
of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS
Act
On
April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting
requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act and are
allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded)
companies. We elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new
or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth
companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting
pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
As
an “emerging growth company,” we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation
report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be
required of non-emerging growth public companies, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional
information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose comparisons of the
Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five
years following the completion of our Public Offering or until we otherwise no longer qualify as an “emerging growth company.”