Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the historical financial statements and the related notes included in Part II Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. The following Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in this report provides an analysis of our financial condition and results of operations and reasons for material changes therein for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 ("2019 and 2018"). This discussion contains “forward-looking statements” reflecting our current expectations, estimates, and assumptions concerning events and financial trends that may affect our future operating results or financial position. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to several factors. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, capital expenditures, economic and competitive conditions, regulatory changes, and other uncertainties, as well as those factors discussed below and elsewhere herein. Please read Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements. Please read the risk factors and other cautionary statements described under “Item 1A. Risk Factors” included elsewhere herein. Except as required by applicable law, we assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements.
Charah Solutions, Inc.
Charah Solutions, Inc. (together with its subsidiaries, “Charah Solutions,” the “Company,” “we,” “us” or “our”) was incorporated in Delaware in 2018 in connection with our initial public offering in June 2018 and, together with its predecessors, has been in business since 1987. Since our founding, we have continuously worked to anticipate our customers’ evolving environmental needs, increasing the number of services we provide through our embedded presence at their power generation facilities. Our multi-service platform allows customers to gain efficiencies from sourcing multiple required offerings from a single, trusted partner compared to service providers with more limited scope.
Overview
We are a leading national service provider of mission-critical environmental services and byproduct sales to the power generation industry. We offer a suite of remediation and compliance services, byproduct sales and marketing, fossil services and environmental risk transfer ("ERT") services. We also design and implement solutions for complex environmental projects (such as coal ash pond closures) and facilitate coal ash recycling through byproduct sales and other beneficial use services. We believe we are a partner-of-choice for the power generation industry due to our quality, safety, domain experience, and compliance record, all of which are key criteria for our customers. In 2020, we performed work at more than 40 coal-fired generation sites nationwide.
On November 19, 2020, the Company sold its Allied Power Holdings LLC (“Allied”) subsidiary engaged in maintenance, modification and repair services to the nuclear and fossil power generation industry to an affiliate of Bernhard Capital Partners Management, LP (“BCP”), the Company’s majority shareholder, in an all-cash deal for $40 million (the “Allied Transaction”) subject to customary adjustments for working capital and other adjustments as set forth in the Purchase Agreement. As described in further detail in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, the company has presented Allied as held for sale and discontinued operations in the accompanying consolidated and combined financial statements and related notes.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we realigned our segment reporting into a single operating segment to reflect the suite of end-to-end services we offer our utility partners and how our chief operating decision maker reviews consolidated financial information to evaluate results of operations, assess performance and allocate resources for these services. We provide the following services through our one segment: remediation and compliance services, byproduct sales, fossil services and ERT services. Remediation and compliance services are associated with our customers’ need for multi-year environmental improvement and sustainability initiatives, whether driven by regulatory requirements, power generation customer initiatives or consumer expectations and standards. Byproduct sales support both our power generation customers’ desire to recycle their recurring and legacy volumes of coal combustion residuals (“CCRs”), commonly known as coal ash, and our ultimate end customers’ need for high-quality, cost-effective raw material substitutes. Fossil services consist of fossil plant maintenance and daily onsite management of coal ash for coal-fired power generation facilities. ERT services represent an innovative solution designed to meet the evolving and increasingly complex needs of utility customers. These customers need to retire and decommission older or underutilized assets while maximizing their value and improving the environment. Our ERT services manage the sites' remediation requirements benefiting the communities and lowering the utility customers' cost.
On February 10, 2021, the Company purchased the Texas Municipal Power Agency’s (“TMPA”) Gibbons Creek Steam Electric Station and Reservoir’s related assets in Grimes County, Texas (“the Gibbons Creek Transaction”). The Company acquired the 6,166-acre area, including the closed power station, a 3,500-acre reservoir, dam and spillway and other property. As part of our ERT services, the Company will be responsible for the shutdown and decommissioning of the coal power plant, and as part of the acquisition, the Company will be assuming an asset retirement obligation for the site landfill and ash pond environmental remediation work.
COVID-19 Update
The pandemic caused by a novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) has impacted many aspects of our operations, directly and indirectly, including our employees, the services we provide at our customers’ power generation facilities, our suppliers and the overall market for our products and services. We, along with our utility partners, have implemented the precautionary health and safety measures recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (the “CDC”) in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including, but not limited to: an employee health status questionnaire, taking daily temperatures, enhanced sanitation practices and cleaning surfaces throughout each shift, and increasing the number of hand sanitizing stations. We have also increased social distancing measures, such as staggering shift start and stop times and break times with additional break spaces to support social distancing as well as holding safety meetings outside of the site trailer. Furthermore, we have implemented work-from-home measures for the majority of office employees. Understanding that the COVID-19 challenge is evolving, based on new information and feedback, we continue to monitor the situation and update our proactive measures in coordination with our customers.
We continue to work closely with our utility partners and concrete producer customers to meet their needs and monitor any potential slowdowns of byproduct sales if there is decreased demand for construction materials. We have had no significant contracts canceled at this time. However, projections for power generation demand have been lowered, and there is the potential for decreased demand for our byproduct sales in the construction market as capital budgets are reduced and construction activity slows.
In light of the uncertain and rapidly evolving situation relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, in April 2020, we implemented a series of preemptive cost-cutting and cost savings initiatives across the Company, including reducing employee compensation, cash-based retainers to our Board of Directors, hiring and discretionary spending including travel restrictions. Also, we implemented applicable benefits of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). In October 2020, we returned employee compensation and cash-based retainers to our Board of Directors to their pre-COVID-19 pandemic annual base levels.
We may elect or need to take additional measures as the information available to us continues to develop, including measures concerning our employees, relationships with our third-party vendors, and our customers. Subject to our assumptions regarding the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, our currently anticipated responses to it and our current
projections, we believe our cash on hand and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to cover our working capital requirements and debt obligations for the next 12 months from the issuance of this Annual Report.
The COVID-19 pandemic presents potential new risks to the Company’s business. A sustained downturn may result in the carrying value of our long-lived assets exceeding their fair value, which may require us to recognize an impairment to those assets. Furthermore, delays in customer payments for our services may impact the collectability of our trade accounts receivable. The COVID-19 pandemic has caused logistical and other challenges to date and may continue to affect demand for our byproduct sales, which are driven by construction activity, and on remediation and compliance services projects, due to delays in new contract awards.
The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will impact our results is unknown and evolving and will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. These include the severity, duration and spread of COVID-19, the success of actions taken by governments and health organizations to combat the disease and treat its effects, including additional remedial legislation, and the extent to which, and when, general economic and operating conditions recover. Accordingly, we cannot reasonably estimate any resulting financial impact at this time but such amounts may be material.
Purchase Option Liability Reversal
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the purchase option associated with the Company's structural fill assets expired. As a result of the expiration, the Company reduced its purchase option liability by $7.1 million and reduced amortization expense within general and administrative expenses in the Consolidated and Combined Statement of Operations.
Asset Impairment
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company evaluated whether events or circumstances changed that would indicate it is more likely than not that any of its indefinite-lived intangible assets, goodwill or property and equipment, were impaired or if there were any other than temporary impairments of our equity investment. Factors considered in this evaluation included, among other things, the annual impairment testing performed as of October 1, 2020, changes in royalty rates, adverse changes in how certain assets were going to be used in the future and whether any factors would impact our ability to recover the carrying amount of our equity investments. Based on the Company's evaluation, the Company concluded that triggering events occurred related to our trade name, structural fill asset, grinding technology equipment and construction in progress assets, technology intangible asset and an equity method investment. As a result of the triggering events, the Company recognized an impairment during the year ended 2020 of $21.0 million for the Charah Solutions trade name, $10.6 million for certain grinding technology equipment and construction in progress assets and intangible asset and $6.4 million for the structural fill asset. Also, the Company recorded a $3.8 million impairment and recorded a loss from equity method investment in the Consolidated and Combined Statement of Operations.
Contingent Payment Liability Change
As part of the Company's evaluation of the recoverability of technology-related assets, the Company also assessed the likelihood of paying the contingent liability based on achieving certain performance sales levels using the grinding technology mentioned above. We concluded that certain sales levels would not be achieved, and we reduced the contingent payment liability by $9.7 million.
Initial Public Offering
On June 18, 2018, we completed the IPO of 7,352,941 shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.01 per share. The net proceeds of the IPO to us before offering expenses were approximately $59.2 million. We used a portion of the IPO proceeds to pay off approximately $40.0 million of the borrowings outstanding under the Term Loan, and any remaining net proceeds were used to pay offering expenses or for general corporate purposes.
How We Evaluate Our Operations
We use a variety of financial and operational metrics to assess the performance of our operations, including:
•Revenue;
•Gross Profit;
•Operating Income;
•Adjusted EBITDA; and
•Adjusted EBITDA Margin.
Revenue
We analyze our revenue by comparing actual revenue to our internal projections for a given period and to prior periods to assess our performance. We believe that revenue is a meaningful indicator of the demand and pricing for our services.
Gross Profit
We analyze our gross profit, which we define as revenue less cost of sales, to measure our financial performance. We believe gross profit is a meaningful metric because it provides insight into our revenue streams' financial performance without consideration of Company overhead. When analyzing gross profit, we compare actual gross profit to our internal projections for a given period and prior periods to assess our performance.
Operating Income
We analyze our operating income, which we define as revenue less cost of sales, general and administrative expenses, gain on change in contingent payment liability and impairment expense to measure our financial performance. We believe operating income is a meaningful metric because it provides insight into profitability and operating performance based on our assets' cost basis. We also compare operating income to our internal projections for a given period and to prior periods.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
We view Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin, which are non-GAAP financial measures, as an important indicator of performance because they allow for an effective evaluation of our operating performance compared to our peers, without regard to our financing methods or capital structure.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net earnings attributable to Charah Solutions, Inc. before loss on extinguishment of debt, impairment expense, gain on change in contingent payment liability, interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, equity-based compensation, non-recurring legal costs and expenses, the Brickhaven contract deemed termination revenue reversal and transaction-related expenses and other items. Adjusted EBITDA margin represents the ratio of Adjusted EBITDA to total revenue. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for more information and a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
Key Factors Affecting Our Business and Financial Statements
Ability to Capture New Contracts and Opportunities
Our ability to grow revenue and earnings is dependent on maintaining and increasing our market share, renewing existing contracts, and obtaining additional contracts from proactive bidding on contracts with new and existing customers. We proactively work with existing customers ahead of contract end dates to attempt to secure contract renewals. We also leverage the embedded long-term nature of our customer relationships to obtain insight and capture new business opportunities across our platform.
Seasonality of Business
Based on historical trends, we expect our operating results to vary seasonally. Variations in normal weather patterns can also cause changes in energy consumption which may influence the demand and timing of associated services for our fossil services offerings. Inclement weather can impact construction-related activities associated with pond and landfill remediation, which affects the timing of revenue generation for our remediation and compliance services. Our byproduct sales are also negatively affected during winter months when the use of cement and cement products is generally lower.
Project-Based Nature of Environmental Remediation Mandates
We believe there is a significant pipeline of coal ash ponds and landfills that will require remediation and/or closure in the future. Due to their scale and complexity, these environmental remediation projects are typically completed over longer periods. As a result, our revenue from these projects can fluctuate over time. Some of our revenue from projects is recognized over time using the cost-to-cost input method of accounting for GAAP purposes, based primarily on contract costs incurred to date compared to total estimated contract costs. This method is the most accurate measure of our contract performance because it depicts the company’s performance in transferring control of goods or services promised to customers according to a reasonable measure of progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation. The timing of revenue recorded for financial reporting purposes may differ from actual billings to customers, sometimes resulting in costs and billing in excess of actual revenue. Because of the risks in estimating gross profit margins for long-term jobs, actual results may differ from these estimates.
Byproduct Recycling Market Dynamics
There is a growing demand for recycled coal ash across various applications driven by market forces and governmental regulations creating the need to dispose of coal ash in an environmentally sensitive manner. Pricing of byproduct sales is driven by supply and demand market dynamics as well as the chemical and physical properties of the ash. As demand increases for the end-products that use CCRs’ (i.e., concrete for construction and infrastructure projects), the demand for recycled coal ash also typically rises. These fluctuations affect the relative demand for our byproduct sales. In recessionary periods, construction and infrastructure spending and the corresponding need for concrete may decline. However, this unfavorable effect may be partially offset by an increase in the demand for recycled coal ash during recessionary periods, given that coal ash is more cost-effective than other alternatives.
Power Generation Industry Spend on Environmental Liability Management and Regulatory Requirements
The power generation industry has increased annual spending on environmental liability management. We believe this results from regulatory requirements and consumer pressure, and the industry’s increasing focus on environmental stewardship. Continued increases in spending on environmental liability management by our customers should result in increased demand for services across our platform.
Many power generation entities are experiencing an increased need to retire and decommission older or less economically viable generating assets while minimizing costs and maximizing the value of the assets and improving the environment. Our ERT services allow these partners to remove the environmental risk and insurance obligations and place control and oversight with a company specializing in these complex remediation and reclamation projects. We believe our broad set of service capabilities, track record of quality service and safety, exacting environmental standards, and a dependable and experienced labor force is a significant competitive advantage. Our work, mission and culture are directly aligned with meeting environmental, sustainability, and governance (“ESG”) standards and providing innovative services to solve our utility customers’ most complex environmental challenges. We believe that we are an industry leader in quality, safety, and compliance, and we are committed to reducing greenhouse gas emissions and preserving our environment for a cleaner energy future.
Cost Management and Capital Investment Efficiency
Our principal operating costs consist of labor, material and equipment costs and equipment maintenance. We focus on cost management and efficiency, including monitoring labor costs, both in terms of wage rates and headcount, along with other costs such as materials and equipment. We believe we maintain a disciplined approach to capital expenditure decisions, typically associated with specific contract requirements. Furthermore, we strive to extend our equipment's useful life by applying a well-planned routine maintenance program.
How We Generate Revenue
Our remediation and compliance services primarily consist of designing, constructing, managing, remediating and closing ash ponds and landfills on customer-owned sites. Our byproduct sales offerings include recycling recurring and contracted volumes of coal-fired power generation waste byproducts, such as bottom ash, fly ash and gypsum byproduct, each of which can be used for various industrial purposes. More than 90% of our services work is time and materials based, cost reimbursable or unit price contracts, which significantly reduces the risk of loss on contracts and provides gross margin visibility. Revenue from management contracts is recognized when the ash is hauled to the landfill or the management services are provided. Revenue from the sale of ash is recognized when it is delivered to the customer. Revenue from construction contracts is recognized using the cost-to-cost input method.
Our fossil services offerings focus on recurring and daily onsite management for coal-fired power generation facilities to fulfill our customers' environmental service needs in handling their waste byproducts. Over the last five years, our renewal rate for fossil services contracts has been approximately 90%. Coal ash management is mission-critical to the power plants' daily operations as they generally only have on-site storage capacity for three to four days of CCR waste accumulation. These services include silo management, on-site ash transportation, landfill management, and capture and disposal of ash byproducts from coal power operations. This combination of one-stop related services deepens customer connectivity and drives long-term relationships, which we believe are critical for renewing existing contracts, winning incremental business from existing customers at new sites and adding new customers.
Factors Impacting the Comparability of Results of Operations
Public Company Costs
We have incurred, and expect to continue to incur, incremental recurring and certain non-recurring costs related to our transition to a publicly-traded and taxable corporation, including the costs of the IPO and the costs associated with the initial
implementation and testing of our Sarbanes-Oxley Section 404 internal controls. We also have incurred, and expect to incur, additional significant and recurring expenses as a publicly-traded company, including costs associated with the employment of additional personnel, compliance under the Exchange Act, annual and quarterly reports to security holders, registrar and transfer agent fees, national stock exchange fees, audit fees, incremental director and officer liability insurance costs, and director and officer compensation
Income Taxes
Charah Solutions is a “C” corporation under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and, as a result, is subject to U.S. federal, state and local income taxes. In connection with the IPO, Charah Solutions and Allied, which previously were flow-through entities for income tax purposes and were indirect subsidiaries of two partnerships, Charah Management and Allied Power Holdings, respectively, became indirect subsidiaries of Charah Solutions. Before the contribution, Charah Solutions and Allied passed through their taxable income to the owners of the partnerships for U.S. federal and other state and local income tax purposes and, thus, were not subject to U.S. federal income taxes or other state or local income taxes, except for franchise tax at the state level (at less than 1% of modified pre-tax earnings). Accordingly, the financial data attributable to Charah Solutions and Allied before the contribution on June 18, 2018 contains no provision for U.S. federal income taxes or income taxes in any state or locality other than franchise taxes.
Overview of Financial Results
Despite a slight improvement in gross profit during the year ended December 31, 2020, as further discussed below, our results were still driven by the timing of our contract awards and the commencement and progress of work awarded under contract. Also, during the year ended December 31, 2020, our byproduct sales offerings were adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and two hurricanes that disrupted plant operations. Revenue generated from new awards won before 2019, during 2019 and during the year ended December 31, 2020 was not sufficient to offset the impact of projects completed during 2019 and 2020. Revenue contributions from these new awards will continue to be recognized in 2021 and beyond.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold our Allied subsidiary, issued 26,000 shares of Series A Preferred Stock ("Preferred Stock") for approximately $25.2 million and amended our Credit Facility as discussed below in “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Our Debt Agreements-Existing Credit Facility.” These transactions strengthened our balance sheet, reduced our leverage and increased our available liquidity. We are also focused on capturing the $75 billion ash environmental remediation and byproduct recycling markets and devoting our resources to these growth opportunities.
In 2020, we won approximately $715 million in contracted new awards compared to $430 million in 2019 and $106 million in 2018. We believe we are well-positioned to capture a significant portion of a large and growing addressable market, although the timing of future awards is difficult to determine. Furthermore, we believe recent regulatory developments in Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina and Virginia will positively impact our business operations as states are becoming more prescriptive in their requirements to remediate ash ponds. Finally, customer interest in our EnviroSourceTM (formerly MP618®) ash beneficiation technology continues to be strong, and contracts with utility customers are currently under discussion.
Our primary sources of ongoing liquidity and capital resources are cash on the balance sheet, cash flows generated by operating activities and borrowings under the Credit Facility. In part due to longer sales cycles, driven by the increase in the size, scope and complexity of remediation and compliance projects that we are bidding on, we have experienced contract initiation delays and project completion delays that have adversely affected our revenue and overall liquidity. Our lengthy and complex projects require us to expend large sums of working capital, and delays in payment receipts, project commencement or project completion can adversely affect our financial position and the cash flows that typically fund our expenditures. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Our Debt Agreements-Existing Credit Facility” below for more information about the Credit Facility and the amendments to it.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The table below sets forth our selected operating data for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Revenue. Revenue decreased $12.3 million, or 5.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $232.4 million as compared to $244.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, driven primarily by a decrease in byproduct sales offerings due to lower plant ash production that we believe was due to lower demand as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and two hurricanes that disrupted plant operations. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in remediation and compliance revenue as new project work started during the second half of 2020 and the $10.0 million revenue reversal associated with the completion of the Brickhaven deemed termination during 2019 was not repeated.
Gross Profit. Gross profit increased $1.5 million, or 7.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $22.8 million as compared to $21.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. As a percentage of revenue, gross profit was 9.8% and 8.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in gross profit was due primarily to the absence in the current year of the $10.0 million revenue reversal associated with the completion of the Brickhaven project resulting from the deemed termination that occurred during the year ended December 31, 2019 and an increase in gross profit from a $1.8 million reduction in our asset retirement obligation resulting from changes in the estimated timing and cash flows associated with our future obligations. These increases were partially offset by an inventory reduction associated with slow-moving stockpiles at two of our locations and a decrease in revenue associated with our byproduct sales offerings.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses decreased $17.0 million, or 33.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $34.1 million as compared to $51.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to a $7.1 million reduction in expense from the expiration of our purchase option liability during the current year, staff reductions, cost-cutting measures implemented in April 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and other cost-saving initiatives. We also had lower transaction costs during the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the Credit Facility as discussed below, partially offset by $2.9 million in lower non-cash general and administrative
expenses during the year ended December 31, 2019 associated with the amortization of the purchase option liability due to the deemed termination of the Brickhaven contract.
Gain on Change in Contingent Payment Liability. A gain on the change in contingent payment liability resulted in a $9.7 million benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020. We reduced the liability as we determined that certain performance sales levels using the grinding technology mentioned below would not be achieved.
Impairment Expense. Impairment expense increased $38.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 driven by a $21.0 million Charah Solutions trade name impairment, adverse changes in how certain assets were going to be used in the future that resulted in a $10.6 million non-cash impairments for certain grinding technology equipment and construction in progress assets and intangible asset and expiration of the purchase option liability that resulted in a $6.4 million non-cash impairment related to the associated structural fill site asset.
Interest Expense, Net. Interest expense, net decreased $0.9 million, or 5.8%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $13.8 million as compared to $14.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to a $2.2 million decrease in the non-cash mark-to-market expense associated with the change in the value of our interest rate swap and lower debt balances partially offset by the paid-in-kind interest related to the amendments to the Credit Facility as discussed below in "-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Our Debt Agreements-Existing Credit Facility."
Loss of Extinguishment of Debt. Loss on extinguishment of debt increased $8.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the Company’s Amendment No. 3 to Credit Agreement (the “Third Amendment”) of our existing Credit Facility as discussed below in “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Our Debt Agreements-Existing Credit Facility.” The Company expensed $5.2 million in amendment fees and wrote off $3.4 million in previously capitalized debt issuance costs.
(Loss) Income from Equity Method Investment. (Loss) income from equity method investment decreased $4.8 million, or 209.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, to loss from equity investment of $2.5 million compared to income from equity investment of $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease period-over-period was primarily attributable to a $3.8 million impairment of our investment in the joint venture as the fair value of our investment was less than its carrying value at December 31, 2020 due to the joint venture ending in the first quarter of 2021 as well as from a reduction in ash volumes generated by the utility and available for sale by us during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Tax (Benefit) Expense. Income tax (benefit) expense increased by $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to a $0.9 million benefit as compared to a $4.2 million expense during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by a decrease in the valuation allowance recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 as we were not able to conclude it was more likely than not certain deferred tax assets will be realized. Furthermore, during the year ended December 31, 2020 the income tax benefit was attributed to the increase in our loss from continuing operations before tax, the reductions in goodwill related to the Allied Transaction and the impairment of intangible assets.
Income from Discontinued Operations, Net of Tax. Income from discontinued operations, net of tax increased $1.8 million, or 25.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $8.9 million as compared to $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to reduced general and administrative expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net Loss. Net loss increased $15.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $54.7 million compared to $39.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
The table below sets forth our selected operating data for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
Revenue. Revenue decreased $156.2 million, or 39.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, to $244.7 million as compared to $400.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, driven primarily by a decrease in remediation and compliance project completions, including the completion of the Brickhaven project resulting from the deemed termination, the $10.0 million revenue reversal associated with the Brickhaven contract payment, and a decrease in the value of projects won in 2018, partially offset by an overall net increase in revenue from our byproduct sales and fossil services offerings.
Gross Profit. Gross profit decreased $59.8 million, or 73.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $21.3 million as compared to $81.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, driven primarily by a decrease in revenue. As a percentage of revenue, gross profit was 8.7% and 20.2% for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The decrease in gross profit was primarily driven by remediation and compliance project completions, the $10.0 million revenue reversal associated with the deemed termination of the Brickhaven contract and adverse weather-related impacts and site-specific issues at three remediation sites that resulted in higher than expected costs.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses increased $15.8 million, or 44.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, to $51.1 million as compared to $35.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily attributable to increased expenses due to the acquisition of SCB Materials International, Inc. and affiliated entities (“SCB”) in March 2018, increased transaction-related expenses during the year ended December 31, 2019 associated with an amendment to the Credit Facility and a decrease in amortization expense during the year ended December 31, 2019 related to our purchase option liability.
Interest Expense, Net. Interest expense, net decreased $15.7 million, or 51.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, to $14.6 million as compared to $30.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease was primarily attributable to a favorable comparison as $12.5 million of costs were incurred in conjunction with the refinancing of our debt during the year ended December 31, 2018, consisting of a $10.4 million non-cash write-off of debt issuance costs and a $2.1 million prepayment penalty, and a reduction in the debt balances using cash received from the Brickhaven deemed termination payment received during the year ended December 31, 2019. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in the mark-to-market expense associated with the change in the fair value of our interest rate swap.
Income from Equity Method Investment. Income from equity method investment decreased $0.1 million, or 4.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, to $2.3 million as compared to $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The slight decrease period-over-period was primarily attributable to a reduction in ash volumes generated by the utility and available for sale.
Income tax expense. Income tax expense increased by $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, to $4.2 million compared to $4.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2018. Based on the available evidence as of December 31, 2019, we could not conclude it was more likely than not certain deferred tax assets will be realized. Therefore, we recorded
a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets. The valuation allowance was partially offset by an income tax benefit associated with the increase in our loss from continuing operations before taxes.
Income (Loss) from Discontinued Operations, Net of Tax. Income from discontinued operations, net of tax increased $27.4 million, or 135.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 to income from discontinued operations, net of tax of $7.1 million as compared to loss from discontinued operations, net of tax of $20.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to lower general and administrative expenses during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net Loss. Net loss increased $32.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, to a loss of $39.2 million as compared to $6.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Consolidated Balance Sheet
The following table is a summary of our overall financial position:
Assets
Total assets decreased $74.8 million driven primarily by a $34.0 million decrease in property and equipment, net as depreciation expense exceeded new additions, land decreased due to the expiration of the purchase option liability that resulted in an impairment of the associated land asset and decreases in technology-related construction in progress and equipment related assets from asset impairments; a $31.0 million decrease in intangible assets, net due to the impairment of the Charah Solutions trade name, the impairment of our technology asset and amortization; a $14.9 million decrease in current assets of discontinued operations held for sale and a $13.8 million decrease in long-term assets of discontinued operations held for sale due to the Allied Transaction; a $8.9 million decrease in inventory due to the reduction in inventory to net realizable value and improved inventory management and a $4.2 million decrease in equity method investments from an impairment and distributions exceeding equity income. Partially offsetting these decreases was a $19.9 million increase in cash as proceeds associated with our Preferred Stock offering were held as available liquidity to fund working capital requirements and other operations. Furthermore, accounts receivable increased $9.3 million, primarily associated with the timing of collections associated with remediation and compliance projects. Finally, restricted cash increased by $3.4 million related to a specific remediation and compliance project that started operations during the second quarter of 2020.
Liabilities
Total liabilities decreased $69.3 million driven by:
•$45.3 million net decrease in amounts owed under the Credit Facility (as defined below) as proceeds from the Allied Transaction were used to pay down our debt balances,
•$27.7 million decrease in current liabilities of discontinued operations held for sale due to the Allied Transaction,
•$9.9 million decrease in our asset retirement obligation associated with our maintenance and monitoring requirement payments and reduction in liability resulting from changes in the estimated timing and cash flows associated with our future obligations,
•$9.5 million decrease in contingent payments for acquisitions from assessing the likelihood that certain performance metrics payments related to the SCB acquisition would be paid,
•$7.1 million decrease in our purchase option liability due to the expiration of the option, and
•$1.9 million decrease in accounts payable.
These decreases were partially offset by:
•$21.1 million increase in accrued and other long-term liabilities from a $7.0 million estimated working capital liability associated with the Allied Transaction, an increase in accruals associated with new remediation and compliance projects, the deferral of certain employer payroll taxes under the CARES Act and fees associated with
the Third Amendment of the Credit Facility as discussed further below in "-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Our Debt Agreements-Existing Credit Facility,"
•$6.7 million increase in capital lease obligations due to a sale-leaseback transaction, and
•$5.7 million increase in contract liabilities was due to billings in excess of costs and earnings associated with a specific remediation and compliance project.
Mezzanine Equity
Total mezzanine equity increased $27.4 million related to the initial liquidation preference of $26.0 million, net of offering costs, Original Issue Discount ("OID"), paid-in-kind dividends and accretion associated with our Preferred Stock offering.
Total Equity
Total equity decreased $33.0 million driven primarily by the $54.7 million net loss, $4.5 million in paid-in-kind and deemed dividends associated with our Preferred Stock, $1.6 million related to distributions to our non-controlling interest and $0.2 million in taxes paid from the net settlement of shares vested. These decreases were partially offset by a $25.5 million increase from the Allied Transaction and $2.5 million in share-based compensation.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary ongoing sources of liquidity and capital resources are cash on the balance sheet, cash flows generated by operating activities and borrowings under the Credit Facility. Due to longer sales cycles, driven by the increase in the size, scope and complexity of remediation and compliance projects that we are bidding on, we have experienced contract initiation delays and project completion delays that have adversely affected our revenue and overall liquidity. Our long and complex projects require us to expend large sums of working capital, and delays in payment receipts, project commencement or project completion can adversely affect our financial position and the cash flows that typically fund our expenditures.
As of December 31, 2020, we had total liquidity of approximately $51.7 million, comprised of $24.8 million of cash on hand and $26.9 million availability under the Revolving Loan.
Cash Flows
The following table is a summary of our cash flows:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $56.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $12.5 million compared to $68.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change in cash flows provided by operating activities was primarily attributable to the $80.0 million Brickhaven deemed termination payment received during the year ended December 31, 2019, a $1.3 million increase in cash paid for interest during the year ended December 31, 2020 and a $0.6 million decrease from all other operating activities. These decreases were partially offset by a $24.2 million reduction in net loss, excluding the $40.8 million impairment expense, $8.6 million in loss in extinguishment of debt and $9.7 million in gain on change in contingent payment liability. Also, there was a $1.6 million increase in accrued liabilities associated with the deferral of certain employer payroll taxes under the CARES Act.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities increased $57.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $42.1 million compared to net cash used in investing activities of $15.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change in cash flows provided by investing activities was primarily attributable to a $37.9 million increase in proceeds from the Allied Transaction, a $13.8 million decrease in capital expenditures and a $6.2 million combined increase in proceeds from the sale-leaseback transaction and other disposal activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities decreased $22.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $31.5 million of as compared to $53.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change in cash flows used in financing activities was primarily attributable to the $24.3 million net increase in proceeds received from the Preferred Stock offering during the year ended December 31, 2020 and a $1.3 million decrease in distributions to our non-controlling interest during the current period. These increases were partially offset by a $2.9 million increase in net payments made under our Credit Facility during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 and a $0.5 million increase from other financing activities.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities increased $82.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $68.7 million as compared to net cash used in operating activities of $13.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The change in cash flows provided by operating activities was primarily attributable to the $80.0 million Brickhaven deemed termination payment received during the year ended December 31, 2019, a $10.8 million decrease in cash paid for interest due to the debt refinancing during the year ended December 31, 2018, a $5.0 million decrease in cash paid for income taxes during the year ended December 31, 2019 and a $16.8 million improvements in working capital items from the year-over-year change in inventory. These decreases were partially offset by a $33.2 million increase in net loss.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities decreased $24.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $15.8 million compared to $40.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The change in cash flows used in investing activities was primarily attributable to $20.0 million used for business acquisitions during the year ended December 31, 2018, net of cash received, and a $4.6 million decrease in capital expenditures, net of proceeds.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities increased $82.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $54 million compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $28.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The change in cash flows used in financing activities was primarily attributable to the $59.2 million in proceeds received during the year ended December 31, 2018 from the issuance of common stock resulting from our IPO. In addition, there was a $30.5 million net increase in debt-related payments during the year ended December 31, 2019. These decreases were partially offset by a $7.5 million reduction in debt and IPO-related costs as $1.4 million was paid during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $8.9 million paid during the year ended December 31, 2018.
Working Capital
Our working capital, which we define as total current assets less total current liabilities, totaled $21.5 million at December 31, 2020 compared to a working capital deficit of $16.1 million as of December 31, 2019. This increase in net working capital for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to:
•increases in cash associated with proceeds from the Preferred Stock offering,
•increases in accounts receivable associated with the timing of collections associated with remediation and compliance projects,
•increases in restricted cash related to a specific remediation and compliance project,
•a decrease in current liabilities of discontinued operations held for sale due to the Allied Transaction,
•a decrease in notes payable, current maturities as proceeds from the Allied Transaction were used to pay down debt,
•a decrease in our asset retirement obligation associated with our maintenance and monitoring requirement payments and reduction in liability due to the change in our intended use of the related asset, and
•a decrease in our purchase option liability due to the expiration of the option.
These changes were partially offset by:
•a decrease in current assets of discontinued operations held for sale due to the Allied Transaction,
•decreases in inventory due to the recording of an obsolescence reserve and improved inventory management,
•an increase in accrued liabilities from the estimated working capital liability associated with the Allied Transaction,
•an increase in accruals associated with new remediation and compliance project and the deferral of certain employer payroll taxes under the CARES Act, and
•increases in contract liabilities due to billings in excess of costs and earnings associated with a specific remediation and compliance project.
Our Debt Agreements
Existing Credit Facility
On September 21, 2018, we entered into a credit agreement (the “Credit Facility”) by and among us, the lenders party thereto from time to time, and Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent (the “Administrative Agent”). The Credit Facility includes:
•A revolving loan not to exceed $50.0 million (the “Revolving Loan”);
•A term loan of $205.0 million (the “Closing Date Term Loan”); and
•A commitment to loan up to a further $25.0 million, which expires in March 2020 (the “Delayed Draw Commitment” and the term loans funded under such Delayed Draw Commitment, the “Delayed Draw Term Loan,” together with the Closing Date Term Loan, the “Term Loan”).
After the Fourth Amendment, all amounts associated with the Revolving Loan and the Term Loan under the Credit Facility will mature in July 2022, as discussed more fully below. The interest rates per annum applicable to the loans under the Credit Facility are based on a fluctuating rate of interest measured by reference to, at our election, either (i) the Eurodollar rate, currently LIBOR, or (ii) an alternative base rate. Various margins are added to the interest rate based upon our consolidated net leverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Facility). Customary fees are payable regarding the Credit Facility and include (i) commitment fees for the unused portions of the Credit Facility and (ii) fees on outstanding letters of credit. Amounts borrowed under the Credit Facility are secured by substantially all of the assets of the Company.
The Credit Facility contains various customary representations and warranties and restrictive covenants that, among other things and subject to specified exceptions, restrict the ability of us and our restricted subsidiaries to grant liens, incur indebtedness (including guarantees), make investments, engage in mergers and acquisitions, make dispositions of assets, make restricted payments or change the nature of our or our subsidiaries' business. The Credit Facility contains financial covenants related to the consolidated net leverage ratio and the fixed charge coverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Facility) that have been modified as described below.
The Credit Facility also contains certain affirmative covenants, including reporting requirements, such as delivering financial statements, certificates and notices of certain events, maintaining insurance and providing additional guarantees and collateral in certain circumstances.
The Credit Facility includes customary events of default, including non-payment of principal, interest or fees as they come due, violation of covenants, inaccuracy of representations or warranties, cross-default to certain other material indebtedness, bankruptcy and insolvency events, invalidity or impairment of guarantees or security interests, material judgments and change of control.
The Revolving Loan provides a principal amount of up to $50.0 million, reduced by outstanding letters of credit. As of December 31, 2020, $12.0 million was outstanding on the Revolving Loan and $11.1 million in letters of credit were outstanding.
But for Amendment No. 2 to Credit Agreement and Waiver (the “Second Amendment”), as of June 30, 2019, we would not have complied with the requirement to maintain a consolidated net leverage ratio of 3.75 to 1.00 under the Credit Facility. On August 13, 2019, we entered into the Second Amendment, under which, among other things, the required lenders agreed to waive such non-compliance.
Also, according to the terms of the Second Amendment, the Credit Facility was amended to revise the required financial covenant ratios, which have been modified as described below. As consideration for these accommodations, we agreed that amounts borrowed under the Delayed Draw Commitment would not exceed $15.0 million at any one time outstanding (without reducing the overall Delayed Draw Commitment amount). Further, the margin of interest charged on all outstanding loans was increased to 4.00% for loans based on LIBOR and 3.00% for loans based on the alternative base rate. The Second Amendment revised the amount of (i) the commitment fees to 0.35% at all times for the unused portions of the Credit Facility and (ii) fees on outstanding letters of credit to 3.35% at all times. The Second Amendment also added a requirement to
make 2 additional scheduled prepayments of outstanding loans under the Credit Facility, including a payment of $50.0 million on or before September 13, 2019 and an additional payment of $40.0 million on or before March 31, 2020. The $50.0 million payment was made before September 13, 2019, using proceeds of the Brickhaven deemed termination payment. The Second Amendment required us to pay the Administrative Agent an amendment fee in an amount equal to 1.00% of the total credit exposure under the Credit Facility immediately before the effectiveness of the Second Amendment and this fee was paid on August 16, 2020.
The Second Amendment also included revisions to the restrictive covenants, including removing certain exceptions to the restrictions on our ability to make acquisitions, make investments and make dividends or other distributions. After giving effect to the Second Amendment, we will not be permitted to make any distributions or dividends to our stockholders without the required lenders' consent.
In March 2020, the Company entered into Amendment No. 3 to Credit Agreement (the “Third Amendment”).
Under the terms of the Third Amendment, the Credit Facility was amended to waive the mandatory $40.0 million prepayment due on or before March 31, 2020, and to revise the required financial covenant ratios such that, after giving effect to the Third Amendment, we were not required to comply with any financial covenants through December 30, 2020. After December 30, 2020, we were required to comply with a maximum consolidated net leverage ratio of 6.50 to 1.00 from December 31, 2020 through June 29, 2021, decreasing to 6.00 to 1.00 from June 30, 2021 through December 30, 2021, and to 3.50 to 1.00 as of December 31, 2021 and thereafter. After giving effect to the Third Amendment, we were also required to comply with a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.00 to 1.00 as of December 31, 2020, increasing to 1.20 to 1.00 as of March 31, 2021 and thereafter.
The Third Amendment increased the maximum amount available to be borrowed under the Delayed Draw Commitment from $15.0 million to $25.0 million, subject to certain quarterly amortization payments. The Third Amendment also included revisions to the restrictive covenants, including increasing the amount of indebtedness that the Company may incur regarding certain capitalized leases from $50.0 million to $75.0 million.
Under the Third Amendment, the Company has agreed to make monthly amortization payments in respect of term loans beginning in April 2020, and move the maturity date for all loans under the Credit Agreement to July 31, 2022 (the “Maturity Date”). Also, if at any time after August 13, 2019, the outstanding principal amount of the Delayed Draw Term Loans exceeds $10.0 million, we will incur additional interest at a rate equal to 10.0% per annum on all daily average amounts exceeding $10.0 million which was paid on March 31, 2020 and will also be payable at the Maturity Date. Further, the Third Amendment requires mandatory prepayments of revolving loans with any cash held by the Company over $10.0 million, which excludes the amount of proceeds received in respect of the Preferred Stock Offering (as defined below) to the extent such funds are used for liquidity and general corporate purposes. The Company has also agreed to an increase of four percent (4%) to the interest rate applicable to the Closing Date Term Loan compounded monthly and paid in kind by adding such portion to the outstanding principal amount.
As a condition to entering into the Second Amendment, we were required to pay the Administrative Agent an amendment fee (the “Second Amendment Fee”) in an amount equal to 1.50% of the total credit exposure under the Credit Agreement, immediately before the effectiveness of the Second Amendment. Of the Second Amendment Fee, 0.50% was due and paid on October 15, 2019, and 1.00% of such Second Amendment was paid on August 16, 2020. We were also required to pay the Administrative Agent an amendment fee associated with the Third Amendment (the “Third Amendment Fee”) in an amount equal to 0.20% of the total credit exposure under the Credit Agreement, immediately before the effectiveness of the Third Amendment, with such Third Amendment Fee paid on June 30, 2020. Finally, we will also pay an additional fee with respect to the Third Amendment in the amount of $2.0 million, with such fee being due and payable on the Maturity Date.
In November 2020, the Company entered into Amendment No. 4 to Credit Agreement (the “Fourth Amendment”).
Under the terms of the Fourth Amendment, the Credit Facility was amended to revise the required financial covenant ratios such that, after giving effect to the Fourth Amendment, for the periods ending December 31, 2020 through March 30, 2021, we will be required to comply with a maximum consolidated leverage of 5.50 to 1.00, decreasing to 4.80 to 1.00 for the periods ended March 31, 2021 through September 29, 2021, to 4.50 to 1.00 for the periods ending September 30, 2021 through December 30, 2021, and to 3.50 to 1.00 as of December 31, 2021 and thereafter. After giving effect to the Fourth Amendment, we will also be required to comply with a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.00 to 1.00 as of March 31, 2021, increasing to 1.20 to 1.00 as of June 30, 2021 and thereafter.
Our ability to comply with such financial covenants depends on the Company’s forecasted leverage and adjusted EBITDA for the applicable periods, which could be adversely impacted by the effects of COVID-19 or other unforeseen factors. Our financial forecasts, which we believe are reasonable given current market conditions, indicate that the Company will be in compliance with all financial covenants through the one-year period following the issuance of these financial
statements. Those financial forecasts are highly dependent upon the demand for our byproduct sales, timing in new contract awards and completion of existing work. The current pandemic is making it more difficult to forecast future results, and as a result, it may have a significant impact on the Company’s results of operations, financial position, liquidity or capital resources. These significant risks may also have an adverse impact and cause us not to comply with our financial covenants. If we are not in compliance with our financial covenants, the Company could be required to seek waivers, forbearance or amendments from the Administrative Agent. There can be no assurance that we could obtain such waivers, forbearance, or amendments as any future agreements with the Administrative Agent are not considered in the Company’s control. If we are unable to comply in the future with such financial covenants upon delivery of our financial statements according to the terms of the Credit Facility, an Event of Default (as defined in the Credit Facility) will have occurred. The Administrative Agent can then, following a specified cure period, declare the unpaid principal amount of all outstanding loans, all interest accrued and unpaid thereon, and all other amounts payable to be immediately due and payable by the Company.
In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 470, Debt, the Company calculated the present value of the cash flows for purposes of applying the 10% cash flow test for the Third Amendment and concluded that the original and new debt instruments were substantially different, necessitating that the Third Amendment be accounted for as an extinguishment. As a result of the Company’s Third Amendment, the Company capitalized third-party fees of $1.6 million that will be amortized prospectively through interest expense, net in the Consolidated and Combined Statement of Operations using the effective interest method through the Maturity Date. Fees payable to the lenders (as discussed above) of $5.2 million were associated with the extinguishment of the old debt instrument and included in loss on extinguishment of debt in the accompanying Consolidated and Combined Statements of Operations. The Company wrote-off unamortized debt issuance costs of $3.4 million, which is included in loss on extinguishment of debt in the accompanying Consolidated and Combined Statements of Operations. Also, the Company calculated the present value of the cash flows for purposes of applying the 10% cash flow test for the Fourth Amendment and concluded that the original and new debt instruments were not substantially different, necessitating that the Fourth Amendment be accounted for as a modification.
Equipment Financing Facilities
We have entered into various equipment financing arrangements to finance the acquisition of certain equipment (the “Equipment Financing Facilities”). As of December 31, 2020, we had $22.6 million of equipment notes outstanding. Each of the Equipment Financing Facilities includes non-financial covenants, and, as of December 31, 2020, we complied with all such covenants.
Series A Preferred Stock
As a condition to the Third Amendment, the Company entered into an agreement with an investment fund affiliated with Bernhard Capital Partners Management, LP (“BCP”) to sell 26,000 shares of Series A Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share (the “Preferred Stock”), for net proceeds of approximately $25.2 million in a private placement (the “Preferred Stock Offering”). The Preferred Stock has an initial liquidation preference of $1,000 per share and pays a dividend at the rate of 10% per annum in cash, or 13% if the Company elects to pay dividends in-kind by adding such amount to the liquidation preference. The Company intends to pay dividends-in-kind for the foreseeable future. We used proceeds from the Preferred Stock Offering for liquidity and general corporate purposes.
For more information related to the Series A Preferred Stock, see Note 12 “Mezzanine Equity" to the notes to consolidated and combined financial statements included in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Contractual and Commercial Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of December 31, 2020.
(1)Includes paid-in-kind interest that will be compounded during 2021 and 2022 and will be payable at the Term Loan maturity date.
(2)We lease equipment and office facilities under non-cancellable operating leases.
(3)Represents minimum fees required that are owed at the Maturity Date.
(4)Contingent payments for acquisitions and the asset retirement obligation are not included in the table above because such payments' timing is uncertain. There are no uncertain tax positions.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are not financial measures determined in accordance with GAAP.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net earnings attributable to Charah Solutions, Inc. before loss on extinguishment of debt, impairment expense, gain on change in contingent payment liability, interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, equity-based compensation, non-recurring legal costs and expenses, the Brickhaven contract deemed termination revenue reversal and transaction-related expenses and other items. Adjusted EBITDA margin represents the ratio of Adjusted EBITDA to total revenue.
We believe Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are useful performance measures because they allow for an effective evaluation of our operating performance compared to our peers, without regard to our financing methods or capital structure. We exclude the items listed above from net loss attributable to Charah Solutions, Inc. in arriving at Adjusted EBITDA because these amounts are either non-recurring or can vary substantially within our industry depending upon accounting methods and book values of assets, capital structures and the method by which the assets were acquired. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to, or more meaningful than, net loss attributable to Charah Solutions, Inc. determined according to GAAP. Certain items excluded from Adjusted EBITDA are significant components in understanding and assessing a company’s financial performance, such as a company’s cost of capital and tax structure, as well as the historic costs of depreciable assets, none of which are reflected in Adjusted EBITDA. Our Adjusted EBITDA presentation should not be construed as an indication that our results will be unaffected by the items excluded from Adjusted EBITDA. Our computations of Adjusted EBITDA may not be identical to other similarly titled measures of other companies. We use Adjusted EBITDA margin to measure our business's success in managing our cost base and improving profitability. The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss attributable to Charah Solutions Inc., our most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, along with our Adjusted EBITDA margin.
The table below represents the consolidated financial information of Charah Solutions for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
(1)Represents expenses associated with the Amendment to the Credit Facility, SCB transaction expenses, severance costs, IPO-related costs and other miscellaneous items.
(2)Represents non-recurring legal and start-up costs associated with discontinued operations, including the setup of financial operations systems and modules, pre-contract expenses to obtain initial contracts, and the hiring of operational staff. Negative amounts represent insurance recoveries related to these matters.
(3)Adjusted EBITDA margin is a non-GAAP financial measure that represents the ratio of Adjusted EBITDA to total revenue. We use Adjusted EBITDA margin to measure the success of our businesses in managing our cost base and improving profitability.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. In connection with preparing our financial statements, we are required to make assumptions and estimates about future events and apply judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expense, and the related disclosures. We base our assumptions, estimates, and judgments on historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be relevant when preparing our consolidated and combined financial statements. Regularly, management reviews the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates, and judgments to ensure that our consolidated combined financial statements are presented fairly and in accordance with GAAP. However, because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ materially from our assumptions and estimates.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to our consolidated and combined financial statements included herein. Our critical accounting policies are described below to provide a better understanding of our estimates and assumptions about future events that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated and combined financial statements and accompanying notes. Significant accounting estimates are important to the representation of our financial position and results of operations and involve our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable according to the current facts and circumstances through the date of the issuance of our financial statements.
Revenue
To determine revenue recognition for contracts, we evaluate whether two or more contracts should be combined and accounted for as one single contract and whether the combined or single contract should be accounted for as more than one
performance obligation. This evaluation requires significant judgment and the decision to combine a group of contracts or separate a combined or single contract into multiple performance obligations could change the amount of revenue and profit recorded in a given period. Contracts are considered to have a single performance obligation if the promise to transfer the individual goods or services is not separately identifiable from other promises in the contracts primarily because we provide a service that involves multiple inter-related and integrated tasks to achieve the completion of a specific, single project. We allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation for contracts with multiple performance obligation using our best estimate of the stand-alone selling price of each distinct good or service in the contract.
For sales and service contracts where we have the right to consideration from the customer in an amount that corresponds directly with the value received by the customer based on our performance to date, revenue is recognized at a point in time when services are performed and contractually billable. Certain service contracts contain provisions dictating fluctuating rates per unit for the certain services in which the rates are not directly related to changes in the Company’s effort to perform under the contract. We recognize revenue based on the stand-alone selling price per unit for such contracts, calculated as the average rate per unit over the term of those contractual rates. This creates a contract asset or liability for the difference between the revenue recognized and the amount billed to the customer.
Under the typical payment terms of our services contracts, amounts are billed as work progresses in accordance with agreed-upon contractual terms, at periodic intervals (e.g., weekly, biweekly or monthly).
We recognize revenue over time, as performance obligations are satisfied, for substantially all of our construction contracts due to the continuous transfer of control to the customer. For most of our construction contracts, the customer contracts with us to provide a service that involves multiple inter-related and integrated tasks to complete a specific, single project and is therefore accounted for as a single performance obligation. We recognize revenue using the cost-to-cost input method, based primarily on contract costs incurred to date compared to total estimated contract costs. This method is the most accurate measure of our contract performance because it depicts the company’s performance in transferring control of goods or services promised to customers according to a reasonable measure of progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation.
Contract costs include all direct material, labor and subcontractor costs and indirect costs related to contract performance. The costs incurred that do not relate directly to transferring a service to the customer are excluded from the input method used to recognize revenue. Project mobilization costs are generally charged to the project as incurred when they are an integrated part of the performance obligation being transferred to the client. Pre-contract costs are expensed as incurred unless they are expected to be recovered from the client.
It is common for our contracts to contain contract provisions that give rise to variable consideration such as unpriced change orders or volume discounts that may either increase or decrease the transaction price. We estimate the amount of variable consideration at the expected value or most likely amount, depending on which is determined to be more predictive of the amount to which the Company will be entitled. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price when it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur or when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. Our estimates of variable consideration and determination of whether to include such amounts in the transaction price are based largely on our assessment of legal enforceability, anticipated performance, industry business practices, and any other information (historical, current or forecasted) that is reasonably available to us. Variable consideration associated with unapproved change orders is included in the transaction price only to the extent of costs incurred.
We provide limited warranties to customers for work performed under our contracts. Such warranties are not sold separately, assure that the services comply with the agreed-upon specifications and legal requirements and do not provide customers with a service in addition to assurance of compliance with agreed-upon specifications. Accordingly, these types of warranties are not considered to be separate performance obligations. Historically, warranty claims have not resulted in material costs incurred by the Company.
Due to the nature of the work required to be performed on many of our performance obligations, the estimation of total revenue and cost at completion is complex, subject to many variables and requires significant judgment. As a significant change in one or more of these estimates could affect the profitability of our contracts, we routinely review and update our contract-related estimates through a disciplined project review process in which management reviews the progress and execution of our performance obligations and the estimated costs at completion. As part of this process, management reviews information including, but not limited to, outstanding contract matters, progress towards completion, program schedule and the associated changes in estimates of revenue and costs. Management must make assumptions and estimates regarding the availability and productivity of labor, the complexity of the work to be performed, the availability and cost of materials, the performance of subcontractors, and the availability and timing of funding from the customer, along with other risks inherent in performing services under all contracts where we recognize revenue over-time using the cost-to-cost method.
We recognize changes in contract estimates on a cumulative catch-up basis in the period in which the changes are identified. Such changes in contract estimates can result in the recognition of revenue in a current period for performance obligations that were satisfied or partially satisfied in prior periods. Changes in contract estimates may also result in the reversal of previously recognized revenue if the current estimate differs from the previous estimate. If at any time the estimate of contract profitability indicates an anticipated loss on the contract, we recognize the total loss in the period it is identified.
Contracts are often modified to account for changes in contract specifications and requirements. Most of our contract modifications are for goods or services that are not distinct from existing contracts due to the significant integration provided in the context of the contract and are accounted for as if they were part of the original contract. The effect of a contract modification on the transaction price and our measure of progress for the performance obligation to which it relates is recognized as an adjustment to revenue (either as an increase in or a reduction of revenue) on a cumulative catch-up basis. We account for contract modifications when the modification results in the promise to deliver additional goods or services that are distinct and the increase in the price of the contract is for the same amount as the stand-alone selling price of the additional goods or services included in the modification.
We evaluate our contracts whether we are acting as the principal or as the agent when providing services, which we consider in determining if revenue should be reported on a gross or net basis. We determine the Company to be a principal if we control the specified service before that service is transferred to a customer.
Billing practices are governed by each project's contract terms based upon costs incurred, the achievement of milestones or predetermined schedules. Billings do not necessarily correlate with revenue recognized over time using the cost-to-cost input method. Contract assets include unbilled amounts typically resulting from revenue under long-term contracts when the revenue recognized exceeds the amount billed to the customer. Contract liabilities consist of advance payments and billings in excess of revenue recognized as well as deferred revenue.
Contract assets also include retainage, which represents amounts withheld by our clients from billings according to provisions in the contracts and may not be paid to us until the completion of specific tasks or the completion of the project and, in some instances, for even longer periods.
Our contract assets and liabilities are reported in a gross position on a contract-by-contract basis at the end of each reporting period. We include in current assets and liabilities contract assets and liabilities, which may extend beyond one year.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the cost of an acquisition purchase price over the fair value of acquired net assets, and such amounts are reported separately as goodwill on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Our total goodwill resulted from applying “push-down” accounting associated with BCP’s January 2017 acquisition of a controlling equity position in Charah Management and the acquisition of certain assets and liabilities of SCB.
Goodwill is not amortized, but instead is tested for impairment at least annually, at October 1st of each year, or more often if events or circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired. We test goodwill at the reporting unit level. We may elect to perform a qualitative assessment for our reporting units to determine whether it is more likely than not that the reporting units' fair value is greater than its carrying value. If a qualitative assessment is not performed, or if as a result of a qualitative assessment it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, then the reporting unit’s fair value is compared to its carrying value. Fair value is typically estimated using an income approach based on discounted cash flows. However, when appropriate, we may also use a market approach. The income approach is based on the long-term projected future cash flows of the reporting unit. We discount the estimated cash flows to present value using a weighted average cost of capital that considers factors such as market assumptions, the timing of the cash flows, and the risks inherent in those cash flows. We believe that this approach is appropriate because it provides a fair value estimate based upon the reporting units’ expected long-term performance considering the economic and market conditions that generally affect our business. The market approach estimates fair value by measuring the aggregate market value of publicly traded companies with similar characteristics to our business as a multiple of their reported earnings. We then apply that multiple to the reporting units’ earnings to estimate their fair values. We believe that this approach may also be appropriate in certain circumstances because it provides a fair value estimate using valuation inputs from entities with operations and economic characteristics comparable to our reporting units. We compute fair value using several factors, including projected future operating results, economic projections, anticipated future cash flows, comparable marketplace data, and the cost of capital. There are inherent uncertainties related to these factors and to our judgment in applying them in our analysis. However, we believe our methodology for estimating the fair value of our reporting units is reasonable. If the reporting unit's carrying value exceeds its fair value, goodwill is written down to its implied fair value.
The Company performed quantitative assessments of its Environmental Solutions and Maintenance and Technical Services reporting units as of October 1, 2020. The Environmental Solutions and Maintenance and Technical Services reporting
units' fair values, as calculated, were approximately 15.1% and 7.2%, respectively, greater than their book values as of October 1, 2020.
After the Allied Transaction, we concluded that the Company has two components: (i) sales and operations, and (ii) construction. Each component constitutes a business as defined by ASC 805, Business Combinations, has discrete financial information, and segment management reviews the operating results during monthly meetings. Based on a review of the relevant qualitative and quantitative factors, we concluded that these components were aggregated to be a single reporting unit as they were deemed to have similar economic characteristics. The Company performed a quantitative assessment of its single reporting unit's fair value immediately following the completion of the Allied Transaction, and the reporting unit's fair value was approximately 7.3% greater than the book value as of November 30, 2020.
The valuation used to test goodwill for impairment depends on several significant estimates and assumptions, including macroeconomic conditions, growth rates, competitive activities, cost containment, margin expansion and the Company's business plans. The most significant assumptions utilized in determining the estimated fair value of our reporting unit are the net sales and earnings growth rates (including residual growth rates) and the discount rate. The residual growth rate represents the rate at which the reporting unit is expected to grow beyond the shorter-term business planning period. The residual growth rate utilized in our fair value estimate is consistent with the reporting unit operating plans and approximates expected long-term category market growth rates and inflation. The discount rate, which is consistent with a weighted average cost of capital that is likely to be expected by a market participant, is based upon industry-required rates of return, including consideration of both debt and equity components of the capital structure. Our discount rate may be affected by adverse changes in the macroeconomic environment, volatility in the equity and debt markets or other factors. We believe these estimates and assumptions are reasonable. However, future changes in the judgments, assumptions and estimates used in our impairment testing for goodwill, including discount and tax rates or future cash flow projections, could result in significantly different estimates of the fair values.
Some of the inherent estimates and assumptions used in determining the reporting unit's fair value are outside management control, including interest rates, cost of capital, tax rates and credit ratings. Given the current COVID-19 global pandemic and the uncertainties regarding the potential financial impact on the Company's business, there can be no assurance that the Company's estimates and assumptions regarding the impact of COVID-19 and the recovery period made for purposes of the goodwill impairment testing performed during our 2020 fiscal year will prove to be accurate predictions of the future. While the Company believes it has made reasonable estimates and assumptions to calculate the reporting unit's fair value, it is possible changes could occur. As for the Company’s reporting unit, if in future years, the reporting unit’s actual results are not consistent with the Company’s estimates and assumptions used to calculate fair value, the Company may be required to recognize material impairments to goodwill. The Company will continue to monitor its reporting unit for any triggering events or other signs of impairment. The Company may be required to perform additional impairment testing based on changes in the economic environment, disruptions to the Company’s business, significant declines in operating results of the Company’s reporting unit, further sustained deterioration of the Company’s market capitalization, and other factors, which could result in impairment charges in the future. Although management cannot predict when improvements in macroeconomic conditions will occur, if contract awards decline significantly in the future or if the operational activity or the market capitalization deteriorates significantly from current levels, it is reasonably likely the Company will be required to record impairment charges in the future.
Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
We assess indefinite-lived intangible asset (trade name) at least annually as of October 1 for impairment, or more frequently if certain events occur or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset below its carrying value. The Charah Solutions trade name fair value is based upon the income approach, primarily utilizing the relief from royalty methodology. This methodology assumes that a third party would be willing to pay a royalty to obtain the rights to use the comparable asset in place of ownership. An impairment loss is recognized when the intangible asset's estimated fair value is less than the carrying value. Fair value calculation requires significant judgments in determining both the assets’ estimated cash flows and the appropriate discount and royalty rates applied to those cash flows to determine fair value. Variations in economic conditions or a change in general consumer demands, operating results estimates or the application of alternative assumptions could produce significantly different results.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an impairment of our Charah Solutions trade name intangible asset of $21.0 million. As part of the October 1, 2020 annual impairment test, we identified a decrease in the royalty rate used in the valuation primarily attributable to the Company's recent performance.
Some of the inherent estimates and assumptions used in determining the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset are outside management control, including interest rates, cost of capital, tax rates and credit ratings. Given the current COVID-19 global pandemic and the uncertainties regarding the potential financial impact on the Company's business, there can
be no assurance that the Company's estimates and assumptions regarding the impact of COVID-19 and the recovery period made for purposes of the indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment testing performed during our 2020 fiscal year will prove to be accurate predictions of the future. While the Company believes it has made reasonable estimates and assumptions to calculate the indefinite-lived intangible asset's fair value, it is possible changes could occur. As for the indefinite-lived intangible asset, the most significant assumptions used are the revenue growth rate, the royalty rate, and the discount rate. A decrease in the revenue growth rate, a decrease in the royalty rate, or an increase in the discount rate could result in a future impairment. We will continue to monitor our Charah Solutions trade name for any triggering events or other signs of impairment. We may be required to perform additional impairment testing based on changes in the economic environment, disruptions to our business, significant declines in our operating results and other factors that could result in impairment charges in the future. Although management cannot predict when improvements in macroeconomic conditions will occur, if contract awards decline significantly in the future or if operational activity deteriorates significantly from current levels, it is reasonably likely the Company will be required to record impairment charges in the future.
Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets, including tangible and intangible assets with finite lives, are amortized over their respective lives to their estimated residual values and are reviewed for impairment whenever certain triggering events may indicate impairment. When such events or changes in circumstances occur, a recoverability test is performed comparing projected undiscounted cash flows from an asset or asset group's use and eventual disposition to its carrying value. If the projected undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying value, an impairment would be recorded for the excess of the carrying value over the fair value, which is determined by discounting future cash flows.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded asset impairments of $6.4 million for the structural fill asset, $7.9 million for the technology construction in progress and equipment assets and $1.5 million for the technology intangible asset. Please see Note 5. "Balance Sheet Items" and Note 8. "Goodwill and Intangible Assets" to our consolidated financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, included elsewhere herein, for a discussion of these impairments.
Deferred Taxes, Valuation Allowance
As discussed in Note 19 to our consolidated financial statements, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our consolidated and combined financial statements or tax returns. We record a valuation allowance to reduce certain deferred tax assets to amounts that are more-likely-than-not to be realized. We evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets by assessing the valuation allowance and adjusting the amount of such allowance, if necessary. The factors used to assess the likelihood of realization include our forecast of future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards, future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences and available tax planning strategies that could be implemented to realize the net deferred tax assets.
Based on the available evidence as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we could not conclude it is more likely than not certain deferred tax assets will be realized. Therefore, a valuation allowance of $17.2 million and $12.9 million, respectively was recorded against our deferred tax assets. We will continue to evaluate the need for a valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets in future periods.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please see Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements” and “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements” to our historical consolidated financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, included elsewhere herein, for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
Under the JOBS Act, we meet the definition of an “emerging growth company,” which allows us to have an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards under Section 107(b) of the JOBS Act. We intend to take advantage of all of the reduced reporting requirements and exemptions, including the longer phase-in periods for adopting new or revised financial accounting standards under Section 107(b) of the JOBS Act until we are no longer an emerging growth company.