Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains “forward-looking statements” that reflect our future plans, estimates, beliefs and expected performance. We caution that assumptions, expectations, projections, intentions or beliefs about future events may, and often do, vary from actual results, and the differences can be material. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” at the beginning of this report for an explanation of these types of statements.
For discussion related to changes in financial condition and results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, refer to “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 27, 2020.
Overview
We are an independent E&P company focused on the acquisition and development of onshore, unconventional crude oil and natural gas resources in the United States. OPNA and OP Permian conduct our E&P activities and own our oil and gas properties located in the North Dakota and Montana regions of the Williston Basin and the Texas region of the Permian Basin, respectively. In addition to our E&P segment, we also operate a midstream business primarily through OMP, a premier gathering and processing master limited partnership that owns, develops, operates and acquires a diversified portfolio of midstream assets in North America. We own a substantial majority of the general partner and a majority of the outstanding units of OMP. We derive significant cash flows from the midstream segment through distributions from our ownership of OMP limited partner units, distributions from the general partner and our retained ownership of equity interests in certain OMP subsidiaries.
Recent Developments
Emergence from voluntary reorganization under Chapter 11
Due to the volatile market environment that drove a severe downturn in crude oil and natural gas prices in early 2020, as well as the unprecedented impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we evaluated strategic alternatives to reduce our debt, increase financial flexibility and position us for long-term success, and on September 30, 2020, the Debtors filed the Chapter 11 Cases. On November 10, 2020, the Bankruptcy Court confirmed the Plan, and the Debtors emerged from bankruptcy on November 19, 2020.
Although we are no longer a debtor-in-possession, the Debtors operated as debtors-in-possession through the pendency of the Chapter 11 Cases. As such, certain aspects of the Chapter 11 Cases and related matters are described below in order to provide context to our financial condition and results of operations for the period presented.
In accordance with the Plan, the following significant transactions occurred on the Emergence Date:
•Shares of the Predecessor’s common stock outstanding immediately prior to the Emergence Date were cancelled, and on the Emergence Date, we issued (i) 20,000,000 shares of the Successor’s common stock pro rata to holders of the Predecessor’s Notes (as defined below) and (ii) 1,621,622 warrants (the “Warrants”) pro rata to holders of the Predecessor’s common stock. The Warrants are exercisable to purchase one share of the Successor’s common stock per Warrant at an initial exercise price of $94.57 and expire on November 19, 2024.
•All outstanding obligations under the following notes (collectively, the “Notes”) issued by the Predecessor were cancelled: (i) 6.50% senior unsecured notes due 2021; (ii) 6.875% senior unsecured notes due 2022; (iii) 6.875% senior unsecured notes due 2023; (iv) 6.250% senior unsecured notes due 2026; and (v) 2.625% senior unsecured convertible notes due 2023.
•Oasis Petroleum Inc., as parent, OPNA, as borrower, and Wells Fargo, as administrative agent, issuing bank and swingline lender, and the lenders party thereto entered into a reserves-based credit agreement (the “Oasis Credit Facility”) with maximum aggregate commitments in the amount of $1,500.0 million and an initial borrowing base of $575.0 million.
•The Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated as of October 16, 2018 (as amended prior to the Emergence Date, the “Predecessor Credit Facility”), by and among the Predecessor, as borrower, the lenders party thereto, and Wells Fargo, as administrative agent, was terminated and holders of claims under the Predecessor Credit Facility had such obligations refinanced through the Oasis Credit Facility. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Specified Default Interest (as defined in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 15-Long-Term Debt”) related to the Predecessor Credit Facility was discharged, released and deemed waived by the lenders.
•The Senior Secured Superpriority Debtor-in-Possession Credit Agreement, dated as of October 2, 2020 (the “DIP Credit Facility”), by and among the Predecessor, as borrower, our subsidiaries party thereto, as guarantors, the lenders party thereto, and Wells Fargo, as administrative agent, was terminated and the holders of claims under the DIP Credit Facility had such obligations refinanced through the Oasis Credit Facility.
•Mirada Claims (as defined in the Plan) were treated in accordance with the Settlement and Mutual Release Agreement dated September 28, 2020 (the “Mirada Settlement Agreement”) with Mirada Energy, LLC and certain related parties (collectively, “Mirada”).
•The holders of other secured claims, other priority claims and general unsecured claims received payment in full in cash upon emergence or through the ordinary course of business after the Emergence Date.
•We adopted the 2020 LTIP effective on the Emergence Date and reserved 2,402,402 shares of our Successor’s common stock for distribution under the 2020 LTIP. No shares were issued under the 2020 LTIP as of the Emergence Date.
In addition, on the Emergence Date, the conditions were satisfied for the waiver, discharge and forgiveness of the OMP Specified Default Interest (as defined in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 15-Long-Term Debt”) related to the revolving credit facility among OMP, as parent, OMP Operating LLC, a subsidiary of OMP, as borrower, Wells Fargo, as administrative agent, and the lenders party thereto (the “OMP Credit Facility”), and payment of the OMP Specified Default Interest was permanently waived by the lenders party to the OMP Credit Facility.
As of the Emergence Date, by operation of and in accordance with the Plan, the Board of Directors consisted of seven members, comprised of our Chief Executive Officer, Thomas B. Nusz, and six new members, Douglas E. Brooks, Samantha Holroyd, John Jacobi, Robert McNally, Cynthia L. Walker and John Lancaster.
Change in Chief Executive Officer
On December 22, 2020, Thomas B. Nusz retired as Chief Executive Officer and as a director of Oasis Petroleum Inc. In light of Mr. Nusz’s retirement, the Board of Directors appointed Douglas E. Brooks to serve as Chief Executive Officer during the period that it conducts a search for a new Chief Executive Officer. Mr. Brooks will continue to serve as Board Chair, in addition to his role as Chief Executive Officer.
Market conditions and COVID-19
On March 13, 2020, the United States declared the COVID-19 pandemic a national emergency, and most states, including Texas, North Dakota and Montana, and many municipalities have declared public health emergencies. Along with these declarations, there have been extraordinary and wide-ranging actions taken by international, federal, state and local public health and governmental authorities to contain and combat the outbreak and spread of COVID-19 in regions across the United States and the world, including mandates for many individuals to substantially restrict daily activities and for many businesses to curtail or cease normal operations. These containment measures, while aiding in the prevention of further outbreak of COVID-19, have resulted in a severe drop in energy demand and general economic activity. To the extent COVID-19 continues or worsens, governments may impose additional similar restrictions. We have taken, and continue to take, proactive steps to manage any disruption in our business caused by COVID-19. For instance, even though our operations were not required to close, we were early adopters in employing a work-from-home system and have deployed additional safety protocols at our operating sites in order to keep our employees and contractors safe and to keep our operations running without material disruption.
The rapid and unprecedented decreases in energy demand have impacted certain elements of our distribution channels. We are also experiencing impacts from downstream markets, as certain pipelines no longer have the ability to transport production as refineries reduce activity or exercise force majeure clauses. Additionally, inventory surpluses have overwhelmed U.S. storage capacity, leading to a further strain on the supply chain. We elected to shut in production of certain wells, primarily during the second quarter of 2020, and the constraints on the supply chain could force us to shut in production in the future.
In March 2020, OPEC and non-OPEC, oil-producing countries, including Russia, failed to agree to production cuts which were intended to stabilize and support global crude oil commodity prices. With no agreement in place, certain large international crude oil producers, including Saudi Arabia and Russia, began to deeply discount sales of their crude oil and committed to ramping up production in an attempt to protect, or increase, their global market share. The impact of this increased production was coupled with significant demand declines caused by the global response to COVID-19. These extreme supply and demand dynamics contributed to significant crude oil price declines, which have and will continue to negatively impact U.S. producers, including us. Although in April 2020, OPEC and other non-OPEC oil-producing countries, including Russia, came to an agreement to cut limited amounts of production, we cannot predict future impacts to crude oil production and global economic activities.
In response to the foregoing market conditions, we suspended our drilling and completion operations in the second quarter of 2020 and significantly reduced our planned capital expenditures for 2020. In addition, as a result of the low commodity price environment coupled with uncertainty related to the continuing economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we reduced our workforce during the second quarter of 2020 to adjust to a lower level of activity and operate in a cost-efficient manner in the current environment.
Dakota Access Pipeline
Our ability to market our production depends, in substantial part, on the availability and capacity of gathering systems, pipelines and processing facilities owned and operated by midstream operators. The impact of pending and future legal proceedings on these systems, pipelines and facilities can affect our ability to market our products and have a negative impact on realized pricing. On July 6, 2020, the operator of DAPL was ordered by a U.S. District court to halt oil flow and empty the pipeline within 30 days while an EIS is completed. On July 15, 2020, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit issued a temporary administrative stay while the court considers the merits of a longer-term emergency stay order through the appeals process. On January 26, 2021, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit upheld the U.S. District court’s ruling that an EIS is needed and also reaffirmed its earlier decision which allows DAPL to operate through the EIS process. We regularly use DAPL in addition to other outlets to market our crude oil in the Williston Basin to end markets. To mitigate the risks associated with a potential shutdown of DAPL, we have proactively arranged for portions of our Williston Basin crude oil volumes to be sold at alternative outlets at fixed differentials to NYMEX WTI. In the event DAPL were to cease operating, we would anticipate Williston Basin crude oil prices to weaken materially before improving as the market adapts to rail transportation.
Commodity Prices
Our revenue, profitability and future growth rate depend substantially on factors beyond our control, such as economic, political and regulatory developments as well as competition from other sources of energy. Prices for crude oil and natural gas can fluctuate widely in response to relatively minor changes in the global and regional supply of and demand for crude oil and natural gas, as well as market uncertainty, economic conditions and a variety of additional factors. Since the inception of our crude oil and natural gas activities, commodity prices have experienced significant fluctuations and may fluctuate widely in the future.
Due to a combination of the foregoing COVID-19 pandemic-related pressures and geopolitical pressures on the global supply and demand balance for crude oil and related products, commodity prices sharply declined in the first half of 2020. While crude oil prices have increased since hitting historic lows in early 2020, prices remain at depressed levels. The commodity price environment is expected to continue to remain depressed for some time based on oversupply, the global economic recession, and uncertainties related to the COVID-19, including the impact new virus strains, the risk of renewed restrictions and the pace of deployment of vaccines. If prices for crude oil, natural gas and NGLs decline or for an extended period of time remain at depressed levels, such commodity price environment could materially and adversely affect our financial position, our results of operations, the quantities of crude oil and natural gas reserves that we can economically produce and our access to capital.
In an effort to improve price realizations from the sale of our crude oil, natural gas and NGLs, we manage our commodities marketing activities in-house, which enables us to market and sell our crude oil, natural gas and NGLs to a broad array of potential purchasers. We enter into crude oil, natural gas and NGL sales contracts with purchasers who have access to transportation capacity, utilize derivative financial instruments to manage our commodity price risk and enter into physical delivery contracts to manage our price differentials. Due to the availability of other markets and pipeline connections, we do not believe that the loss of any single crude oil, natural gas or NGL customer would have a material adverse effect on our results of operations or cash flows. Please see “Part I, Item 1. Business-Exploration and Production Operations-Marketing and major customers.”
Our average net realized crude oil prices and average price differentials are shown in the tables below for the periods presented:
__________________
(1)Realized crude oil prices do not include the effect of derivative contract settlements.
(2)Price differential reflects the difference between our realized crude oil prices and NYMEX WTI crude oil index prices.
We sell a significant amount of our crude oil production through gathering systems connected to multiple pipeline and rail facilities. As of December 31, 2020, 92% of our gross operated crude oil production was connected to gathering systems, which originate at the wellhead and reduce the need to transport barrels by truck from the wellhead. Our market optionality on these crude oil gathering systems allows us to shift volumes between pipeline and rail markets in order to optimize price realizations. Expansions of both rail and pipeline facilities in both the Williston and Permian Basins have reduced prior constraints on crude oil takeaway capacity in the areas and improved our price differentials received at the lease.
Expected future commodity prices play a significant role in determining impairment of proved oil and gas properties. As a result of the significant decline in commodity prices in the first quarter of 2020, we recorded impairment charges of $3.8 billion and $637.3 million on our proved oil and gas properties in the Williston Basin and in the Permian Basin, respectively, as of March 31, 2020 (Predecessor). Upon adoption of fresh start accounting, our proved oil and gas properties were recorded at their estimated fair values as of the Emergence Date. NYMEX WTI forward strip prices increased between the Emergence Date and December 31, 2020. However, commodity prices remain volatile, and if expected future commodity prices decline, we may record impairment charges in the future.
Results of Operations
Upon emergence from bankruptcy, we adopted fresh start accounting, which resulted in us becoming a new entity for financial reporting purposes. Accordingly, the consolidated financial statements on or after November 19, 2020 are not comparable to the consolidated financial statements prior to that date. References to “Successor” relate to our financial position and results of operations as of and subsequent to the Emergence Date. References to “Predecessor” relate to our financial position prior to, and our results of operations through and including, the Emergence Date.
Upon adoption of fresh start accounting, our assets and liabilities were recorded at their estimated fair values as of the Emergence Date. As a result, the impact to the comparability of the Predecessor and Successor results is generally limited to those areas associated with the basis in and accounting for our oil and gas and other properties, most notably, depreciation, depletion and amortization (“DD&A”) and impairment.
Highlights
During the year ended December 31, 2020:
•We emerged from bankruptcy with a best-in-class balance sheet.
•Our production volumes averaged 64,717 Boepd (66.8% oil).
•E&P and other capital expenditures, excluding capitalized interest, were $14.9 million for the period from November 20, 2020 through December 31, 2020 (the “2020 Successor Period”) and $194.6 million for the period from January 1, 2020 through November 19, 2020 (the “2020 Predecessor Period”).
•Lease operating expenses decreased $1.20 per Boe in 2020 from $6.95 per Boe in 2019.
•Reported year-end estimated net proved reserves of 182.5 MMBoe with a Standardized Measure of $948.9 million and PV-10 of $1,115.0 million.
Revenues
Our crude oil and natural gas revenues are derived from the sale of crude oil and natural gas production. These revenues do not include the effects of derivative instruments and may vary significantly from period to period as a result of changes in volumes of production sold or changes in commodity prices. Our purchased oil and gas sales are primarily derived from the sale of crude oil and natural gas purchased through our marketing activities primarily to optimize transportation costs, for blending at our crude oil terminal or to cover production shortfalls. Revenues and expenses from crude oil and natural gas sales and purchases are recorded on a gross basis when we act as a principal in these transactions by assuming control of the purchased crude oil or natural gas before it is transferred to the customer. In certain cases, we enter into sales and purchases with the same counterparty in contemplation of one another, and these transactions are recorded on a net basis.
Our midstream revenues are primarily derived from natural gas services (gathering, compression, processing and gas lift supply, as well as sales of residue gas and NGLs related to third-party natural gas purchase arrangements), crude oil services (gathering, terminaling and transportation) and water services (gathering and disposal of produced and flowback water and freshwater distribution). Our other services revenues are derived from equipment rentals, and also included revenues for well completion services and product sales prior to our transition of our well fracturing services from Oasis Well Services LLC (“OWS”), a wholly-owned subsidiary, to a third-party provider during the first quarter of 2020 (the “Well Services Exit”). A portion of our midstream revenues and substantially all of our other services revenues are from services provided to our operated wells. Intercompany revenues for work performed for our ownership interests are eliminated in consolidation, and only the revenues related to non-affiliated interest owners and other third-party customers are included in midstream and other services revenues.
The following table summarizes our revenues for the periods presented (in thousands):
Crude oil and natural gas revenues. Crude oil and natural gas revenues decreased $718.7 million, or 51%, from $1,408.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was attributable to a $438.4 million decrease due to lower crude oil and natural gas sales prices coupled with a $280.2 million decrease due to lower crude oil and natural gas production sold year over year. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our crude oil and natural gas revenues were negatively impacted by recent market conditions, which caused a significant decline in our realized prices for crude oil, natural gas and NGLs. Excluding the effect of derivative settlements, average crude oil sales prices decreased 32%, and average natural gas sales prices, which include the value for natural gas and NGLs, decreased 21% year over year. Due to the depressed commodity price environment in 2020, we reduced our E&P capital expenditures, curtailed flush production on newly completed wells and temporarily shut in certain wells during the second and third quarters of 2020. Average daily production sold decreased by 23,344 Boepd year over year, primarily driven by temporary well shut-ins, partially offset by new well completions. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we completed 20.6 total net wells in the Williston Basin and 14.0 total net wells in the Permian Basin.
The following table summarizes the changes in production and average realized prices for the periods presented:
__________________
(1)The effect of derivative settlements includes the cash received or paid for the cumulative gains or losses on our commodity derivatives settled in the periods presented, but does not include proceeds from derivative liquidations. Our commodity derivatives do not qualify for or were not designated as hedging instruments for accounting purposes.
(2)Natural gas prices include the value for natural gas and NGLs.
Purchased oil and gas sales. Purchased oil and gas sales, which consist primarily of the sale of crude oil purchased to optimize transportation costs, for blending at our crude oil terminal or to cover production shortfalls, decreased $215.2 million in 2020 from $408.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to lower crude oil volumes purchased and then subsequently sold in the Williston Basin coupled with lower crude oil sales prices, partially offset by an increase in crude oil volumes purchased and then subsequently sold in the Permian Basin.
Midstream revenues. Midstream revenues decreased $19.6 million in 2020 from $212.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily driven by a $9.5 million decrease due to lower sales related to third-party natural gas purchase agreements driven by lower NGL and residue gas prices during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, coupled with a $5.1 million decrease in produced and flowback water gathering and disposal revenues and a $4.0 million decrease in crude oil gathering, terminaling and transportation revenues. The lower midstream revenues for water and crude oil services were primarily attributable to a decrease in production from our E&P business segment year over year.
Other services revenues. Other services revenues decreased by $34.9 million from $42.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was primarily attributable to a decrease in well completion revenues due to the Well Services Exit in the first quarter of 2020.
Expenses and other income
The following table summarizes our operating expenses, gain (loss) on sale of properties, other income and expenses, income tax benefit, net income attributable to non-controlling interests and net loss attributable to Oasis for the periods presented (in thousands, except per Boe of production):
Lease operating expenses. Lease operating expenses decreased $87.2 million in 2020 from $223.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to lower workover expenses and fixed costs driven by lower activity. Lease operating expenses decreased $1.20 per Boe in 2020 from $6.95 per Boe in 2019.
Midstream expenses. Midstream expenses represent costs of product sales related to third-party natural gas purchase arrangements as well as non-affiliated interest owners’ share of operating expenses incurred by our midstream business. The $8.6 million decrease for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily related to a $3.7 million decrease in natural gas operating and maintenance expenses driven by a decrease in our operated Williston Basin production and a $2.6 million decrease in natural gas purchases from third parties due to lower prices,
coupled with decreases in expenses related to crude oil and water services of $1.1 million and $1.0 million, respectively, as a result of lower activity.
Other services expenses. Other services expenses represent non-affiliated working interest owners’ share of expenses incurred by OWS related to equipment rental services provided to our operated wells, and prior to the Well Services Exit, also included the non-affiliated share of well completion service costs and costs of goods sold. The $22.1 million decrease for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily attributable to a decrease in well completion expenses due to decreased activity as a result of the Well Services Exit in the first quarter of 2020.
Gathering, processing and transportation expenses. GPT expenses decreased $33.8 million year over year, which was attributable to a $20.7 million decrease in natural gas gathering and processing expenses and a $13.1 million decrease in crude oil gathering and transportation expenses, both related to a decrease in our production volumes. Cash GPT expenses, which excludes non-cash valuation adjustments, increased $0.03 per Boe in 2020 from $3.93 for the year ended December 31, 2019. For a definition of Cash GPT and a reconciliation of GPT to Cash GPT, see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below.
Purchased oil and gas expenses. Purchased oil and gas expenses, which represent the crude oil purchased primarily to optimize transportation costs, for blending at our crude oil terminal or to cover production shortfalls, decreased $215.9 million from $409.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to lower crude oil volumes purchased in the Williston Basin, coupled with lower crude oil prices, partially offset by an increase in crude oil volumes purchased in the Permian Basin.
Production taxes. Production taxes decreased $61.2 million in 2020 from $112.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the decrease in crude oil and natural gas revenues and production volumes year over year. The production tax rate as a percentage of crude oil and natural gas sales decreased 0.5% year over year from 8.0% in 2019, primarily due to an increase in the proportion of our total production volumes from the Permian Basin, which bear a lower average production tax rate than our production in the Williston Basin.
Depreciation, depletion and amortization. DD&A expense decreased $480.0 million, or 61%, from $787.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in DD&A related to oil and gas properties of $482.3 million, of which $282.4 million was due to a lower average unit-of-production rate and $199.9 million was due to the decrease in production volumes year over year. The average unit-of-production DD&A rate decreased $11.92 per Boe, or 50%, in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to the impairment charge recorded by the Predecessor on our proved oil and gas properties in the first quarter of 2020 due to the significant decline in commodity prices. The average unit-of-production DD&A rate for the 2020 Successor Period was $5.25 per Boe, which is based on the estimated fair value of proved oil and gas properties recorded on the Emergence Date under fresh start accounting. The decrease in DD&A for oil and gas properties year over year was offset by an increase in DD&A for other properties of $2.4 million, which was related to additional assets placed into service, coupled with the acceleration of DD&A expense on assets related to mechanical refrigeration units which were decommissioned at our natural gas processing complex in Wild Basin.
Exploration expenses. Exploration expenses decreased $4.0 million in 2020 from $6.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to a $2.9 million decrease in write-off costs related to exploratory well locations that are no longer in our current development plan, coupled with a $0.7 million decrease in geological and geophysical expenses.
Rig termination. As a result of our reducing our capital expenditure program in 2020, we elected to early terminate certain drilling rig contracts in the Permian Basin and the Predecessor recorded rig termination expense of $1.3 million during the 2020 Predecessor Period, as compared to early termination fees of $0.4 million recorded during the year ended December 31, 2019. The Successor has not incurred any rig termination charges.
Impairment. No impairment charges were recorded during the 2020 Successor Period. Impairment expense increased to $4.9 billion for the 2020 Predecessor Period as compared to $10.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the following:
•Proved oil and gas properties. We recorded an impairment charge of $4.4 billion on our proved oil and gas properties, including $3.8 billion in the Williston Basin and $637.3 million in the Permian Basin, during the 2020 Predecessor Period due to the significant decline in commodity prices. No impairment charges on proved oil and gas properties were recorded for the year ended December 31, 2019.
•Unproved oil and gas properties. We recorded impairment losses on our unproved oil and gas properties of $401.1 million and $5.4 million for the 2020 Predecessor Period and the year ended December 31, 2019, respectively, as a result of leases expiring or expected to expire as well as drilling plan uncertainty on certain acreage of unproved properties.
•Other property and equipment. During the 2020 Predecessor Period, we recorded impairment charges of $108.3 million to reduce the carrying values of our midstream assets to their estimated fair values as a result of lower forecasted throughput volumes for our midstream assets driven by the significant decline in expected future
commodity prices during the first quarter of 2020. No impairment charges were recorded on our midstream assets for the year ended December 31, 2019.
•Assets held for sale. During the 2020 Predecessor Period and the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded impairment losses of $1.4 million and $4.4 million, respectively, to adjust the carrying value of certain inventory and equipment held for sale related to the Well Services Exit to the estimated fair value less costs to sell (see “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 13-Assets Held for Sale”). In addition, we recorded an impairment loss of $14.5 million during the 2020 Predecessor Period related to certain well services equipment previously classified as held for sale that was no longer probable to be sold within one year.
•Inventory. During the 2020 Predecessor Period, we recorded impairment losses of $7.4 million, $1.8 million and $1.4 million to adjust the carrying values of our crude oil inventory, equipment and materials inventory and long-term linefill inventory, respectively, to their net realizable values. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded an impairment loss of $0.5 million to adjust the carrying value of our long-term linefill inventory to its net realizable value.
•Right-of-use asset. During the 2020 Predecessor Period, we recorded an impairment loss of $1.1 million primarily related to the impairment of a right-of-use asset associated with decommissioning leased mechanical refrigeration units at our natural gas processing complex in Wild Basin. No impairment charges were recorded on our right-of-use assets for the year ended December 31, 2019.
General and administrative expenses. Our G&A expenses increased $36.0 million in 2020 from $123.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to pre-petition restructuring expenses of $34.7 million incurred prior to the Petition Date of the Chapter 11 Cases. G&A expenses included non-cash amortization for equity-based compensation of $31.6 million and $33.6 million in the 2020 Predecessor Period and the year ended December 31, 2019, respectively. All outstanding share-based equity awards vested as of the Emergence Date, and the remaining unrecognized compensation cost for the vested awards was expensed in the 2020 Predecessor Period. In the 2020 Successor Period, G&A expenses included $0.3 million of non-cash equity-based compensation expenses primarily related to OMP GP Class B units and OMP restricted unit awards (see “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 18-Equity-Based Compensation”). E&P Cash G&A expenses, which excludes non-cash equity-based compensation expenses, other non-cash charges and G&A expenses attributable to midstream and other services, increased $2.40 per Boe in 2020 from $2.07 per Boe for the year ended December 31, 2019. For a definition of E&P Cash G&A and a reconciliation of G&A to E&P Cash G&A, see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below.
Litigation settlement. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a $20.0 million loss contingency accrual, which represented our estimate of the probable amount that would be incurred from our legal proceedings with Mirada based upon available information at that time. On September 28, 2020, we entered into the Mirada Settlement Agreement, which provides for, among other things, payment of $42.8 million to certain Mirada related parties and the release of all claims asserted in the case Mirada filed against us. We recorded the incremental $22.8 million loss accrual for the settlement during the 2020 Predecessor Period. See “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 24-Commitments and Contingencies” for more information about our legal proceedings.
Gain (loss) on sale of properties. For the 2020 Predecessor Period, we recognized a $10.4 million net gain on sale of properties, primarily related to certain oil and gas properties located in the Williston Basin. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized a $4.5 million net loss primarily due to completing the final closing statements for the 2018 divestitures of non-strategic oil and gas properties and certain other property and equipment in the Williston Basin (see “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 12-Acquisitions and Divestitures”).
Derivative instruments. As a result of entering into derivative contracts and the effect of the forward strip commodity price changes, we recognize gains or losses on our derivative instruments for the change in their fair value during the period. During the 2020 Successor Period, we recognized an $84.6 million loss on derivative instruments, including net cash settlement payments of $0.1 million, for the decrease in the fair value of our derivative contracts as a result of an increase in forward commodity prices during the period. During the 2020 Predecessor Period, we recognized a $233.6 million gain on derivative instruments, including net cash settlement receipts of $224.4 million, of which $62.6 million was received for derivative contracts liquidated prior to their maturities (see “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 10-Derivative Instruments”). For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized a $106.3 million net loss on derivative instruments, including net cash settlement receipts of $19.1 million.
Interest expense, net of capitalized interest. Interest expense increased $8.4 million from $176.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to Specified Default Interest and OMP Specified Default Interest of $30.3 million and $28.0 million, respectively, which were recorded in interest expense during the 2020 Predecessor Period, and subsequently waived on the Emergence Date, the discharge of which was recognized in reorganization items, net during the 2020 Predecessor Period (see “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 3-Fresh Start Accounting” and “-Note 15-Long-Term
Debt” for more information). This increase was coupled with a $5.4 million decrease in capitalized interest due to lower work in progress activity, and was offset by a $44.8 million decrease in interest expense related to the Predecessor’s Notes due to repurchases of Notes in the first quarter of 2020 as well as the cancellation of the remaining outstanding Notes pursuant to the Plan. In addition, interest expense related to revolving credit facilities, excluding default interest charges, decreased $9.3 million primarily due to lower weighted average borrowings outstanding year over year.
Gain (loss) on extinguishment of debt. During the 2020 Predecessor Period, we repurchased an aggregate principal amount of $156.8 million of our outstanding Notes for an aggregate cost of $68.0 million, including fees. As a result, we recognized a pre-tax gain in the 2020 Predecessor Period of $83.9 million, which included write-offs of unamortized debt discount of $4.2 million, unamortized deferred financing costs of $1.0 million and the equity component of the senior unsecured convertible notes of $0.3 million. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we repurchased an aggregate principal amount of $56.8 million of our outstanding Notes for an aggregate cost of $45.8 million and recognized a pre-tax gain related to the repurchases of $4.3 million, which included the write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs and unamortized debt discount of $6.7 million.
Reorganization items, net. During the 2020 Predecessor Period, we recorded $786.8 million of reorganization items related to the Chapter 11 Cases, consisting of (i) gains on settlement of obligations under our Notes upon consummation of the Plan, (ii) fresh start accounting fair value adjustments, (iii) professional fees recognized between the Petition Date and the Emergence Date, (iv) the write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs and unamortized debt discount and (v) DIP Credit Facility fees. See “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 3-Fresh Start Accounting” for more information on amounts recorded to reorganization items, net.
Income tax benefit. Our income tax benefit for the 2020 Successor Period and 2020 Predecessor Period was recorded at 7.0% and 6.6%, respectively. These rates were significantly lower than the statutory rate primarily due to the impacts of recording a valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets, as well as the impacts of discharge of debt and other reorganization items, partially offset by state income taxes. Our income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2019 was recorded at 26.5% of pre-tax loss. Our effective tax rates for the 2020 Successor Period and the 2020 Predecessor Period were significantly lower than the effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to (i) the impacts of recording a valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets during 2020, (ii) the impact of discharge of debt and other reorganization items recorded during 2020 and (iii) the impacts of non-controlling interests.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For the 2020 Successor Period, our primary sources of liquidity have been cash flows from operations, and our primary uses of cash have been for net principal payments under the Oasis Credit Facility and the development of oil and gas properties. For the 2020 Predecessor Period, our primary sources of liquidity have been derivative settlements (including derivative contract liquidations), cash flows from operations and proceeds from sales of properties, and our primary uses of cash have been for the development of oil and gas properties and midstream infrastructure, debt repurchases and distributions to non-controlling interests.
We are committed to our rigorous capital discipline strategy and intend to invest well within our cash flows from operations and cash settlements of derivative contracts. As a result of the Chapter 11 restructuring, we strengthened our balance sheet, reducing our total indebtedness by $1.8 billion by issuing equity in a reorganized entity to the holders of our Notes. We believe our strong balance sheet will allow us to generate significant free cash flow and corporate-level returns.
Our cash flows depend on many factors, including the price of crude oil and natural gas and the success of our development and exploration activities as well as future acquisitions. We actively manage our exposure to commodity price fluctuations by executing derivative transactions to mitigate the change in crude oil and natural gas prices on a portion of our production, thereby mitigating our exposure to crude oil and natural gas price declines, but these transactions may also limit our cash flow in periods of rising crude oil and natural gas prices. As of December 31, 2020, our derivative contracts in place cover 22.7 MMBbls of our crude oil production in 2021 through 2024. For additional information on the impact of changing prices and our derivative arrangements on our financial position, see “