Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Reference is made to “Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” which describe important factors that could cause actual results to differ from expectations and non-historical information contained herein. In addition, the following discussion should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes thereto of Charter included in “Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Overview
We are a leading broadband connectivity company and cable operator serving more than 31 million customers in 41 states through our Spectrum brand. Over an advanced high-capacity, two-way telecommunications network, we offer a full range of state-of-the-art residential and business services including Spectrum Internet, TV, Mobile and Voice. For small and medium-sized companies, Spectrum Business delivers the same suite of broadband products and services coupled with special features and applications to enhance productivity, while for larger businesses and government entities, Spectrum Enterprise provides highly customized, fiber-based solutions. Spectrum Reach delivers tailored advertising and production for the modern media landscape. We also distribute award-winning news coverage, sports and high-quality original programming to our customers through Spectrum Networks and Spectrum Originals. See “Part I. Item 1. Business - Products and Services” for further description of these services, including customer statistics for different services.
The COVID-19 pandemic and measures taken to prevent its spread impacted our business and presented significant challenges throughout 2020. To reduce the transmission of COVID-19, federal, state and local governments implemented a wide range of restrictions on business and individual activities, including closures or limitations on the operations of businesses along with restrictions on large gatherings, travel and other actions to promote or enforce physical distancing. Despite these restrictions, we have continued to deliver our services uninterrupted across our footprint. The pandemic has significantly impacted how our customers use our products and services, how they interact with us, and how our employees work and provide services to our customers. The impacts of COVID-19 have significantly impacted our results of operations during the year ended December 31, 2020 and we expect that there will continue to be impacts through 2021.
•Beginning in March 2020, we offered our customers a set of programs, including our Remote Education Offer (“REO”) pursuant to which new customers with students or educators in the household were eligible to receive our Internet service for free for 60 days; and the Keep Americans Connected (“KAC”) pledge which paused collection efforts and related disconnects for residential and small and medium business (“SMB”) customers with COVID-19 related payment challenges through June 30, 2020. These programs resulted in higher customer net additions in 2020 than prior year with retention rates for these customers similar to our average customer base. In an effort to assist COVID-19 impacted customers with overdue balances at the end of the KAC and certain state-mandated programs, we waived approximately $102 million of receivables which was recorded as a reduction of revenue.
•The interruption of professional sports seasons resulted in $163 million lower programming expenses as a result of estimated sports rebates from sports programming networks as a result of canceled sporting events and a $217 million reduction in regulatory, connectivity and produced content costs as a result of a shortened 2020 baseball season and a delay to the start of the 2020-2021 basketball season which will push some expense that otherwise would have been recognized in 2020 to 2021 and beyond. In the third quarter of 2020, we recognized $218 million of estimated credits that we intend to provide on our customers' invoices related to the rebates to be received from sports programming networks. The difference between the estimated credits and the estimated rebates is due to an expected reduction in sports rights content costs which is being amortized over the life of the contract.
•Economic conditions and temporary closures or reductions in operations of businesses resulted in reduced advertising spend and lower revenues from seasonal plans offered to SMB and Enterprise hospitality customers that have requested a reduced level of service due to temporary business closure or because these customers have reduced their service offering to their own customers ("Seasonal Plan"). Despite the economic conditions, we saw improved collections of residential customer receivables which we believe were enhanced by government stimulus benefits. We expect bad debt expense and churn in 2021 to return to pre-pandemic levels.
•We increased wages for all hourly field operations and customer service call center employees and gave our employees additional paid sick time for COVID-19-related illnesses and a flex time program to address other COVID-19 issues. We also committed to raise our minimum starting wage for hourly employees to $20 an hour over the next 2 years.
•Through accelerated network capacity increases we have been able to respond to the significant increase in data demands on our network to enable social distancing through telecommuting and e-learning with usage by our Internet-only customers averaging over 600 gigabytes per month, up nearly 20% from the end of 2019.
•WiFi access points were opened across our footprint for public use.
•Requests from government, healthcare and educational institutions for new fiber connections, bandwidth upgrades and new services were prioritized.
•We have invested significantly in our self-service infrastructure, and customers have accelerated the adoption of our digital self-service capabilities and self-installation program with nearly 80% of installations using the program.
•A significant portion of our workforce was temporarily moved to remote work arrangements.
•We enhanced safety protocols for field and other employees working outside their home.
•We offered public access to our Spectrum News websites to ensure people have access to high-quality local news and information and donated significant airtime to run public service announcements to our entire footprint.
Our ability to successfully operate our business and deliver services during the COVID-19 pandemic is a result of investments we have made in our network, our employees and our systems. Our operating and investment strategy has allowed us to sustain and accelerate our customer and financial growth during the pandemic.
We cannot predict the ultimate impact of COVID-19 on our business, including the depth and duration of the economic impact to household formation and growth, our residential and business customers’ ability to pay for our products and services including the impact of extended unemployment benefits and other stimulus packages and the long-term impact on our business, including from consumer behavior, after the pandemic is over. Some of the COVID-19 programs discussed above may result in incremental churn and bad debt in 2021 and may have accelerated demand into 2020. In addition, there is uncertainty regarding the impact of government emergency declarations, the ability of our suppliers and vendors to provide products and services to us, the pace of new housing construction, changes in business spend in our local and national ad sales
business, the effects to our employees’ health and safety and resulting reorientation of our work activities, and the risk of limitations on the deployment and maintenance of our services (including by limiting our customer support and on-site service repairs and installations).
Although the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic cannot be predicted, we remain focused on driving customer relationship growth by deploying superior products and services packaged with attractive pricing. Further, we expect to continue to drive customer relationship growth through sales of bundled services and improving customer retention despite the expectation for continued losses of video and wireline voice customers.
Our Spectrum Mobile service is offered to customers subscribing to our Internet service and runs on Verizon's mobile network combined with Spectrum WiFi. In 2020, we launched 5G service offerings and refreshed our device offerings with new 5G models which we expect will contribute to continued growth of our mobile business. Our Spectrum Mobile BYOD program lowers the cost for consumers of switching mobile carriers, and reduces the short-term working capital impact of selling new mobile devices on installment plans. We also continue to explore ways to drive even more mobile traffic to our network. In October 2020, we purchased approximately $464 million of CBRS PALs and intend to use the licenses along with unlicensed CBRS spectrum to build our own 5G mobile network which we plan to use in combination with our MVNO and WiFi network to enhance the customer’s experience and improve our cost structure.
We believe Spectrum-branded mobile services will drive higher sales of our core products, create longer customer lives and increase profitability and cash flow over time. As a result of growth costs associated with our new mobile product line, we cannot be certain that we will be able to grow revenues or maintain our margins at recent historical rates. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our mobile product line increased revenues by $1.4 billion and $726 million, respectively, reduced Adjusted EBITDA by approximately $401 million and $520 million, respectively, and reduced free cash flow by approximately $1.1 billion and $1.2 billion, respectively. As we continue to grow our mobile services, we expect mobile Adjusted EBITDA will continue to be negative throughout 2021 primarily as a result of growth-related sales and marketing and other customer acquisition costs. We also expect to continue to see negative free cash flow from the timing of device-related cash flows when we sell the handset or tablet to customers pursuant to equipment installment plans and capital expenditures related to retail store build-outs.
We realized revenue, Adjusted EBITDA and income from operations during the periods presented as follows (in millions; all percentages are calculated using whole numbers. Minor differences may exist due to rounding).
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income attributable to Charter shareholders plus net income attributable to noncontrolling interest, net interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, stock compensation expense, loss on extinguishment of debt, (gain) loss on financial instruments, net, other pension (benefits) costs, net, other (income) expense, net and other operating (income) expenses, net, such as merger and restructuring costs, special charges and (gain) loss on sale or retirement of assets. See “-Use of Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow” for further information on Adjusted EBITDA and free cash flow.
Growth in total revenue was primarily due to growth in our residential Internet and mobile customers. Adjusted EBITDA and income from operations growth was impacted by growth in revenue and increases in operating costs and expenses, primarily mobile, costs to service customers and programming offset by lower sports rights content costs as a result of a shortened 2020 baseball season and a delayed start to the 2020-2021 basketball season. Income from operations was also affected by a decrease in depreciation and amortization expense.
Approximately 91% of our revenues for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are attributable to monthly subscription fees charged to customers for our Internet, video, voice, mobile and commercial services as well as regional sports and news channels. Generally, these customer subscriptions may be discontinued by the customer at any time subject to a fee for certain commercial customers. The remaining 9% of revenue is derived primarily from advertising revenues, franchise and other regulatory fee revenues (which are collected by us but then paid to local authorities), sales of mobile and video devices,
processing fees or reconnection fees charged to customers to commence or reinstate service, installation, VOD and pay-per-view programming, and commissions related to the sale of merchandise by home shopping services.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Certain of our accounting policies require our management to make difficult, subjective and/or complex judgments. Management has discussed these policies with the Audit Committee of Charter’s board of directors, and the Audit Committee has reviewed the following disclosure. We consider the following policies to be the most critical in understanding the estimates, assumptions and judgments that are involved in preparing our financial statements, and the uncertainties that could affect our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows:
•Capitalization of labor and overhead costs
•Valuation and impairment of franchises and goodwill
•Income taxes
•Defined benefit pension plans
Capitalization of labor and overhead costs
Costs associated with network construction or upgrades, placement of the customer drop to the dwelling and the placement of outlets within a dwelling along with the costs associated with the deployment of new customer premise equipment necessary to provide Internet, video or voice services, are capitalized. Costs capitalized include materials, direct labor and certain indirect costs. These indirect costs are associated with the activities of personnel who assist in installation activities, and consist of compensation and overhead costs associated with these support functions. While our capitalization is based on specific activities, once capitalized, we track these costs on a composite basis by fixed asset category at the cable system level, and not on a specific asset basis. For assets that are sold or retired, we remove the estimated applicable cost and accumulated depreciation. The costs of disconnecting service and removing customer premise equipment from a dwelling and the costs to reconnect a customer drop or to redeploy previously installed customer premise equipment are charged to operating expense as incurred. Costs for repairs and maintenance are charged to operating expense as incurred, while plant and equipment replacement, including replacement of certain components, betterments, and replacement of cable drops and outlets, are capitalized.
We make judgments regarding the installation and construction activities to be capitalized. We capitalized direct labor and overhead of $1.6 billion for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. We capitalize direct labor and overhead using standards developed from actual costs and applicable operational data. We calculate standards annually (or more frequently if circumstances dictate) for items such as the labor rates, overhead rates, and the actual amount of time required to perform a capitalizable activity. For example, the standard amounts of time required to perform capitalizable activities are based on studies of the time required to perform such activities. Overhead rates are established based on an analysis of the nature of costs incurred in support of capitalizable activities, and a determination of the portion of costs that is directly attributable to capitalizable activities. The impact of changes that resulted from these studies were not material in the periods presented.
Labor costs directly associated with capital projects are capitalized. Capitalizable activities performed in connection with installations include such activities as:
•dispatching a “truck roll” to the customer’s dwelling or business for service connection or placement of new equipment;
•costs to package and ship new equipment to a customer's home for self-installation;
•verification of serviceability to the customer’s dwelling or business (i.e., determining whether the customer’s dwelling is capable of receiving service by our cable network);
•customer premise activities performed by in-house field technicians and third-party contractors in connection with the installation, replacement and betterment of equipment and materials to enable Internet, video or voice services; and
•verifying the integrity of the customer’s network connection by initiating test signals downstream from the headend to the customer premise equipment, as well as testing signal levels at the utility pole or pedestal.
Judgment is required to determine the extent to which overhead costs incurred result from specific capital activities, and therefore should be capitalized. The primary costs that are included in the determination of the overhead rate are (i) employee benefits and payroll taxes associated with capitalized direct labor, (ii) direct variable costs associated with capitalizable activities, (iii) the cost of support personnel, such as care personnel and dispatchers, who assist with capitalizable installation activities, and (iv) indirect costs directly attributable to capitalizable activities.
While we believe our existing capitalization policies are appropriate, a significant change in the nature or extent of our operating practices could affect management’s judgment about the extent to which we should capitalize direct labor or overhead in the future. We monitor the appropriateness of our capitalization policies, and perform updates to our internal studies on an ongoing basis to determine whether facts or circumstances warrant a change to our capitalization policies.
Valuation and impairment of franchises
The net carrying value of franchises as of both December 31, 2020 and 2019 was approximately $67.3 billion (representing 47% and 45% of total assets, respectively). Franchise assets are aggregated into essentially inseparable units of accounting to conduct valuations. The units of accounting generally represent geographical clustering of our cable systems into groups. For more information and a complete discussion of how we value and test franchise assets for impairment, see Note 5 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in “Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
We perform an impairment assessment of franchise assets annually or more frequently as warranted by events or changes in circumstances. We performed a qualitative assessment in 2020. Our assessment included consideration of a multitude of factors that affect the fair value of our franchise assets. Examples of such factors include environmental and competitive changes within our operating footprint, actual and projected operating performance, the consistency of our operating margins, equity and debt market trends, including changes in our market capitalization, and changes in our regulatory and political landscape, among other factors. Based on our assessment, we concluded that it was more likely than not that the estimated fair values of our franchise assets equals or exceeds their carrying values and that a quantitative impairment test is not required.
Valuation and impairment of goodwill
The net carrying value of goodwill as of both December 31, 2020 and 2019 was approximately $29.6 billion (representing 20% of total assets). We have determined that we have one reporting unit for purposes of the assessment of goodwill impairment. For more information and a complete discussion on how we test goodwill for impairment, see Note 5 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in “Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” We perform our impairment assessment of goodwill annually as of November 30. As with our franchise impairment testing, we elected to perform a qualitative assessment of goodwill in 2020. Given the completion of the assessment and absence of significant adverse changes in factors impacting our fair value estimates, we concluded that it is more likely than not that our goodwill is not impaired.
Income taxes
As of December 31, 2020, Charter had approximately $5.3 billion of federal tax net operating loss carryforwards resulting in a gross deferred tax asset of approximately $1.1 billion. These losses resulted from the operations of Charter Holdco and its subsidiaries and from loss carryforwards received as a result of the merger with TWC. Federal tax net operating loss carryforwards expire in the years 2022 through 2035. In addition, as of December 31, 2020, Charter had state tax net operating loss carryforwards, resulting in a gross deferred tax asset (net of federal tax benefit) of approximately $223 million. State tax net operating loss carryforwards generally expire in the years 2021 through 2040. Such tax loss carryforwards can accumulate and be used to offset Charter’s future taxable income. After December 31, 2020, $676 million of Charter's federal tax loss carryforwards are subject to Section 382 and other restrictions. Pursuant to these restrictions, Charter estimates that approximately $226 million annually over each of the next three years of federal tax loss carryforwards, should become unrestricted and available for Charter’s use. Charter’s state tax loss carryforwards are subject to similar but varying restrictions.
In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, management considers whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will be realized. In evaluating the need for a valuation allowance, management takes into account various factors, including the expected level of future taxable income, available tax planning strategies and reversals of existing taxable temporary differences. Approximately $9 million of valuation allowance associated with federal capital loss carryforwards and approximately $23 million of valuation allowance associated with state tax loss carryforwards and other miscellaneous deferred tax assets remains on the December 31, 2020 consolidated balance sheet.
In determining our tax provision for financial reporting purposes, we establish a reserve for uncertain tax positions unless such positions are determined to be “more likely than not” of being sustained upon examination, based on their technical merits. In evaluating whether a tax position has met the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, we presume the position will be examined by the appropriate taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information. A tax position that meets the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold is measured to determine the amount of benefit to be recognized in our financial statements. The tax position is measured as the largest amount of benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being
realized when the position is ultimately resolved. There is considerable judgment involved in determining whether positions taken on the tax return are “more likely than not” of being sustained. We adjust our uncertain tax reserve estimates periodically because of ongoing examinations by, and settlements with, the various taxing authorities, as well as changes in tax laws, regulations and interpretations.
No tax years for Charter are currently under examination by the Internal Revenue Service ("IRS") for income tax purposes. Charter's 2016 through 2020 tax years remain open for examination and assessment. Charter’s short period return dated May 17, 2016 (prior to the merger with TWC and acquisition of Bright House) and prior years remain open solely for purposes of examination of Charter’s loss and credit carryforwards. The IRS is currently examining Charter Holdings’ income tax return for 2016. Charter Holdings’ 2017 through 2020 tax years remain open for examination and assessment. The IRS is currently examining TWC’s income tax returns for 2011 through 2014. TWC’s tax year 2015 remains subject to examination and assessment. Prior to TWC’s separation from Time Warner Inc. (“Time Warner”) in March 2009, TWC was included in the consolidated U.S. federal and certain state income tax returns of Time Warner. The IRS has examined Time Warner’s 2008 through 2010 income tax returns and the results are under appeal. The Company does not anticipate that these examinations will have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial position or results of operations. In addition, the Company is also subject to ongoing examinations of the Company’s tax returns by state and local tax authorities for various periods. Activity related to these state and local examinations did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial position or results of operations during the year ended December 31, 2020, nor do we anticipate a material impact in the future.
Defined benefit pension plans
We sponsor qualified and unqualified defined benefit pension plans that provide pension benefits to a majority of employees who were employed by TWC before the merger with TWC. As of December 31, 2020, the accumulated benefit obligation and fair value of plan assets was $3.7 billion and $3.5 billion, respectively, and the net underfunded liability was recorded as a $1 million noncurrent asset, $5 million current liability and $222 million long-term liability. As of December 31, 2019, the accumulated benefit obligation and fair value of plan assets was $3.4 billion and $3.2 billion, respectively, and the net underfunded liability was recorded as a $1 million noncurrent asset, $4 million current liability and $160 million long-term liability.
Pension benefits are based on formulas that reflect the employees’ years of service and compensation during their employment period. Actuarial gains or losses are changes in the amount of either the benefit obligation or the fair value of plan assets resulting from experience different from that assumed or from changes in assumptions. We have elected to follow a mark-to-market pension accounting policy for recording the actuarial gains or losses annually during the fourth quarter, or earlier if a remeasurement event occurs during an interim period. We use a December 31 measurement date for our pension plans.
We recognized net periodic pension costs of $66 million and $69 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net periodic pension benefit or expense is determined using certain assumptions, including the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, discount rate and mortality assumptions. We determined the discount rate used to compute pension expense based on the yield of a large population of high-quality corporate bonds with cash flows sufficient in timing and amount to settle projected future defined benefit payments. In developing the expected long-term rate of return on assets, we considered the current pension portfolio’s composition, past average rate of earnings, and our asset allocation targets. We used a discount rate of 2.70% to determine the December 31, 2020 pension plan benefit obligation. A decrease in the discount rate of 25 basis points would result in a $153 million increase in our pension plan benefit obligation as of December 31, 2020 and net periodic pension expense recognized in 2020 under our mark-to-market accounting policy. The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets used to determine net periodic pension benefit for the year ended December 31, 2021 is expected to be 5.00%. A decrease in the expected long-term rate of return of 25 basis points to 4.75%, while holding all other assumptions constant, would result in an increase in our 2021 net periodic pension expense of approximately $8 million. See Note 22 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in “Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional discussion on these assumptions.
Results of Operations
A discussion of changes in our results of operations during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 has been omitted from this Annual Report on Form 10-K, but may be found in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on January 31, 2020, which is available free of charge on the SECs website at www.sec.gov and on our investor relations website at ir.charter.com.
The following table sets forth the consolidated statements of operations for the periods presented (dollars in millions, except per share data):
Revenues. Total revenues grew $2.3 billion or 5.1% during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to increases in the number of residential Internet and mobile customers, price adjustments and higher political advertising sales offset by lower local advertising revenues as a result of COVID-19, $218 million of estimated customer credits to be issued to our video customers due to canceled sporting events and $102 million of waived receivables related to the KAC and certain state-mandated programs.
Revenues by service offering were as follows (dollars in millions; all percentages are calculated using whole numbers. Minor differences may exist due to rounding):
The increase in Internet revenues from our residential customers was attributable to the following (dollars in millions):
Residential Internet customers grew by 2,115,000 in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase related to rate, product mix and allocation changes was primarily due to price adjustments including promotional roll-off offset by a $34 million reduction related to the KAC and certain state-mandated program credits.
Video revenues consist primarily of revenues from basic and digital video services provided to our residential customers, as well as franchise fees, equipment service fees and video installation revenue. The decrease in video revenues was attributable to the following (dollars in millions):
We recorded $218 million of estimated customer credits related to canceled sporting events during the year ended December 31, 2020 and $59 million of customer credits related to KAC and certain state-mandated programs. The increase related to rate, product mix and allocation changes was primarily due to price adjustments including annual increases and promotional roll-off, partly offset by a higher mix of lower cost video packages within our video customer base. Residential video customers increased by 19,000 in 2020 compared to 2019.
The decrease in voice revenues from our residential customers was attributable to the following (dollars in millions):
Residential wireline voice customers decreased by 228,000 in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease related to rate, product mix and allocation changes was primarily due to value-based pricing and a $4 million reduction related to the KAC and certain state-mandated program credits
The increase in SMB commercial revenues was attributable to the following (dollars in millions):
SMB customers increased by 93,000 in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease related to rate and product mix changes during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 included reductions of $36 million related to COVID-19 programs.
Enterprise revenues decreased $88 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the corresponding period in 2019 primarily due to the sale of non-strategic assets in the third quarter of 2019 and a reduction of $18 million related to the COVID-19 Enterprise hospitality seasonal program. Enterprise PSUs increased by 7,000 in 2020 compared to 2019.
Advertising sales revenues consist primarily of revenues from commercial advertising customers, programmers and other vendors, as well as local cable and advertising on regional sports and news channels. Advertising sales revenues increased $131 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the corresponding period in 2019 primarily due to an increase in political revenue, partially offset by a decrease in local advertising revenues due to COVID-19.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, mobile revenues included approximately $658 million and $488 million of device revenues, respectively, and approximately $706 million and $238 million of service revenues, respectively. The increases in revenues are a result of increases in the number of lines from 1,082,000 as of December 31, 2019 to 2,375,000 as of December 31, 2020.
Other revenues consist of revenue from regional sports and news channels (excluding intercompany charges or advertising sales on those channels), home shopping, late payment fees, video device sales, wire maintenance fees and other miscellaneous revenues. The decrease during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the corresponding period in 2019 was primarily due to a decrease in late payment fees and home security revenue offset by an increase in the sale of video devices and regional sports and news revenue.
Operating costs and expenses. The increase in our operating costs and expenses, exclusive of items shown separately in the consolidated statements of operations, was attributable to the following (dollars in millions):
Programming costs were approximately $11.4 billion and $11.3 billion, representing 38% and 39% of operating costs and expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Programming costs consist primarily of costs paid to programmers for basic, digital, premium, video on demand, and pay-per-view programming. Programming costs increased in 2020 as a result of contractual rate adjustments, including renewals and increases in amounts paid for retransmission consent as well as an increase in video customers. The increase was offset by $163 million of estimated rebates from sports programming networks as a result of canceled sporting events due to COVID-19 and further benefited from a higher mix of lower cost video packages within our video customer base. We expect programming rates per customer will continue to increase due to a variety of factors, including annual increases imposed by programmers with additional selling power as a result of media and broadcast station groups consolidation, increased demands by owners of broadcast stations for payment for retransmission consent or linking carriage of other services to retransmission consent, and additional programming, particularly new services. We have been unable to fully pass these increases on to our customers and do not expect to be able to do so in the future without a potential loss of customers.
Regulatory, connectivity and produced content decreased $183 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the corresponding period in 2019 primarily due to deferred sports rights costs associated with the shortened 2020 baseball season and delayed start to the 2020-2021 basketball season as a result of COVID-19.
Costs to service customers increased $195 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the corresponding period in 2019 primarily due to higher labor costs resulting from COVID-19 related wage increases and flex time benefits along with 6.5% customer growth offset by a decrease in bad debt expense given the revenue write-off associated with the KAC program and better collections enhanced by government stimulus benefits.
Mobile costs of $1.8 billion and $1.2 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, were comprised of mobile device costs and mobile service, customer acquisition and operating costs.
The increase in other expense was attributable to the following (dollars in millions):
Corporate costs increased primarily due to higher personnel costs. Enterprise costs decreased primarily due to the sale of non-strategic assets in the third quarter of 2019.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense decreased by $222 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the corresponding period in 2019 primarily due to a decrease in depreciation and amortization as certain assets acquired in acquisitions become fully depreciated offset by an increase in depreciation as a result of more recent capital expenditures.
Other operating expenses, net. The decrease in other operating expenses, net was attributable to the following (dollars in millions):
The gain on sale of assets, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a loss on sale of assets in 2019 is primarily due to a $42 million impairment of non-strategic assets incurred during 2019. For more information, see Note 15 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in “Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Interest expense, net. Net interest expense increased by $51 million in 2020 from 2019 primarily due to an increase in weighted average debt outstanding of approximately $5.3 billion primarily as a result of the issuance of notes in 2020 and 2019 for general corporate purposes including stock buybacks and debt repayments offset by a decrease in weighted average interest rates.
Loss on extinguishment of debt. Loss on extinguishment of debt of $143 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily represents losses recognized as a result of the redemption of CCO Holdings notes. For more information, see Note 9 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in “Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Loss on financial instruments, net. Gains and losses on financial instruments are recognized due to changes in the fair value of our interest rate and our cross currency derivative instruments, and the foreign currency remeasurement of the fixed-rate British pound sterling denominated notes (the “Sterling Notes”) into U.S. dollars. For more information, see Note 12 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in “Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Other pension costs, net. Other pension costs, net was consistent during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the corresponding period in 2019. For more information, see Note 22 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in “Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Other expense, net. Other expense, net primarily represents equity losses on our equity investments. Other expense, net also includes an impairment on equity investments of approximately $10 million and $121 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For more information, see Note 6 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in “Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Income tax expense. We recognized income tax expense of $626 million and $439 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Income tax expense increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the corresponding period in 2019 primarily as a result of higher pretax income offset by increased recognition of excess tax benefits resulting from share-based compensation during 2020. For more information, see Note 17 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in “Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interest. Net income attributable to noncontrolling interest for financial reporting purposes represents A/N’s portion of Charter Holdings’ net income based on its effective common unit ownership interest and the preferred dividend of $150 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. For more information, see Note 11 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in “Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Net income attributable to Charter shareholders. Net income attributable to Charter shareholders was $3.2 billion and $1.7 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, primarily as a result of the factors described above.
Use of Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow
We use certain measures that are not defined by U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) to evaluate various aspects of our business. Adjusted EBITDA and free cash flow are non-GAAP financial measures and should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, net income attributable to Charter shareholders and net cash flows from operating activities reported in accordance with GAAP. These terms, as defined by us, may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. Adjusted EBITDA and free cash flow are reconciled to net income attributable to Charter shareholders and net cash flows from operating activities, respectively, below.
Adjusted EBITDA eliminates the significant non-cash depreciation and amortization expense that results from the capital-intensive nature of our businesses as well as other non-cash or special items, and is unaffected by our capital structure or investment activities. However, this measure is limited in that it does not reflect the periodic costs of certain capitalized tangible and intangible assets used in generating revenues and our cash cost of financing. These costs are evaluated through other financial measures.
Free cash flow is defined as net cash flows from operating activities, less capital expenditures and changes in accrued expenses related to capital expenditures.
Management and Charter’s board of directors use Adjusted EBITDA and free cash flow to assess our performance and our ability to service our debt, fund operations and make additional investments with internally generated funds. In addition, Adjusted EBITDA generally correlates to the leverage ratio calculation under our credit facilities or outstanding notes to determine compliance with the covenants contained in the facilities and notes (all such documents have been previously filed with the SEC). For the purpose of calculating compliance with leverage covenants, we use Adjusted EBITDA, as presented, excluding certain expenses paid by our operating subsidiaries to other Charter entities. Our debt covenants refer to these expenses as management fees, which fees were in the amount of $1.3 billion and $1.2 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
A reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA and free cash flow to net income attributable to Charter shareholders and net cash flows from operating activities, respectively, is as follows (dollars in millions).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
We have significant amounts of debt. The principal amount of our debt as of December 31, 2020 was $82.1 billion, consisting of $10.2 billion of credit facility debt, $47.7 billion of investment grade senior secured notes and $24.3 billion of high-yield senior unsecured notes. Our business requires significant cash to fund principal and interest payments on our debt.
Our projected cash needs and projected sources of liquidity depend upon, among other things, our actual results, and the timing and amount of our expenditures. As we continue to grow our mobile services, we expect to continue to see negative mobile Adjusted EBITDA in 2021 as well as negative working capital impacts from the timing of device-related cash flows when we sell the handset or tablet to customers pursuant to equipment installment plans. Free cash flow was $7.1 billion and $4.6 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. See table below for factors impacting free cash flow during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. As of December 31, 2020, the amount available under our credit facilities was approximately $4.7 billion and cash on hand was approximately $1.0 billion. We expect to utilize free cash flow, cash on hand and availability under our credit facilities as well as future refinancing transactions to further extend the maturities of our obligations. The timing and terms of any refinancing transactions will be subject to market conditions among other considerations. Additionally, we may, from time to time, and depending on market conditions and other factors, use cash on hand and the proceeds from securities offerings or other borrowings to retire our debt through open market purchases, privately negotiated purchases, tender offers or redemption provisions. We believe we have sufficient liquidity from cash on hand, free cash flow and Charter Operating’s revolving credit facility as well as access to the capital markets to fund our projected cash needs.
We continue to evaluate the deployment of our cash on hand and anticipated future free cash flow including to invest in our business growth and other strategic opportunities, including mergers and acquisitions as well as stock repurchases and dividends. Charter's target leverage of net debt to the last twelve months Adjusted EBITDA remains at 4 to 4.5 times Adjusted EBITDA, and up to 3.5 times Adjusted EBITDA at the consolidated first lien level. Our leverage ratio was 4.4 times Adjusted EBITDA as of December 31, 2020. As Adjusted EBITDA grows, we expect to increase the total amount of our indebtedness to maintain leverage within Charter's target leverage range. We have used the proceeds from such borrowings for general corporate purposes and to buyback shares of Charter Class A common stock and Charter Holdings common units. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, Charter purchased approximately 18.4 million and 16.7 million shares, respectively, of Charter Class A common stock for approximately $10.6 billion and $6.7 billion, respectively. Since the beginning of its buyback program in September 2016 through the year ended December 31, 2020, Charter has purchased approximately 87.7 million shares of Class A common stock for approximately $34.6 billion.
In December 2017, Charter and A/N entered into an amendment to the letter agreement (the "Letter Agreement") that requires A/N to sell to Charter or to Charter Holdings, on a monthly basis, a number of shares of Charter Class A common stock or Charter Holdings common units that represents a pro rata participation by A/N and its affiliates in any repurchases of shares of Charter Class A common stock from persons other than A/N effected by Charter during the immediately preceding calendar month, at a purchase price equal to the average price paid by Charter for the shares repurchased from persons other than A/N during such immediately preceding calendar month. A/N and Charter both have the right to terminate or suspend the pro rata repurchase arrangement on a prospective basis. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, Charter Holdings purchased from A/N 2.6 million and 2.3 million Charter Holdings common units, respectively, for approximately $1.5 billion and $885 million, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020, Charter had remaining board authority to purchase an additional $1.5 billion of Charter’s Class A common stock and/or Charter Holdings common units. Although Charter expects to continue to buy back its common stock consistent with its leverage target range, Charter is not obligated to acquire any particular amount of common stock, and the timing of any purchases that may occur cannot be predicted and will largely depend on market conditions and other potential uses of capital. Purchases may include open market purchases, tender offers or negotiated transactions.
As possible acquisitions, swaps or dispositions arise, we actively review them against our objectives including, among other considerations, improving the operational efficiency, geographic clustering of assets, product development or technology capabilities of our business and achieving appropriate return targets, and we may participate to the extent we believe these possibilities present attractive opportunities. However, there can be no assurance that we will actually complete any acquisitions, dispositions or system swaps, or that any such transactions will be material to our operations or results.
Recent Events
In December 2020, Charter Operating and Charter Communications Operating Capital Corp. jointly issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 2.300% senior secured notes due 2032 at a price of 99.786% of the aggregate principal amount, an additional $650 million aggregate principal amount of 3.700% senior secured notes due 2051 at a price of 100.791% of the aggregate principal amount and $1.35 billion aggregate principal amount of 3.850% senior secured notes due 2061 at a price of 99.882% of the aggregate principal amount. The net proceeds were used to pay related fees and expenses and for general corporate purposes, including funding buybacks of Charter Class A common stock and Charter Holdings common units as well as repaying certain indebtedness including $700 million of Time Warner Cable, LLC 4.125% notes due February 2021.
In addition to the debt issued in December 2020 as described above, CCO Holdings and CCO Holdings Capital Corp. jointly issued $8.65 billion aggregate principal amount of senior unsecured notes at varying rates, prices and maturity dates in 2020, and Charter Operating and Charter Communications Operating Capital Corp. jointly issued $3.0 billion aggregate principal amount of senior secured notes at varying rates, prices and maturity dates in 2020. The net proceeds were used to pay related fees and expenses and for general corporate purposes, including funding buybacks of Charter Class A common stock and Charter Holdings common units as well as repaying certain indebtedness.
Free Cash Flow
Free cash flow increased $2.5 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the corresponding prior period due to the following (dollars in millions).
Free cash flow was reduced by $1.1 billion and $1.2 billion during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, due to mobile with impacts negatively affecting working capital, capital expenditures and Adjusted EBITDA. The increase in free cash flow resulting from changes in working capital was favorably impacted by one-time unfavorable impacts in 2019 from bill cycle standardization efforts as well as one-time net favorable impacts in 2020 related to COVID-19, including deferral of payroll tax payments.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our payment obligations as of December 31, 2020 under our long-term debt and certain other contractual obligations and commitments (dollars in millions.)
(a)The table presents maturities of long-term debt outstanding as of December 31, 2020. Refer to Notes 9 and 21 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in “Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for a description of our long-term debt and other contractual obligations and commitments.
(b)Interest payments on variable debt are estimated using amounts outstanding at December 31, 2020 and the average implied forward LIBOR rates applicable for the quarter during the interest rate reset based on the yield curve in effect at December 31, 2020. Actual interest payments will differ based on actual LIBOR rates and actual amounts outstanding for applicable periods.
(c)We lease certain facilities and equipment under noncancelable finance and operating leases. Finance lease obligations represented $94 million of total finance and operating lease obligations as of December 31, 2020. Lease and rental costs charged to expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $452 million and $445 million, respectively.
(d)We pay programming fees under multi-year contracts typically based on a flat fee per customer, which may be fixed for the term, or may in some cases escalate over the term. Programming costs included in the accompanying statement of operations were approximately $11.4 billion and $11.3 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Certain of our programming agreements are based on a flat fee per month or have guaranteed minimum payments. The table sets forth the aggregate guaranteed minimum commitments under our programming contracts.
(e)“Other” represents other guaranteed minimum commitments, including rights negotiated directly with content owners for distribution on company-owned channels or networks, commitments related to our role as an advertising and distribution sales agent for third party-owned channels or networks, commitments to our customer premise equipment and device vendors and contractual obligations related to third-party network augmentation.
The following items are not included in the contractual obligations table because the obligations are not fixed and/or determinable due to various factors discussed below. However, we incur these costs as part of our operations:
•We rent utility poles used in our operations. Generally, pole rentals are cancelable on short notice, but we anticipate that such rentals will recur. Rent expense incurred for pole rental attachments for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $192 million and $180 million, respectively.
•We pay franchise fees under multi-year franchise agreements based on a percentage of revenues generated from video service per year. We also pay other franchise related costs, such as public education grants, under multi-year agreements. Franchise fees and other franchise-related costs included in the accompanying statement of operations were $741 million and $750 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
•We have $367 million in letters of credit, of which $41 million is secured under the Charter Operating credit facility, primarily to our various casualty carriers as collateral for reimbursement of workers' compensation, auto liability and general liability claims.
•Minimum pension funding requirements have not been presented in the table above as such amounts have not been determined beyond 2020. We made no cash contributions to the qualified pension plans in 2020; however, we are permitted to make discretionary cash contributions to the qualified pension plans in 2021. For the nonqualified pension plan, we contributed $3 million during 2020 and will continue to make contributions in 2021 to the extent benefits are paid.
•In December 2020, we won a bidding process for $1.2 billion in phase I of the RDOF auction to further extend our broadband services in states where we currently operate. We expect to fund our multi-billion dollar fiber-based build-out over a six to eight-year period.
See "Part I. Item 1. Business - Commitments Related to the 2016 Merger with TWC and Acquisition of Bright House" for a listing of commitments as a result of the merger with TWC and acquisition of Bright House in 2016.
Historical Operating, Investing, and Financing Activities
Cash and Cash Equivalents. We held $998 million and $3.5 billion in cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We also held $3 million and $66 million in restricted cash as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing escrowed funds of a consolidated variable interest entity. See Note 6 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in “Item 1. Financial Statements.”
Operating Activities. Net cash provided by operating activities increased $2.8 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase in Adjusted EBITDA of $1.7 billion and changes in working capital, excluding the change in accrued interest and accrued expenses related to capital expenditures, that used $1.2 billion less cash.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $8.2 billion and $7.3 billion, respectively. The increase in cash used was primarily due to the purchase of spectrum wireless licenses and an increase in capital expenditures.
Financing Activities. Net cash used in financing activities increased $7.3 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to an increase in the purchase of treasury stock and noncontrolling interest and a decrease in the amount by which borrowings of long-term debt exceeded repayments.
Capital Expenditures
We have significant ongoing capital expenditure requirements. Capital expenditures were $7.4 billion and $7.2 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase was primarily due to higher line extensions driven by continued network expansion, including to rural areas, higher support capital as a result of facility improvements and investments in back office systems and mobile store build-outs offset by lower customer premise equipment. See the table below for more details.
We currently expect 2021 cable capital expenditures to be relatively consistent or lower as a percentage of cable revenue versus 2020. The actual amount of our capital expenditures in 2021 will depend on a number of factors including further spend related to product development and growth rates of both our residential and commercial businesses.
Our capital expenditures are funded primarily from cash flows from operating activities and borrowings on our credit facility. In addition, our accrued liabilities related to capital expenditures decreased $77 million and increased $55 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following tables present our major capital expenditures categories in accordance with National Cable and Telecommunications Association (“NCTA”) disclosure guidelines for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. These disclosure guidelines are not required disclosures under GAAP, nor do they impact our accounting for capital expenditures under GAAP (dollars in millions):
(a)Customer premise equipment includes costs incurred at the customer residence to secure new customers and revenue generating units, including customer installation costs and customer premise equipment (e.g., digital receivers and cable modems).
(b)Scalable infrastructure includes costs not related to customer premise equipment, to secure growth of new customers and revenue generating units, or provide service enhancements (e.g., headend equipment).
(c)Line extensions include network costs associated with entering new service areas (e.g., fiber/coaxial cable, amplifiers, electronic equipment, make-ready and design engineering).
(d)Upgrade/rebuild includes costs to modify or replace existing fiber/coaxial cable networks, including betterments.
(e)Support capital includes costs associated with the replacement or enhancement of non-network assets due to technological and physical obsolescence (e.g., non-network equipment, land, buildings and vehicles).
Debt
As of December 31, 2020, the accreted value of our total debt was approximately $82.8 billion, as summarized below (dollars in millions):
(a)The accreted values presented in the table above represent the principal amount of the debt adjusted for original issue discount or premium at the time of sale, deferred financing costs, and, in regards to debt assumed in acquisitions, fair value premium adjustments as a result of applying acquisition accounting plus the accretion of those amounts to the balance sheet date. However, the amount that is currently payable if the debt becomes immediately due is equal to the principal amount of the debt. In regards to the Sterling Notes, the principal amount of the debt and any premium or discount is remeasured into US dollars as of each balance sheet date. We have availability under our credit facilities of approximately $4.7 billion as of December 31, 2020.
(b)In general, the obligors have the right to redeem all of the notes set forth in the above table in whole or in part at their option, beginning at various times prior to their stated maturity dates, subject to certain conditions, upon the payment of the outstanding principal amount (plus a specified redemption premium) and all accrued and unpaid interest.
(c)Principal amount includes £625 million valued at $854 million as of December 31, 2020 using the exchange rate as of December 31, 2020.
(d)Principal amount includes £650 million valued at $889 million as of December 31, 2020 using the exchange rate as of December 31, 2020.
See Note 9 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in “Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for further details regarding our outstanding debt and other financing arrangements, including certain information about maturities, covenants and restrictions related to such debt and financing arrangements. The agreements and instruments governing our debt and financing arrangements are complicated and you should consult such agreements and instruments which are filed with the SEC for more detailed information.
At December 31, 2020, Charter Operating had a consolidated leverage ratio of approximately 2.8 to 1.0 and a consolidated first lien leverage ratio of 2.7 to 1.0. Both ratios are in compliance with the ratios required by the Charter Operating credit facilities of 5.0 to 1.0 consolidated leverage ratio and 4.0 to 1.0 consolidated first lien leverage ratio. A failure by Charter Operating to maintain the financial covenants would result in an event of default under the Charter Operating credit facilities and the debt of CCO Holdings. See “Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors - The agreements and instruments governing our debt contain restrictions and limitations that could significantly affect our ability to operate our business, as well as significantly affect our liquidity.”
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 23 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in “Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for a discussion of recently issued accounting standards.