ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with Item 6. “Selected Financial Data” and our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
The following discussion contains, in addition to historical information, forward-looking statements that include risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those set forth under the heading Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report.
Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable based on our current knowledge of our business and operations, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements. We assume no obligation to provide revisions to any forward-looking statements should circumstances change, except as may be required by law.
The following discussion summarizes the significant factors affecting the consolidated operating results, financial condition, liquidity and cash flows of our company as of and for the periods presented below.
COVID-19 Pandemic
During March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak to be a global pandemic and the United States declared a National Public Health Emergency. The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted health and economic conditions throughout the United States. Federal, state and local governments took a variety of actions to contain the spread of COVID-19. Many jurisdictions where our restaurants are located required mandatory closures or imposed capacity limitations and other restrictions affecting our operations. As of December 27, 2020, the Company had reopened dining rooms at varying degrees of operating capacity in its 92 operating restaurants.
Selected monthly comparable restaurant sales and average weekly sales per restaurant for the fourth quarter and first quarter of 2021 to-date are as follows:
Comparable restaurant sales were negatively impacted by closures of dining rooms in Kentucky, Colorado and Illinois during the latter part of November and December due to the COVID-19 pandemic as well as reduced traffic during the Thanksgiving week and Christmas Day which fell on Friday, a higher volume day, as compared to Wednesday last year. Off-premise sales remained strong at a rate more than double pre-COVID-19 levels ranging from 30% to 35% of all revenue during the fourth quarter and the first quarter of 2021 to date.
During the fiscal year ended December 27, 2020, the Company took various steps to reduce non-essential spend, postpone restaurant development and rightsize operations in light of reduced sales volume to improve our store level profitability and increase our cash flows. The Company also enhanced its liquidity position by selling shares of its common stock in an "At-The-Market" ("ATM") offering and using a portion of the net proceeds to repay the $25.0 million outstanding under its revolving credit facility. As of December 27, 2020, the Company had $86.8 million in cash and cash equivalents, no debt and $25.0 million of availability under its revolving credit facility. Management believes the Company's strong financial position, combined with the measures taken during the pandemic, will allow the Company to meet its financial obligations over the next twelve months.
We cannot predict how soon we will be able to reopen all of our restaurants at full capacity, and our ability to reopen and stay open will depend in part on the actions of a number of governmental bodies over which we have no control. Moreover, once restrictions are lifted, it is unclear how quickly customers will return to our restaurants, which may be a function of continued concerns over safety and/or depressed consumer sentiment due to adverse economic conditions, including job losses.
Overview
We are a growing, full-service restaurant concept offering a distinct menu of authentic, freshly-prepared Mexican and Tex-Mex inspired food. We were founded in Austin, Texas in 1982 by Mike Young and John Zapp, and as of December 27, 2020, we operated 92 restaurants across 17 states.
We are committed to providing value to our customers through offering generous portions of made-from-scratch, flavorful Mexican and Tex-Mex inspired dishes. We also offer a full-service bar in all of our restaurants providing our customers a wide
variety of beverage offerings. We believe the Chuy’s culture is one of our most valuable assets, and we are committed to preserving and continually investing in our culture and our customers’ dining experience.
Our restaurants have a common décor, but we believe each location is unique in format, offering an “unchained” look and feel, as expressed by our motto “If you’ve seen one Chuy’s, you’ve seen one Chuy’s!” We believe our restaurants have an upbeat, funky, eclectic, somewhat irreverent atmosphere while still maintaining a family-friendly environment.
Our Growth Strategies and Outlook
Our growth is based primarily on the following strategies:
•Pursue new restaurant development in major markets;
•Backfill smaller existing markets to build brand awareness;
•Deliver consistent same store sales by providing high-quality food and service at a considerable value; and
•Leverage our infrastructure.
We opened one restaurant in fiscal 2020 and postponed the rest of the planned restaurant development to fiscal 2021 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. During fiscal 2021, we plan to open four to six restaurants. We have an established presence in Texas, the Southeast and the Midwest, with restaurants in multiple large markets in these regions. Our growth plan over the next five years focuses on developing additional locations in our existing core markets and major new markets while continuing to "backfill" our smaller existing markets in order to build our brand awareness. For additional discussion of our growth strategies and outlook, see Item 1. “Business-Our Business Strategies.”
Newly opened restaurants typically experience normal inefficiencies in the form of higher cost of sales, labor and direct operating and occupancy costs for several months after their opening in both percentage and dollar terms when compared with our more mature, established restaurants. Accordingly, the number and timing of newly opened restaurants has had, and is expected to continue to have, an impact on restaurant opening expenses, cost of sales, labor and occupancy and operating expenses. Additionally, initial restaurant openings in new markets may experience even greater inefficiencies for several months, if not longer, due to lower initial sales volumes, which results from initially low consumer awareness levels, and a lack of operating cost leverage until additional restaurants can be opened in these markets and build the overall consumer awareness in the market.
Our profitability is dependent, among other things, on our ability to anticipate and react to changes in the costs of key operating resources, including food and other raw materials, labor, energy and other supplies and services. Substantial increases in costs and expenses could impact our operating results to the extent that such increases cannot be passed along to our restaurant customers. The impact of inflation on food, labor, energy and occupancy costs can significantly affect the profitability of our restaurant operations.
Many of our restaurant staff members are paid hourly rates related to the federal minimum wage. Labor costs related to hourly wages have been impacted by and will continue to be impacted by mandated increases in minimum wage rates at the federal, state and local levels. Certain operating costs, such as taxes, insurance and other outside services increase with the general level of inflation and may also be subject to other cost and supply fluctuations outside of our control.
While we have been able to partially offset inflation and other changes in the costs of key operating resources by gradually increasing prices for our menu items, more efficient purchasing practices, productivity improvements and greater economies of scale, there can be no assurance that we will be able to continue to do so in the future. From time to time, competitive conditions could limit our menu pricing flexibility. In addition, macroeconomic conditions could make additional menu price increases imprudent. There can be no assurance that all future cost increases can be offset by increased menu prices or that increased menu prices will be fully absorbed by our restaurant customers without any resulting changes in their visit frequencies or purchasing patterns. A majority of the leases for our restaurants provide for contingent rent obligations based on a percentage of revenue. There can be no assurance that we will continue to generate increases in comparable restaurant sales in amounts sufficient to offset inflationary or other cost pressures.
Performance Indicators
We use the following performance indicators in evaluating our performance:
•Number of Restaurant Openings. Number of restaurant openings reflects the number of restaurants opened during a particular fiscal period. For restaurant openings we incur pre-opening costs, which are defined below, before the restaurant opens. Typically new restaurants open with an initial start-up period of higher than normalized sales volumes, which decrease to a steady level approximately six to twelve months after opening. However, operating costs during this initial six to twelve month period are also higher than normal, resulting in restaurant operating margins that are generally lower during the start-up period of operation and increase to a steady level approximately nine to twelve months after opening.
•Comparable Restaurant Sales. We consider a restaurant to be comparable in the first full quarter following the eighteenth month of operations. Changes in comparable restaurant sales reflect changes in sales for the comparable group of restaurants over a specified period of time. Changes in comparable sales reflect changes in customer count trends as well as changes in average check. Our comparable restaurant base consisted of 86, 88 and 81 restaurants at December 27, 2020, December 29, 2019 and December 30, 2018, respectively.
•Average Weekly Sales per Restaurant. Average Weekly Sales per Restaurant is calculated by dividing total weekly sales by number of operating restaurants in a given week.
•Average Check. Average check is calculated by dividing revenue by total entrées sold for a given time period. Average check reflects menu price increases as well as changes in menu mix. Our management team uses this indicator to analyze trends in customers’ preferences, effectiveness of changes in menu and price increases as well as per customer expenditures.
•Average Weekly Customers. Average weekly customers is measured by the number of entrées sold per week. Our management team uses this metric to measure changes in customer traffic.
•Average Unit Volume. Average unit volume consists of the average sales of our comparable restaurants over a certain period of time. This measure is calculated by dividing total comparable restaurant sales within a period of time by the total number of comparable restaurants within the relevant period. This indicator assists management in measuring changes in customer traffic, pricing and development of our brand.
•Operating Margin. Operating margin represents income from operations as a percentage of our revenue. By monitoring and controlling our operating margins, we can gauge the overall profitability of our company.
The following table presents operating data for the periods indicated:
(1)We consider a restaurant to be comparable in the first full quarter following the 18th month of operations. Change in comparable restaurant sales reflect changes in sales for the comparable group of restaurants over a specified period of time.
Our Fiscal Year
We operate on a 52- or 53-week fiscal year that ends on the last Sunday of the calendar year. Each quarterly period has 13 weeks, except for a 53-week year when the fourth quarter has 14 weeks. Our 2020, 2019 and 2018 fiscal years each consisted of 52 weeks.
Key Financial Definitions
Revenue. Revenue primarily consists of food and beverage sales and also includes sales of our t-shirts, sweatshirts and hats. Revenue is presented net of discounts associated with each sale. Revenue in a given period is directly influenced by the number of operating weeks in such period, the number of restaurants we operate and comparable restaurant sales growth.
Cost of sales. Cost of sales consists primarily of food, beverage and merchandise related costs. The components of cost of sales are variable in nature, change with sales volume and are subject to increases or decreases based on fluctuations in commodity costs.
Labor costs. Labor costs include restaurant management salaries, front- and back-of-house hourly wages and restaurant-level manager bonus expense and payroll taxes.
Operating costs. Operating costs consist primarily of restaurant-related operating expenses, such as supplies, utilities, repairs and maintenance, travel cost, insurance, employee benefits, credit card fees, recruiting, delivery service and security. These costs generally increase with sales volume but may increase or decrease as a percentage of revenue.
Occupancy costs. Occupancy costs include rent charges, both fixed and variable, as well as common area maintenance costs, property insurance and taxes, the amortization of tenant allowances and the adjustment to straight-line rent. These costs are generally fixed but a portion may vary with an increase in sales when the lease contains percentage rent.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses include costs associated with corporate and administrative functions that support our operations, including senior and supervisory management and staff compensation (including stock-based compensation) and benefits, travel, legal and professional fees, information systems, corporate office rent and other related corporate costs.
Marketing. Marketing costs include costs associated with our restaurant marketing programs, community service and sponsorship activities, our menus and other promotional activities.
Restaurant pre-opening costs. Restaurant pre-opening costs consist of costs incurred before opening a restaurant, including manager salaries, relocation costs, supplies, recruiting expenses, initial new market public relations costs, pre-opening activities, employee payroll and related training costs for new employees. Restaurant pre-opening costs also include rent recorded during the period between date of possession and the restaurant opening date.
Impairment, closed restaurant and other costs. Impairment costs include impairment of long-lived assets associated with restaurants where the carrying amount of the asset is not recoverable and exceeds the fair value of the asset. Closed restaurant costs consist of any costs associated with the closure of a restaurant such as lease termination costs, severance benefits, other miscellaneous closing costs as well as costs to maintain these closed restaurants through the lease termination date such as occupancy costs, including rent payments less sublease income, if any, and insurance and utility costs. Other costs consist of COVID-19 related charges due to idle development costs as a result of delaying restaurant openings to 2021.
Depreciation. Depreciation principally includes depreciation on fixed assets, including equipment and leasehold improvements.
Interest expense, net. Interest expense consists primarily of interest on our outstanding indebtedness, uncommitted credit facility fees and the amortization of our debt issuance costs reduced by interest income, if any.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 27, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 29, 2019
The following table presents, for the periods indicated, the consolidated statement of operations (in thousands):
Revenue. Revenue was $321.0 million for the year ended December 27, 2020 compared to $426.4 million for the year ended December 29, 2019. The decrease in revenue was primarily attributed to a decline in customer traffic as a result of COVID-19 and closures of six restaurants during fiscal 2019 and nine restaurants during fiscal 2020. The Company operated on an off-premise only operating model beginning in late March 2020 through May 2020. Since then, the Company reopened and operated dining rooms at varying degrees of operating capacity in 92 of its restaurants. The decrease in revenue was partially offset by $11.3 million of incremental revenue from an additional 183 operating weeks provided by new restaurants.
Comparable restaurant sales decreased 22.1% for the year ended December 27, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 primarily driven by a 27.3% decrease in average weekly customers, partially offset by a 5.2% increase in average check.
Cost of sales. Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue decreased to 24.6% during the year ended December 27, 2020 from 25.8% during the same period in 2019, primarily as a result of switching to a limited menu and eliminating the complimentary buffet style chips and salsa, or “Nacho Car,” which was partially offset by an increase of approximately 60 basis points in the cost of beef and approximately 10 basis points in the cost of dairy and cheese.
Labor costs. Labor costs as a percentage of revenue decreased to 30.6% during the year ended December 27, 2020, from 35.4% during the comparable period in 2019, primarily due to furloughing a substantial number of hourly employees as well as store management personnel to right-size our operations as the Company transitioned to an off-premise only operating model at the end of the first quarter of 2020. Hourly labor rate inflation in comparable stores was approximately 0.4%.
Operating costs. Operating costs as a percentage of revenue increased to 15.7% during the year ended December 27, 2020, from 14.6% during the comparable period in 2019. This increase is mainly driven by increases in delivery service charges and to-go supplies as a result of the growth in the Company's off-premise business, partially offset by lower credit card fees and liquor taxes.
Occupancy costs. Occupancy costs as a percentage of revenue increased to 9.2% during the year ended December 27, 2020 as compared to 7.5% for the same period in 2019, primarily as a result of sales deleverage on fixed occupancy expenses and higher property taxes.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses decreased $1.5 million, or 6.3%, to $22.2 million for the year ended December 27, 2020, as compared to $23.7 million during the comparable period in 2019. This decrease was primarily driven by a $0.9 million decrease in performance-based bonuses and $0.6 million decrease in travel during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Marketing costs. Marketing costs as a percentage of revenue decreased to 0.9% during the year ended December 27, 2020 from 1.3% during the comparable period in 2019. This decrease was primarily due to the suspension of the Company’s national-level marketing initiatives in response to COVID-19 while relying on more cost effective local store digital marketing efforts during the second and third quarter of 2020. The Company partially resumed it's advertising campaigns during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Restaurant pre-opening costs. Restaurant pre-opening costs decreased by $1.2 million, or 40.0% to $1.8 million for the year ended December 27, 2020 as compared to $2.9 million during the comparable period in 2019 due to a postponement of new store openings, during the COVID-19 pandemic, to fiscal 2021.
Impairment and closed restaurant costs. Impairment, closed restaurant and other costs increased to $26.8 million during the year ended December 27, 2020 from $14.2 million during the comparable period in 2019. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company recorded non-cash impairment and other COVID-19 related charges of $21.7 million during fiscal 2020 relating to restaurant closures, discontinuation of the complimentary "Nacho Car" as well as write-offs of idle, or abandoned, development costs. During fiscal 2019, the Company recorded a $12.7 million non-cash impairment charge relating to closures of underperforming restaurants during the year. The Company also incurred $5.1 million and $1.5 million of closed restaurant costs, which include rent expense, utility and insurance costs, during fiscal 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Gain on insurance settlements. During fiscal 2020, the Company received a one-time insurance settlement in the amount of $1.0 million under its trade name restoration insurance policy.
Depreciation. Depreciation decreased $0.7 million to $20.0 million for the year ended December 27, 2020, as compared to $20.7 million during the comparable period in 2019, primarily due to a decrease in depreciation related to closed stores.
Income tax benefit. Income tax benefit was $5.5 million in fiscal 2020 and $2.9 million in fiscal 2019. The increase in the tax benefit was primarily driven by a net loss in fiscal 2020 as compared to net income in the same period last year. The tax benefit recorded in fiscal year 2020 related to the revaluation of deferred tax assets due to the administrative correction of the depreciation recovery period for qualified improvement property and the reinstatement of net operating loss carrybacks as a result of the CARES Act. The Company believes that it will realize all of its deferred tax assets and, therefore, no valuation allowance is required at this time.
In August 2020, the IRS issued a Notice of Proposed Adjustment to the Company asserting that the tenant allowances paid under our operating leases should be recorded as taxable income for years 2016 and prior. The Company disagrees with this position based on the underlying facts and circumstances as well as standard industry practice. The Company estimates if the IRS's position was upheld, the Company's tax liability could range between $0.5 million and $2.5 million.
Net (loss) income. As a result of the foregoing, net loss was $3.3 million in fiscal 2020 compared to net income of $6.2 million in fiscal 2019.
Year Ended December 29, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 30, 2018
The following table presents, for the periods indicated, the consolidated statement of operations (in thousands):
Impairment, closed restaurant and other costs
Revenue. Revenue increased 7.1% to $426.4 million for the year ended December 29, 2019, as compared to $398.2 million for the year ended December 30, 2018. The increase in revenue was primarily driven by $28.5 million in incremental revenue from an additional 359 operating weeks provided by new restaurants opened during and subsequent to the year ended December 30, 2018 as well as an increase in our comparable restaurant sales. These increases were partially offset by $2.9 million decrease in revenue as a result of the loss of 80 operating weeks as compared to fiscal year 2018 due to the store closures in 2019 and a decrease in revenue from our non-comparable restaurants that are not included in the incremental revenue discussed above. Revenue related to non-comparable restaurants is historically lower as the stores transition out of the 'honeymoon' period that follows a restaurant's initial opening.
Comparable restaurant sales increased 2.6% for the year ended December 29, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018. The increase was primarily driven by a 3.7% increase in average weekly check, partially offset by a 1.1% decrease in weekly average customers. Our total revenue mix attributed to bar sales was 18.1% and 18.4% during the years ended December 29, 2019 and December 31, 2018, respectively.
Cost of sales. Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue increased to 25.8% during the year ended December 29, 2019 from 25.6% during the same period in 2018, primarily as a result of increases in the cost of beef of approximately 40 basis points, produce of approximately 20 basis points, partially offset by decreases in the costs of chicken of approximately 10 basis points, grocery of approximately 10 basis points and bar costs of 10 basis points.
Labor costs. Labor costs as a percentage of revenue decreased to 35.4% during the year ended December 29, 2019, from 36.2% during the comparable period in 2018, primarily due to leverage on higher average check, increased labor efficiency at new store openings and lower training expense for new managers, partially offset by hourly labor rate inflation on comparable stores of approximately 3.3%.
Operating costs. Operating costs as a percentage of revenue increased to 14.6% during the year ended December 29, 2019, from 14.4% during the comparable period in 2018. This increase is mainly driven by higher insurance costs of approximately 10 basis points and higher credit card fees and delivery service charges of approximately 10 basis points.
Occupancy costs. Occupancy costs as a percentage of revenue remained flat at 7.5% during the year ended December 29, 2019 as compared to the same period in 2018.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses increased $3.0 million, or 14.3%, to $23.7 million for the year ended December 29, 2019, as compared to $20.7 million during the comparable period in 2018. This increase was primarily driven by $1.9 million increase in performance based bonuses and a $1.0 million increase in management salaries and equity compensation in part due to an additional headcount to support our growth.
Marketing costs. Marketing costs as a percentage of revenue increased to 1.3% during the year ended December 29, 2019 from 1.0% during the comparable period in 2018. This increase was a result of our new national-level marketing initiatives.
Restaurant pre-opening costs. Restaurant pre-opening costs decreased by $1.4 million, or 32.7% to $2.9 million for the year ended December 29, 2019 as compared to $4.4 million during the comparable period in 2018. This decrease is primarily driven by a decrease in the number of new restaurants under development in fiscal 2019, as compared to fiscal 2018 as well as timing of our openings. During the year ended December 29, 2019, we incurred pre-opening costs for six new restaurants opened during 2019 as well as five restaurants, one of which was opened during fiscal year 2020 and four of which were postponed to fiscal year 2021 as a result of COVID-19. During the year ended December 30, 2018, we incurred pre-opening costs for nine new restaurants opened during 2018 and four restaurants which opened in fiscal year 2019.
Legal settlement. During the fiscal year 2019, the Company recorded $0.6 million ($0.5 million, net of tax or $0.03 per diluted share) related to a pending legal settlement.
Impairment, closed restaurant and other costs. As a result of our impairment analysis and closures of under-performing restaurants during fiscal year 2019, the Company recorded a non-cash asset impairment charge of approximately $12.7 million and $1.5 million of costs related to closed restaurants during the year. As a result of our impairment analysis of under-performing restaurants during the fiscal year 2018, the Company identified six restaurants as impaired and recognized a non-cash asset impairment charge of approximately $12.3 million.
Depreciation. Depreciation increased $0.9 million to $20.7 million for the year ended December 29, 2019, as compared to $19.8 million during the comparable period in 2018, primarily as the result of an increase in equipment and leasehold improvement costs associated with our new restaurants.
Income tax benefit. Income tax benefit was $2.9 million in fiscal year 2019 and $2.4 million in fiscal year 2018. The tax benefit was primarily due to the tax impact of the non-cash loss on asset impairment and closed restaurant costs of $14.2 million as well as legal settlement accrual of $0.6 million in the fiscal year 2019 and the non-cash loss on asset impairment of $12.3 million in the fiscal year 2018. Excluding the impact of these adjustments, our effective tax rate for fiscal year 2019 was 3.0% compared to 3.5% in the same period last year.
Net income. As a result of the foregoing, net income increased by $0.7 million and 12.2% to $6.2 million for the year ended December 29, 2019 as compared to $5.5 million during the comparable period in 2018.
Liquidity
Our principal sources of cash are net cash provided by operating activities, which includes tenant improvement allowances from our landlords, and borrowings, if any, under our $25.0 million Revolving Credit Facility. Consistent with many other restaurant and retail store operations, we typically use operating lease arrangements for our restaurants. From time to time, we may also purchase the underlying land for development. We believe that our operating lease arrangements provide appropriate leverage of our capital structure in a financially efficient manner.
Our main requirements for liquidity are to support our working capital, restaurant expansion plans, ongoing maintenance of our existing restaurants, investment in infrastructure, obligations under our operating leases, interest payments on our debt, if any, and to repurchase shares of our common stock subject to market conditions. Repurchases of the Company's outstanding common stock will be made in accordance with applicable laws and may be made at management's discretion from time to time in the open market, through privately negotiated transactions or otherwise, including pursuant to Rule 10b5-1 trading plans. There is no guarantee as to the exact number of shares to be repurchased by the Company. The timing and extent of repurchases will depend upon several factors, including market and business conditions, regulatory requirements and other corporate considerations, and repurchases may be discontinued at any time. During the first quarter of 2020, and prior to the impact that COVID-19 had on the Company's business operations, the Company repurchased approximately 90,000 shares of its common stock for a total of $1.4 million. As of December 27, 2020, the Company had $28.6 million remaining under its $30.0 million repurchase program that expires on December 31, 2022. As a result of COVID-19, the Company temporarily suspended further share repurchase activity during 2020.
During the second quarter of 2020, the Company issued 3,041,256 shares of its common stock and received net proceeds of $48.2 million after deducting sales agent commissions and offering expenses payable by the Company. A portion of the net proceeds was used to repay the $25.0 million outstanding under the Company's revolving credit facility. The Company intends to use the remaining net proceeds from the ATM offering for general corporate purposes, including, but not limited to, increasing its liquidity as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
As of December 27, 2020, the Company had a strong financial position with $86.8 million in cash and cash equivalents, no debt and $25.0 million of availability under its revolving credit facility. During the fiscal year ended December 27, 2020, the Company took the following measures to enhance its liquidity position in response to the uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 pandemic:
•Temporarily suspended any further activity under its share repurchase program;
•Utilized CARES act provisions to obtain tax savings as well as deferred its portion of social security taxes to future years; and
•Negotiated rent abatements and concessions with the majority of its landlords in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Management believes that the Company's strong financial position, combined with the measures taken during the COVID-19 pandemic will allow the Company to meet its financial obligations for at least the next twelve months.
Our liquidity may be adversely affected by a number of factors, including a decrease in customer traffic or average check per customer due to changes in economic conditions, as described in Item 1A. “Risk Factors.”
Cash Flows for the Years Ended December 27, 2020, December 29, 2019 and December 30, 2018
The following table summarizes the statements of cash flows (in thousands):
Operating Activities. Net cash provided by operating activities remained relatively flat at $42.7 million for the year ended December 27, 2020 compared to $43.4 million during the same period in 2019. Our business is almost exclusively a cash business. Almost all of our receipts come in the form of cash and cash equivalents and a large majority of our expenditures are paid within a 30 day period. The Company was able to sustain the net cash provided by operating activities near the prior year level despite an approximately 25.0% decrease in revenue mainly driven by a 370 basis point improvement in restaurant-level operating margin over fiscal 2019, various cost savings initiatives and cash management efforts during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $4.4 million to $43.4 million for the year ended December 29, 2019, from $47.9 million during the same period in 2018. The decrease in net cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 29, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018 was primarily due to a $6.8 million decrease in lease incentive receivables and deferred lease incentives mainly driven by our development schedule as well as a planned reduction in contracted tenant allowances on new leases and a $1.8 million decrease in prepaid expenses driven by timing of payments. This total decrease of $8.6 million was partially offset by a $3.5 million increase in accrued liabilities mainly driven by higher bonus and property tax accruals, a $0.5 million increase in tax payable as a result of higher income taxes driven by higher taxable income and timing of other payments.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities decreased $21.1 million to $12.1 million for the year ended December 27, 2020, from $33.3 million for the year ended 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a cancellation of all non-essential capital expenditures and postponement of new store development post COVID-19 to fiscal 2021.
Net cash used in investing activities decreased $11.2 million to $33.3 million for the year ended December 29, 2019, from $44.5 million for the year ended 2018. This decrease is primarily driven by a decrease in the number of new restaurants under development in fiscal 2019 as compared to fiscal 2018 as well as timing of our openings. During the year ended December 29, 2019, we incurred development costs for construction of six new restaurants opened during 2019 as well as five restaurants, one of which was opened during fiscal year 2020 and four of which were postponed to fiscal year 2021 as a result of COVID-19. During the year ended December 30, 2018, we incurred development costs for the construction of nine new restaurants and four restaurants, which opened in fiscal year 2019.
Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities increased $54.5 million to $46.2 million for the year ended December 27, 2020 from net cash used in financial activities of $8.3 million for the same period in 2019. The increase was
primarily due to $48.2 million in net proceeds received in the Company's ATM offering completed during the second quarter of 2020 and a $6.4 million decrease in stock repurchases as compared to the same period last year.
Net cash used in financing activities increased $4.4 million to $8.3 million for the year ended December 29, 2019 from $3.9 million for the same period in 2018. The increase in net cash used by financing activities was primarily the result of $4.2 million of repurchases of our common stock in the open market.
For the years ended December 27, 2020 and December 29, 2019, we had no other financing transactions, arrangements or other relationships with any unconsolidated affiliates or related parties. Additionally, we had no financing arrangements involving synthetic leases or trading activities involving commodity contracts.
Capital Resources
Long-Term Capital Requirements
Our capital requirements are primarily dependent upon the pace of our growth plan and resulting new restaurants. Our growth plan is dependent upon many factors, including economic conditions, real estate markets, restaurant locations and the nature of our lease agreements. Our capital expenditure outlays are also dependent on maintenance and remodel costs in our existing restaurants as well as information technology and other general corporate capital expenditures.
The capital resources typically required for a new restaurant depend on whether the restaurant is a ground-up construction or a conversion. For our new unit openings, we estimate the cost of a conversion or ground-up buildout will require a total cash investment of approximately $2.5 million to $3.5 million. In addition, we expect to spend approximately $0.5 million per restaurant for restaurant pre-opening costs.
During the next twelve to twenty-four months, we intend to negotiate terminations for all of our closed store operating leases. We estimate the cost of termination of these leases could range between approximately $12.0 to $20.0 million.
For 2021, we currently estimate capital expenditure outlays will range between $15.0 million and $25.0 million and approximately $2.0 million to $3.0 million of restaurant pre-opening costs for new restaurants. These capital expenditure estimates are based on the opening of four to six new restaurants and approximately $7.0 million to maintain and remodel our existing restaurants and for other general corporate purposes.
Based on our growth plans, we believe our existing cash balance combined with future expected cash flows from operations and available borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility will be sufficient to finance our planned capital expenditures and other operating activities in fiscal 2021.
Short-Term Capital Requirements
Our operations have not required significant working capital and, like many restaurant companies, we generally operate with negative working capital. Restaurant sales are primarily paid for in cash or by credit card, and restaurant operations do not require significant inventories or receivables. In addition, we receive trade credit for the purchase of food, beverages and supplies, therefore reducing the need for incremental working capital to support growth.
We had a net working capital of $51.2 million at December 27, 2020 compared to a deficit of $19.4 million at December 29, 2019. The increase in the net working capital during fiscal year 2020 is primarily driven by $48.2 million net proceeds received in the Company's ATM offering completed during the second quarter of 2020 and improved restaurant level operating margins subsequent to the start of COVID-19 pandemic.
Revolving Credit Facility
On November 30, 2012, we entered into our $25.0 million Revolving Credit Facility with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association. On May 21, 2020, the Company entered into the second amendment (the “Amendment”) to its Revolving Credit Facility (as amended, the "Revolving Credit Facility") to (1) extend the maturity date to April 30, 2022, (2) relax compliance with the financial covenants during the COVID-19 pandemic through the new maturity date and (3) revise the applicable margins and leverage ratios that determine the commitment fees and interest payable by the Company.
Under our Revolving Credit Facility, we may request to increase the size of our Revolving Credit Facility by up to $25.0 million, in minimum principal amounts of $5.0 million or the remaining amount of the $25.0 million if less than $5.0 million (the "Incremental Revolving Loan"). In the event that any of the lenders fund the Incremental Revolving Loan, the terms and provisions of the Incremental Revolving Loan will be the same as under our Revolving Credit Facility.
Borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility generally bear interest at a variable rate based upon the Company's election, of (i) the base rate (which is the highest of the prime rate, federal funds rate plus 0.5% and one month LIBOR plus 1.0%), or (ii) LIBOR, plus, in either case, an applicable margin based on the Company's consolidated total leverage ratio (as defined in the Amendment) with a LIBOR floor of 1.0%. The Revolving Credit Facility also requires payment for commitment fees that
accrue on the daily unused commitment of the lender at the applicable margin, which varies based on the Company's consolidated total leverage ratio.
The Revolving Credit Facility also requires compliance with a fixed charge coverage ratio, a consolidated total leverage ratio, growth capital expenditure limitation during fiscal years 2020 and 2021 and a minimum monthly liquidity requirement of $5.0 million. The Revolving Credit Facility also has certain restrictions on the payment of dividends and distributions. Under the Revolving Credit Facility, the Company may declare and make dividend payments so long as (i) no default or event of default has occurred and is continuing or would result therefrom and (ii) immediately after giving effect to any such dividend payment, on a pro forma basis, the lease adjusted leverage ratio does not exceed 3.50 to 1.00.
The obligations under the Company's Revolving Credit Facility are secured by a first priority lien on substantially all of the Company's asset. As of December 27, 2020, the Company had no borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility, and we were in compliance with all covenants.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes contractual obligations at December 27, 2020 (in thousands):
(1)Reflects the aggregate minimum lease payments for our restaurant operations and corporate office, including approximately $2.1 million of legally binding minimum lease payments for leases signed but which we have not yet taken possession. Operating lease obligations excludes contingent rent payments that may be due under certain of our leases based on a percentage of sales.
(2)Includes contractual purchase commitments for the purchase of goods related to restaurant operations and commitments for construction of new restaurants.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As part of our on-going business, we do not participate in transactions that generate relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities referred to as structured finance or variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. As of December 27, 2020, we are not involved in any variable interest entities transactions and do not otherwise have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Preparing consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are affected by the application of our accounting policies. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Critical accounting estimates are those that require application of management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. While we apply our judgment based on assumptions believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, actual results could vary from these assumptions. It is possible that materially different amounts would be reported using different assumptions. The following is a description of what we consider to be our most significant critical accounting policies.
Leases and leasehold improvements. The Company leases land and or buildings for its corporate offices and all of its restaurants under various long-term operating lease agreements. The Company determines if a contract contains a lease at inception. The lease term begins on the date that the Company takes possession under the lease, including the pre-opening period during construction, when in many cases the Company is not making rent payments. The initial lease terms range from 10 years to 15 years, most of which include renewal options of 10 to 15 years. The lease term is generally the minimum of the noncancelable period or the lease term including renewal options which are reasonably certain of being exercised up to a term of approximately 20 years. When determining the lease term, we include option periods for which failure to renew the lease imposes a penalty on us in such an amount that a renewal appears, at the inception of the lease, to be reasonably assured. The
primary penalty to which we are subject is the economic detriment associated with the existence of leasehold improvements which might become impaired if we choose not to continue the use of the leased property.
Operating lease assets and liabilities are recognized at the lease commencement date for material leases with a term of greater than 12 months. Operating lease liabilities represent the present value of future minimum lease payments. Since our leases do not provide an implicit rate, our operating lease liabilities are calculated using the Company's secured incremental borrowing rate at lease commencement. We have no outstanding debt, and as a result, we estimate this rate based on prevailing financial market conditions, comparable companies, credit analysis and management judgment. Minimum lease payments include only fixed lease components of the agreement, as well as variable rate payments that depend on an index, initially measured using the index at the lease commencement date.
Operating lease assets represent our right to use an underlying asset and are based upon the operating lease liabilities adjusted for prepaid or accrued lease payments, initial direct costs and lease incentives. Lease incentives are recognized when earned and reduce our operating lease asset. They are amortized through the operating lease assets as reductions of rent expense over the lease term.
Operating lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Variable lease payments that do not depend on a rate or index, escalation in the index subsequent to the initial measurement, payments associated with non-lease components such as common area maintenance, real estate taxes and insurance, and short-term lease payments (leases with a term with 12 months or less) are expensed as incurred. Certain of the Company’s operating leases contain clauses that provide for contingent rent based on a percentage of sales greater than certain specified target amounts. These variable payments are expensed when the achievement of the specified target that triggers the contingent rent is considered probable.
We make judgments regarding the probable term for each restaurant property lease, which can impact the classification and accounting for a lease as finance or operating, the rent holiday and/or escalations in payments that are taken into consideration when calculating straight-line rent and the term over which leasehold improvements and deferred lease incentives for each restaurant are amortized. These judgments may produce materially different amounts of depreciation and rent expense than would be reported if different assumed lease terms were used.
Impairment of long-lived assets. The Company reviews long-lived assets, such as property and equipment and intangibles, subject to amortization, for impairment when events or circumstances indicate the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable. In determining the recoverability of the asset value, an analysis is performed at the individual restaurant level and primarily includes an assessment of historical undiscounted cash flows and other relevant factors and circumstances. The Company evaluates future cash flow projections in conjunction with qualitative factors and future operating plans and regularly reviews any restaurants with a deficient level of cash flows for the previous 24 months to determine if impairment testing is necessary. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying value of the restaurant to its estimated future undiscounted cash flows. If the estimated undiscounted future cash flows are less than the carrying value, we determine if there is an impairment loss by comparing the carrying value of the restaurant to its estimated fair value. Based on this analysis, if the carrying value of the restaurant exceeds its estimated fair value, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value.
We make assumptions to estimate future cash flows and asset fair values. The estimated fair value is generally determined using the depreciated replacement cost method, the market approach, or discounted cash flow projections. Estimated future cash flows are highly subjective assumptions based on Company’s projections and understanding of our business, historical operating results, and trends in sales and restaurant level operating costs.
The Company’s impairment assessment process requires the use of estimates and assumptions regarding future cash flows and operating outcomes, which are based upon a significant degree of management judgment. The estimates used in the impairment analysis represent a Level 3 fair value measurement. The Company continues to assess the performance of restaurants and monitors the need for future impairment. Changes in the economic environment, real estate markets, capital spending, overall operating performance and underlying assumptions could impact these estimates and result in future impairment charges.
As a result of the above mentioned process, the Company recorded a non-cash loss on asset impairment of $20.9 million during the fiscal year ended December 27, 2020, $12.7 million during the fiscal year ended December 29, 2019 and $12.3 million during the fiscal year ended December 30, 2018.
Goodwill and other intangible assets. Goodwill and indefinite life intangible assets are not amortized but are tested annually at the end of the fiscal year, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the assets might be impaired. In assessing the recoverability of goodwill and indefinite life intangible assets, the Company must make assumptions about the estimated future cash flows and other factors to determine the fair value of these assets.
For goodwill, our assessment is performed at the reporting unit level. The Company considers all of its stores in total as one reporting unit. The goodwill impairment test compares the fair value of the reporting unit to the carrying amount, including
goodwill. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying amount, an impairment charge is recorded for the difference, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
Similarly, for the impairment evaluation for indefinite life intangible assets, which includes our trade names, we determine whether the estimated fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying value. We calculate the estimated fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset and compare it to the carrying value. Fair value is estimated primarily using future discounted cash flow projections in conjunction with qualitative factors and future operating plans. When the carrying value exceeds fair value, an impairment charge is recorded for the amount of the difference. An intangible asset is determined to have an indefinite useful life when there are no legal, regulatory, contractual, competitive, economic or other factors that may limit the period over which the asset is expected to contribute directly or indirectly to the future cash flows of the Company. The Company also annually evaluates intangible assets that are not being amortized to determine whether events and circumstances continue to support an indefinite useful life. If an intangible asset that is not being amortized is determined to have a finite useful life, the asset will be amortized prospectively over the estimated remaining useful life and accounted for in the same manner as intangible assets subject to amortization. Our analysis indicated that no impairments of goodwill or indefinite-lived intangibles occurred during fiscal 2020, 2019 or 2018.
Income taxes. Income tax provisions consist of federal and state taxes currently due, plus deferred taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Deferred tax assets are recognized when management considers the realization of those assets in future periods to be more likely than not. Future taxable income, adjustments in temporary difference, available carryforward periods and changes in tax laws could affect these estimates.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The information regarding recent accounting pronouncements materially affecting our consolidated financial statements is included in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.