Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
See Part 1, Item 1, "Business", for additional detail on forward looking statements.
Company Overview
CIRCOR International is one of the world’s leading providers of mission critical flow control products and services for the Industrial and Aerospace & Defense markets. The Company has a product portfolio of market-leading brands serving its customers’ most demanding applications. CIRCOR markets its solutions directly and through various sales partners to more than 14,000 customers in approximately 100 countries. The Company has a global presence with approximately 3,100 employees and is headquartered in Burlington, Massachusetts. See Part 1, Item 1, Business, for additional information regarding the description of our business.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic adversely impacted our end markets, operations, and financial condition in 2020. Throughout this continued time of unprecedented uncertainty, the Company's top priority remains the health and safety of our employees, customers, and suppliers. Because of the end markets we serve, the majority of our facilities are deemed 'essential operations' in the countries in which we operate. Throughout 2020 and continuing in 2021, we implemented significant measures in an effort to ensure our employees around the world have the necessary protection and our business continues to operate with as little disruption as possible. These measures include but are not limited to:
•Additional cleaning and disinfecting procedures at all facilities;
•Daily temperature checks and masks for employees;
•Adherence to strict social distancing guidelines;
•Employees are strongly encouraged to work from home where possible; and
•Cancellation of all non-essential travel
Throughout 2020 and into 2021, the Company also took prudent action to ensure it maintained its financial flexibility including the cessation of all non-critical business expenses, permanent employee reductions, employee furloughs, and pay cuts for senior management and board of directors. We believe that these actions along with the Company's continued focus on new product innovation, cost productivity, and the CIRCOR Operating System ("COS") serve to best position the Company for potential end market recovery across our Industrial and Aerospace & Defense business segments. The situation relating to the COVID-19 pandemic and its potential effects on our business and financial results remains dynamic, and the broader implications for our business and results of operations remain uncertain and will depend on many factors outside our control. Please see Part 1, Item 1A - "Risk Factors" for more detail.
Segment Commentary
The Company's Aerospace & Defense segment has been and continues to be significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, primarily in our Commercial Aerospace business. We expect that the commercial aerospace end markets will improve in 2021 compared to 2020, but that a recovery to pre-pandemic levels of demand will depend on air framer production rates and could take several years. Our Defense business has been less impacted by the pandemic, and we expect continued growth in this end market driven by our positions on key U.S. defense programs, including the Joint Strike Fighter and Columbia class submarines, and new product introductions. We continue to focus on increasing growth in our global aftermarket.
The Company's Industrial reporting segment has been and continues to be significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2021, we expect modest growth in the General Industrial sector led by chemical and machinery applications with a weaker recovery in construction and mining. While our commercial marine sector continues to be constrained, we do expect to experience growth as the regulatory environment could cause demand for our products. We expect that our mid-stream and downstream oil and gas customers will continue to prioritize spending on critical safety and maintenance, but we expect that larger capital expenditures will continue to be delayed. We expect to experience higher demand for our products that serve the power generation markets with particular strength in Asia and in our global aftermarket.
We continue to implement actions to mitigate the impact on our earnings from lower demand and an increasingly competitive environment. In addition, we are investing in products and technologies designed to help solve our customers’ most difficult problems. We expect to further simplify CIRCOR by standardizing technology, rationalizing facilities, consolidating suppliers and achieving world class operational excellence, including working capital management. We believe our cash flow from
operations and financing capacity is adequate to support these activities. Finally, continuing to attract and retain talented personnel, including the enhancement of our global sales, operations, product management and engineering organizations, remains an important part of our strategy during 2021.
Basis of Presentation
All significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. We operate and report financial information using a 52-week fiscal year ending December 31. The data periods contained within our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q reflect the results of operations for the 13-week, 26-week and 39-week periods which generally end on the Sunday nearest the calendar quarter-end date. Certain reclassifications have been made to prior period amounts to conform to the current period financial statement presentation, including the results of discontinued operations and reportable segment information.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
The Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and results of operations is based upon its consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP"). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosure of contingent liabilities. On an on-going basis, management evaluates its significant estimates, including those related to contracts accounted for under the percentage of completion method, bad debts, inventories, intangible assets and goodwill, purchase accounting, delivery penalties, income taxes, and contingencies including litigation. Management believes the most complex and sensitive judgments, because of their significance to the consolidated financial statements, result primarily from the need to make estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain. Management bases its estimates on historical experience, current market and economic conditions and other assumptions that management believes are reasonable. The results of these estimates form the basis for judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities where the values are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
There have been no significant changes from the methodology applied by management for critical accounting estimates previously disclosed in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
For goodwill, we perform an impairment assessment at the reporting unit level on an annual basis as of our October month end or more frequently if circumstances warrant. On March 29, 2020, the Company reorganized its reporting units and had its stock price drop below book value, which the Company determined were triggering events requiring an assessment of its goodwill and indefinite-lived trade names. Based on our impairment assessment as of March 29, 2020, we concluded that our goodwill in the Industrial reporting unit was impaired and, accordingly, recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $116.2 million in the quarterly period ended March 29, 2020.
In October 2020 when we performed our annual goodwill impairment assessment, the fair value of each of our reporting units exceeded the respective carrying amount, and no goodwill impairments were recorded. The fair values utilized for our 2020 goodwill assessment exceeded the carrying amounts by more than 20% and 10% for our Aerospace & Defense and Industrial reporting units, respectively. The growth rate assumptions utilized were consistent with growth rates within the markets that we serve and considered the near to mid-term negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our end markets, operations, and cash flows. If our results significantly vary from our estimates, related projections, or business assumptions in the future due to change in industry or market conditions, we may be required to record impairment charges.
For information regarding our significant accounting policies, refer to Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, which disclosure is incorporated by reference herein.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue to depict the transfer of control to the Company's customers in an amount reflecting the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for performance obligations. Revenue on point in time contracts are recognized when customer obtains control of the product, which is generally at the time of shipping. Revenues and costs on certain long-term contracts are recognized on the percentage-of-completion method measured on the basis of costs incurred to estimated total costs of each contract. This method is used because management considers it to be the best available measure of progress towards completion on these contracts. Revenues and costs on contracts are subject to changes in estimates throughout the duration of the contracts, and any required adjustments are made in the period in which a change in estimate becomes known.
For revenue that is recognized from products and services transferred to customers over-time, the Company uses an input measure (e.g., costs incurred to date relative to total estimated costs at completion, known as the “cost-to-cost” method) to measure progress. The Company uses the cost-to-cost measure of progress because it best depicts the transfer of control to the customer which occurs as it incurs costs on its contracts. Under the cost-to-cost measure of progress, revenue is recognized proportionally as costs are incurred. Contract costs include labor, materials and subcontractors’ costs, other direct costs and an allocation of overhead, as appropriate. Accounting for over-time contracts requires reliable estimates in order to estimate total contract revenue and costs. For these contracts, management reviews the progress and execution of the Company's performance obligations at least quarterly. Management estimates the profit on a contract as the difference between the total estimated revenue and estimate at completion ("EAC") costs and recognizes the resultant profit over the life of the contract, using the cost-to-cost EAC input method to measure progress toward complete satisfaction of a performance obligation. A change in one or more of these estimates could affect the profitability of the related contracts. Management recognizes adjustments in estimated profit on contracts under the cumulative catch-up method. Under this method, the impact of the adjustment on profit recorded to date is recognized in the period the adjustment is identified. Revenue and profit in future periods of contract performance is recognized using the adjusted estimate. The impact of adjustments in contract estimates on our operating earnings can be reflected in either operating expenses or revenue.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carry-forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
In accordance with the provisions of ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes, the Company initially recognizes the financial statement effect of a tax position when, based solely on its technical merits, it is more likely than not (a likelihood of greater than fifty percent) that the position will be sustained upon examination by the relevant taxing authority. Those tax positions failing to qualify for initial recognition are recognized in the first interim period in which they meet the more likely than not standard, are resolved through negotiation or litigation with the taxing authority, or upon expiration of the statute of limitations. De-recognition of a tax position that was previously recognized occurs when an entity subsequently determines that a tax position no longer meets the more likely than not threshold of being sustained.
ASC 740, Income Taxes, requires a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets if, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion, or all, of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The weight given to the potential effect of negative and positive evidence should be commensurate with the extent to which it can be objectively verified. The more negative evidence that exists, (a) the more positive evidence is necessary and (b) the more difficult it is to support a conclusion that a valuation allowance is not needed for some portion, or all, of the deferred tax asset. Should there be
a cumulative loss in recent years it is considered a significant piece of negative evidence that is difficult to overcome in assessing the need for a valuation allowance.
Management assesses the available positive and negative evidence to estimate whether sufficient future taxable income will be generated to permit use of the existing deferred tax assets. On July 9, 2020, the US Department of the Treasury (Treasury) and Internal Revenue Service (IRS) released Final Regulations (Final Regulations) that provide guidance on the section 250 deduction for foreign-derived intangible income (FDII) and global intangible low-taxed income (GILTI). In addition, on July 20, 2020, Treasury released Proposed Regulations concerning GILTI. Based on the impact of these regulations, we believe less reliance should be placed on the US taxation of foreign earnings, which would adversely impact our ability to realize our US deferred tax assets. With the release of these Final Regulations during the third quarter, coupled with the negative evidence of cumulative losses in the US, the negative evidence outweighed the positive evidence as of the third quarter of 2020. As such, the Company has not relied on projections of future taxable income in our assessment of the realization of deferred tax assets at September 27, 2020, and recognized a valuation allowance of $42.2 million in income tax expense in the third quarter of 2020.. In addition, the Company recorded a valuation allowance related to German deferred tax assets of $14.8 million in income tax expense in the fourth quarter of 2020. The Company relied solely on the expected reversal of taxable temporary differences to support the realizability of the German deferred tax assets and no reliance was placed on projections of future taxable income.
Results of Operations
The Chief Operating Decision Maker ("CODM") is the function that allocates the resources of the enterprise and assesses the performance of the Company's reportable operating segments. CIRCOR has determined that the CODM is solely comprised of its Chief Executive Officer ("CEO"), as the CEO has the ultimate responsibility for CIRCOR strategic decision-making and resource allocation.
Our CODM evaluates segment operating performance using segment operating income. We define segment operating income as GAAP operating income excluding intangible amortization and amortization of fair value step-ups of inventory and fixed assets from acquisitions completed subsequent to December 31, 2011, the impact of restructuring-related inventory write-offs, impairment charges and special charges or gains. The Company also refers to this measure as adjusted operating income. The Company uses this measure because it helps management understand and evaluate the segments’ core operating results and facilitates a comparison of performance for determining incentive compensation achievement.
For information regarding our segment determination refer to Note 18, Business Segment and Geographical Information, of the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
The following tables present information on net revenues and operating income of our business segments, along with a reconciliation of total segment operating income to the Company's consolidated operating income.
2020 Compared With 2019
Consolidated Operations
Net revenues in 2020 were $773.3 million, a decrease of $191 million from 2019 primarily driven by lower revenue as a result of divestitures of $90.3 million and lower operational results of $104.0 million, partially offset by favorable foreign exchange of $3.2 million.
Segment Results
Industrial Segment
Industrial segment revenues decreased $186.2 million, or 27%, in 2020 compared to 2019. Segment net revenues excluding divestitures decreased $96.0 million due to the timing of projects in the Europe and North American Pumps businesses ("Pumps businesses") driving a decrease of 7% and reduction in the Valves businesses of 10%.
Industrial segment operating income decreased $51.0 million, or 56%, in 2020 compared to 2019. Segment operating income excluding divestitures decreased $33.7 million, or 46%, to $39.8 million for 2020 compared to $73.5 million for 2019, driven by decreases in the Pumps businesses of 31% and the Valves businesses of 49% partially offset by operational efficiencies in headquarters.
Industrial segment orders decreased $181.9 million, or 27%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by the impact from divestitures of $90.3 million and reductions in the Valves businesses of 17% and the Pumps businesses of 11%.
Aerospace & Defense Segment
Aerospace & Defense segment net revenues decreased by $4.8 million, or 2% in 2020 as compared to 2019. The decrease was driven by our Aerospace businesses 28%, partially offset by increases in the Defense businesses 21%.
Segment operating income increased $6.6 million, or 13%, to $59.1 million for 2020 compared to $52.5 million for 2019. The increase in operating income was driven by improved value pricing and cost actions taken to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Aerospace & Defense segment orders decreased $59.4 million, or 18.9%, to $254.5 million in 2020 compared to $313.9 million in 2019, driven by decreases in our Defense businesses of 5% and our Aerospace businesses of 36%.
Corporate Expenses
Corporate expenses decreased $2.2 million to $31.3 million for 2020. This decrease was primarily driven by ongoing cost savings initiatives and lower travel expenses due to global travel restrictions related to COVID-19.
Special and Restructuring (Recoveries) Charges, net
During 2020, the Company recorded a total of $34.3 million in recovery of special and restructuring charges. In our consolidated statements of (loss) income, these recoveries are recorded in special and restructuring (recoveries) charges, net. The recovery is a result of the net gain on sale of our Instrumentation & Sampling business, offset by professional fees related to an unsolicited tender offer to acquire the Company and other restructuring costs associated with our simplification efforts, primarily in our Industrial Segment. These recoveries, restructuring charges and other special charges are described in further detail in Note 5, Special and Restructuring (Recoveries) Charges, net, in the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Restructuring, impairment and other costs, net
During 2020, the Company recorded a total of $162.4 million of Restructuring, impairment and other costs, net, including Q1 2020 industrial reporting unit goodwill impairment in the amount of $116.2 million. These charges represent plant, property, and equipment depreciation related to the step-up in fair value as part of our acquisition of Colfax Corporation's Fluid Handling ("FH") business, intangible amortization in connection with acquisitions subsequent to December 31, 2011, and step-up in fair value of inventory acquired as part of our FH acquisition. These charges are recorded in either selling, general and administrative expenses or cost of revenues based upon the nature of the underlying asset.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense decreased $14.4 million to $34.2 million for 2020. The change in interest expense was primarily due to lower debt balances.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net, was $0.5 million for 2020 compared to $0.8 million in 2019. The difference of $0.3 million primarily relates to net pension income for the retirement plans we acquired as part of the FH acquisition. Effective January 1, 2018 all pension gains and losses are recorded in the Other (Income) Expense, net caption on our consolidated statement of (loss) income. Pension Income was partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency translation.
Comprehensive (Loss) Income
Comprehensive loss increased $46.7 million, from a comprehensive loss position of $144.5 million for the year-ended December 31, 2019 to a comprehensive loss position of $191.2 million for the year-ended December 31, 2020. This change was primarily driven by an increase in net loss of $125.6 million in our continuing operations caused by impairment of goodwill of $116.2 million and increased income taxes of $41.5 million, partially offset by net gain on the sale of the
Instrumentation & Sampling business of $53.2 million and reduced losses in our discontinued operations of $74.0 million as the Distributed Valve business was divested during the year.
As of December 31, 2020, we had a cumulative currency translation adjustment of $18.2 million in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss for our Brazil entity. If we were to cease to have a controlling financial interest in the Brazil entity or otherwise satisfy criteria for reclassification of the amount from Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss to earnings, we would recognize a non-cash charge of $18.2 million based on December 31, 2020 balances, which would be included as a special charge within the consolidated statements of (loss) income.
(Benefit from) Provision for Income Taxes
The table below outlines the change in effective tax rate for 2020 and 2019 (in thousands, except percentages).
Management assesses the available positive and negative evidence to estimate whether sufficient future taxable income will be generated to permit use of the existing deferred tax assets. On July 9, 2020, the US Department of the Treasury ("Treasury") and Internal Revenue Service released "Final Regulations" that provide guidance on the section 250 deduction for foreign-derived intangible income ("FDII") and global intangible low-taxed income ("GILTI"). In addition, on July 20, 2020, Treasury released proposed regulations ("Proposed Regulations") concerning GILTI. Based on the expected impact of these regulations, we believe less reliance should be placed on the US taxation of foreign earnings, which would adversely impact our ability to realize our US deferred tax assets. With the release of the Final Regulations during the third quarter of 2020, coupled with the negative evidence of cumulative losses in the US, the negative evidence outweighed the positive evidence as of the third quarter of 2020. As such, the Company has not relied on projections of future taxable income in our assessment of the realization of deferred tax assets at September 27, 2020, and recognized a valuation allowance of $42.2 million in income tax expense in the third quarter of 2020. In addition, the Company recorded a valuation allowance related to German deferred tax assets of $14.8 million in income tax expense in the fourth quarter of 2020. The Company relied solely on the expected reversal of taxable temporary differences to support the realizability of the German deferred tax assets and no reliance was placed on projections of future taxable income.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company maintained a total valuation allowance of $125.3 million and $44.3 million, respectively, which relates to foreign, federal, and state deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. The amount of the deferred tax asset considered realizable, however, could be adjusted if estimates of future taxable income during the carryforward period are reduced or increased or if objective negative evidence in the form of cumulative losses is no longer present and additional weight is given to subjective evidence such as our projections for growth.
Results of Operations
2019 Compared With 2018
Consolidated Operations
Net revenues in 2019 were $964.3 million, a decrease of $49.2 million from 2018 primarily driven by lower revenue as a result of divestitures of $81.0 million and unfavorable foreign exchange of $22.5 million, partially offset by operational growth in all segments of $54.4 million.
The following table present information on net revenues and operating income of our business segments, along with a reconciliation of total segment operating income to the Company's consolidated operating income.
Industrial Segment
Industrial segment net revenues, excluding divestitures, remained relatively flat with a less than $0.1 million increase, in 2019 compared to 2018.
Segment operating income, excluding divestitures, decreased $4.0 million, or 5%, to $73.5 million for 2019 compared to $77.5 million for 2018, primarily driven by a decrease in the Pumps businesses of 14%, partially offset by an increase in the Valves businesses of 6% along with operational efficiencies in headquarters.
Industrial segment orders decreased $158.2 million, or 19%, to $663.5 million for 2019 as compared to $821.7 million in 2018, driven by declines within our Pumps businesses of 9%, Refinery Valves of 9% and other Valves businesses of 3%.
Aerospace & Defense Segment
Aerospace & Defense segment net revenues increased by $35.6 million, or 15%, in 2019 as compared to 2018. The increase was driven by growth in our Defense businesses of 10% and our Aerospace businesses of 5%.
Segment operating income increased $16.4 million, or 46%, to $52.5 million for 2019 compared to $36.0 million for 2018. The change was driven by increases in our Defense businesses of 25% and our Aerospace businesses of 21%.
Aerospace & Defense segment orders increased $36.5 million, or 13%, to $313.9 million for 2019 compared to $277.5 million in 2018, driven by increases in our Defense businesses of 10% and our Aerospace businesses of 3%.
Corporate Expenses
Corporate expenses decreased $5.5 million to $33.5 million for 2019. This decrease was primarily driven by ongoing cost savings initiatives resulting in lower professional fees, variable compensation and integration costs
Special and Restructuring charges, net
During 2019, the Company recorded a total of $22.9 million of Special and restructuring charges. In our consolidated statements of (loss) income, these charges are recorded in Special and restructuring charges, net. These costs are primarily related to our simplification and restructuring efforts, as well as professional fees relating to an unsolicited tender offer to acquire the Company. These restructuring charges and other special charges are described in further detail in Note 5, Special and Restructuring (recoveries) charges, net, of the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Restructuring and other cost, net
During 2019, the Company recorded a total of $49.2 million of Restructuring and other costs. These charges represent plant, property, and equipment depreciation related to the step-up in fair value as part of our acquisition of Colfax Corporation's Fluid Handling ("FH") business, intangible amortization in connection with acquisitions subsequent to December 31, 2011, and step-up in fair value of inventory acquired as part of our FH acquisition. These charges are recorded in either selling, general and administrative expenses or cost of revenues based upon the nature of the underlying asset.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense decreased $4.4 million to $48.6 million for 2019. The change in interest expense was primarily due to lower debt balances, and our net investment hedge, partially offset by an increase in interest rates.
Other (Income) Expense, Net
Other income, net, was $0.8 million for 2019 compared to $7.4 million in 2018. The difference of $6.6 million primarily relates to net pension income for the retirement plans we acquired as part of the FH acquisition. Effective January 1, 2018 all pension gains and losses are recorded in the Other (Income) Expense, net caption on our consolidated statement of (loss) income. In addition we experienced lower gains from foreign exchange in 2019 compared to 2018.
Comprehensive (Loss) Income
Comprehensive loss increased $72.1 million, from a comprehensive loss position of $72.4 million for the year-ended December 31, 2018 to a comprehensive loss position of $144.5 million for the year-ended December 31, 2019. This change was primarily driven by an increase in net loss of $103.1 million in our discontinued operations, partially offset by $15.8 million of lower negative effects of foreign currency translation, and reduced losses in our continuing operations of $8.6 million, as compared to the prior year.
(Benefit from) Provision for Income Taxes
The table below outlines the change in effective tax rate for 2019 and 2018 (in thousands, except percentages).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity needs arise primarily from capital investment in machinery, equipment and the improvement of facilities, funding working capital requirements to support business growth initiatives, acquisitions, and debt service costs. We have historically generated cash from operations and remain in a strong financial position, with resources available for reinvestment in existing businesses, strategic acquisitions and managing our capital structure on a short and long-term basis.
The following table summarizes our cash flow activities for the year-ended indicated (in thousands):
Cash Flow Activities for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $22.7 million in cash flow from operating activities compared to generating $15.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The $38.6 million decrease in operating cash was primarily driven by lower income from continuing operations, payment of one-time professional fees, and transition costs related to exiting the upstream oil & gas business, partially offset by higher cash flows from inventory and accounts payable.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated $144.3 million from investing activities compared to generating $153.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The $8.7 million year over year decrease in cash provided was primarily driven by cash used in discontinued investing activities.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $133.8 million in cash from financing activities compared to cash used of $152.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The $19.1 million year over year decrease in cash used by financing activities resulted from lower repayment of long term debt.
As of December 31, 2020, total debt (including current portion) was $507.9 million compared to $636.3 million at December 31, 2019. Total debt is net of unamortized term loan debt issuance costs of $12.0 million and $17.6 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Total debt as a percentage of total shareholders’ equity was 246% as of December 31, 2020 compared to 163% as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had available capacity to borrow an additional $91.7 million under our revolving credit facility.
As of December 31, 2020, we had borrowings of $507.9 million outstanding under our credit facility and $39.3 million outstanding under letters of credit.
We were in compliance with all financial covenants related to our existing debt obligations at December 31, 2020 and we believe it is likely that we will continue to meet such covenants for at least the next twelve months from date of issuance of the financial statements.
The ratio of current assets to current liabilities was 2.4:1 at December 31, 2020 compared to 2.4:1 at December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, cash and cash equivalents totaled $76.5 million and was substantially all held in foreign bank accounts. This compares to $84.5 million of cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2019, with balances all substantially held in foreign bank accounts. These funds are considered indefinitely reinvested to be used to expand operations either organically or through acquisitions outside of the United States.
In 2021, we expect to generate positive cash flow from operating activities sufficient to support our capital expenditures and service our debt. Based on our expected cash flows from operations and contractually available borrowings under our credit facility, we expect to have sufficient liquidity to fund working capital needs and future growth over at least the next twelve months from date of filing the 2020 financial statements.
On February 26, 2020, the Company amended its term loan to lower the interest rate associated with the applicable margin calculation. The new terms lower the interest rate on the Company's term loan from LIBOR plus an applicable margin of 3.5% to LIBOR plus an applicable margin of 3.25%, based on its existing corporate family rating from Moody's. The applicable margin reduces to LIBOR plus an applicable margin of 3.00%, with a corporate family rating from Moody's of B1 or better.
During the fourth quarter of 2019, the Company entered into a definitive agreement to sell its non-core Instrumentation and Sampling ("I&S") business to Crane Co. for $172 million, in cash, subject to working capital adjustments. The transaction
closed on January 31, 2020. The I&S business manufactures valves, fittings, regulators and sampling systems primarily serving energy end markets. The Company received net cash proceeds from sale of $169.8 million and recognized a pre-tax gain on sale of $54.6 million.
Cash Flow Activities for the Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we generated $15.9 million in cash flow from operating activities compared to $54.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2018. The $38.1 million decrease in operating cash was primarily driven by higher cash taxes, higher working capital and cash used by discontinued operations.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we generated $153.0 million for investing activities compared to cash used of $16.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2018. The $169.9 million year over year increase in cash provided was primarily driven by cash proceeds from the sale of certain assets and liabilities related to Spence and Nicholson products lines for $84.5 million and the sale of the Reliability Services business for approximately $85 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we used $152.9 million in cash from financing activities as compared to cash used of $74.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2018. The $78.9 million year over year increase in cash used by financing activities resulted from payments to reduce long-term debt.
As of December 31, 2019, total debt (including current portion) was $636.3 million compared to $786.0 million at December 31, 2018. Total debt is net of unamortized term loan debt issuance costs of $17.6 million and $21.0 million at December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Total debt as a percentage of total shareholders’ equity was 163% as of December 31, 2019 compared to 149% as of December 31, 2018. As of December 31, 2019, we had available capacity to borrow an additional $115.7 million under our revolving credit facility.
As of December 31, 2019, we had borrowings of $636.3 million outstanding under our credit facility and $42.0 million outstanding under letters of credit.
We were in compliance with all financial covenants related to our existing debt obligations at December 31, 2019 and we believe it is likely that we will continue to meet such covenants for at least the next twelve months from date of issuance of the financial statements.
Significant Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations and commercial commitments at December 31, 2020 that affect our liquidity (in thousands):
Our commercial contract commitments primarily relate to open purchase orders of $94.0 million, $11.7 million of which extend to 2022 and beyond.
In accordance with the authoritative guidance for accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, as of December 31, 2020, we had unrecognized tax benefits of $1.1 million and $0.1 million of accrued interest. The Company does not expect the unrecognized tax benefits to change over the next 12 months.
During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, we made cash contributions of approximately $0.8 million to our U.S. plans and $4.1 million to our foreign plans. During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, we made cash contributions of approximately $0.8 million to our U.S. plans and $4.3 million for our foreign plans. During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018, we did not make any cash contributions to our defined benefit plan, but made $0.4 million in payments for our non-qualified plans. In addition, we made $0.5 million, $3.4 million, $1.8 million in payments to our 401(k) savings plan for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
In 2021, we expect to make defined benefit plan contributions based on the minimum required funding in accordance with statutory requirements (approximately $1.1 million in the U.S. and approximately $3.9 million for our foreign plans). The estimates for plan funding for future periods may change as a result of the uncertainties concerning the return on plan assets, the number of plan participants, and other changes in actuarial assumptions. We anticipate fulfilling these commitments through the generation of cash flow from operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Through December 31, 2020, we have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements or material transactions with unconsolidated entities or other persons that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources that is material to investors.