ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Executive Overview
Business Organization
Colgate-Palmolive Company (together with its subsidiaries, “we,” “us” “our” the “Company” or “Colgate”) is a caring, innovative growth company reimagining a healthier future for all people, their pets and our planet. We seek to deliver sustainable, profitable growth and superior shareholder returns, as well as to provide Colgate people with an innovative and inclusive work environment. We do this by developing and selling products globally that make people’s lives healthier and more enjoyable and by embracing our sustainability and social impact and diversity, equity and inclusion strategies across our organization.
We are tightly focused on two product segments: Oral, Personal and Home Care; and Pet Nutrition. Within these segments, we follow a closely defined business strategy to grow our key product categories and increase our overall market share. Within the categories in which we compete, we prioritize our efforts based on their capacity to maximize the use of the organization’s core competencies and strong global equities and to deliver sustainable, profitable long-term growth.
Operationally, we are organized along geographic lines with management teams having responsibility for the business and financial results in each region. We compete in more than 200 countries and territories worldwide with established businesses in all regions contributing to our sales and profitability. Approximately 70% of our Net sales are generated from markets outside the U.S., with approximately 45% of our Net sales coming from emerging markets (which consist of Latin America, Asia (excluding Japan), Africa/Eurasia and Central Europe). This geographic diversity and balance help to reduce our exposure to business and other risks in any one country or part of the world.
The Oral, Personal and Home Care product segment is managed geographically in five reportable operating segments: North America, Latin America, Europe, Asia Pacific and Africa/Eurasia, all of which sell primarily to a variety of traditional and eCommerce retailers, wholesalers and distributors. Through Hill’s Pet Nutrition, we also compete on a worldwide basis in the pet nutrition market, selling products principally through authorized pet supply retailers, veterinarians and eCommerce retailers. We are engaged in manufacturing and sourcing of products and materials on a global scale and have major manufacturing facilities, warehousing facilities and distribution centers in every region around the world.
On an ongoing basis, management focuses on a variety of key indicators to monitor business health and performance. These indicators include net sales (including volume, pricing and foreign exchange components), organic sales growth (net sales growth excluding the impact of foreign exchange, acquisitions and divestments), a non-GAAP financial measure, and gross profit margin, operating profit, net income and earnings per share, in each case, on a GAAP and non-GAAP basis, as well as measures used to optimize the management of working capital, capital expenditures, cash flow and return on capital. In addition, we review market share data to assess how our brands are performing within their categories on a global and regional basis. The monitoring of these indicators and our Code of Conduct and corporate governance practices help to maintain business health and strong internal controls. For additional information regarding non-GAAP financial measures and the Company’s use of market share data and the limitations of such data, see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” and “Market Share Information” below.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic and government steps to reduce the spread and address the impact of COVID-19 have had and continue to have a profound impact on the way people live, work, interact and shop and have significantly impacted and will likely continue to impact economic activity around the world. We have a well-established Crisis Management Team (“CMT”) process, and the CMT, together with our senior management team and Colgate people around the world, continue to respond to and manage the challenges presented by COVID-19.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, many of the communities in which we manufacture, market and sell our products experienced unprecedented “stay at home” orders, travel or movement restrictions and other government actions to reduce the spread and address the impact of COVID-19, and have implemented varying policies to resume economic activity. The situation continues to be uncertain and varies by geography, as infection rates of COVID-19 continue to increase in many regions throughout the world, and authorities have taken different approaches to address the pandemic and resume economic activity. Because the vast majority of our products (such as oral care products, soaps and other personal hygiene products, home cleaners and pet food) have been deemed essential for the health and well-being of people and their pets, we have, in most instances, been able to continue operating our business.
In doing so, the health, safety and well-being of our employees has been and remains our first priority. Many of our employees globally continue to work from home. In those instances where our employees cannot perform their work at home, such as in our factories and in certain of our laboratories, or in geographies where circumstances have allowed us to offer employees the ability to return to the office, often on a voluntary and staggered basis, we have implemented additional health and safety measures and social distancing protocols, consistent with government recommendations and/or requirements, to help to ensure their safety, often at an additional cost. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we experienced some limited factory closures and, in some cases, we have seen increased instances of absenteeism. Furthermore, some of our suppliers, customers, distributors, logistics providers and service providers have experienced disruptions to their businesses.
We saw a significant increase in demand across many of our categories in the year ended December 31, 2020, such as liquid hand soap, dish liquid, bar soap and cleaners, driven by consumer pantry-loading and increased consumption of our products. We believe that some of the increase in consumption in these categories is sustainable in light of changes in consumer behavior related to COVID-19. In other categories, such as oral care and pet food, consumer demand trends continued to normalize in the second half of the year ended December 31, 2020. Across our business, changes in consumer demand for our products vary by product category and geography depending on, among other things, the severity of the COVID-19 outbreak and retailer availability. At the same time, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we experienced declines in certain channels, including professional sales and travel retail, due to the economic slowdown and restricted consumer movement in many geographies throughout the world. We also continue to see changes in the purchasing patterns of our consumers, including the nature and/or frequency of visits by consumers to retailers and dental, veterinary and skin health professionals and a shift in many markets to purchasing our products online. In some instances during the year ended December 31, 2020, we were not able to keep up with the increased consumer demand for our products, and our products were at times out of stock on retailers’ shelves. In some cases, we have incurred additional costs as we worked to meet this increased demand. Despite continuing to significantly ramp up production of in-demand products, we expect that some of our products may continue to be out of stock on retailers’ shelves for a period of time.
COVID-19 and government steps to reduce the spread and address the impact of COVID-19 have impacted and may continue to impact our consumers’ ability to purchase and our ability to manufacture and distribute our products. While we believe that, in the long-term, consumer demand for the products in our categories will continue to be strong, uncertainties continue surrounding the timing and extent of the pandemic and the recovery from it. These uncertainties include: the impact of the timing and scale of changes to travel and movement restrictions in certain geographies, the availability and widespread distribution and use of safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines and when communities will reach herd immunity, the timing and impact of consumer pantry-loading and destocking activity in certain markets, product demand trends and the impact of COVID-19 on the global economy. Our retail customers, contract manufacturers, logistics providers and other third parties are also being impacted by the global pandemic; their success in addressing COVID-19 and maintaining their operations could impact consumer access to and sales of our products. We expect the ongoing economic impact and health concerns associated with COVID-19 to continue to impact consumer behavior, shopping patterns and consumption preferences despite the lifting of government restrictions and the reopening of economies around the world.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
While we currently expect to be able to continue operating our business as described above and we intend to continue to work with government authorities and to follow the necessary protocols to maintain the health and safety of our employees and contract providers, uncertainty resulting from COVID-19 could result in an unforeseen additional disruption to our business, including our global supply chain and retailer network, and/or require us to incur additional operational costs.
For more information about the anticipated COVID-19 impact, see “Outlook” below.
Business Strategy
To achieve our business and financial objectives, we are focused on innovating our core businesses; improving our brand building activities with an elevated brand purpose model and the use of equity advertising; innovating to gain market share in high growth segments and adjacencies; expanding into new channels and markets; maximizing growth online; and investing to drive consumption in growing populations. We continue to develop initiatives to build strong relationships with consumers, dental, veterinary and skin health professionals and traditional and eCommerce retailers. In addition, we continue to invest behind our brands, not just in terms of advertising, but also to build key growth capabilities in areas such as innovation and data and analytics. We also continue to broaden our eCommerce offerings, including direct-to-consumer and subscription services. We continue to believe that growth opportunities are greater in those areas of the world in which economic development and rising consumer incomes expand the size and number of markets for our products. We are also working to integrate our sustainability and social impact and diversity, equity and inclusion strategies across our organization.
We are also changing the way we work to drive growth and how we approach innovation to respond to the dynamic retail landscape and the evolving preferences of our customers and consumers. The retail landscape, the ease of new entrants into the market in many of our categories and the evolving preferences of our customers and consumers demand that we work differently and faster in an agile, authentic and culturally relevant manner to drive innovation.
The investments needed to drive growth are supported by strong cash flow performance and our disciplined capital allocation strategy. These investments are developed through continuous, Company-wide initiatives to lower costs and increase effective asset utilization. Through these initiatives, which are referred to as our funding-the-growth initiatives, we seek to become even more effective and efficient throughout our businesses. These initiatives are designed to reduce costs associated with direct materials, indirect expenses, distribution and logistics and advertising and promotional materials, among other things, and encompass a wide range of projects, examples of which include raw material substitution, reduction of packaging materials, consolidating suppliers to leverage volumes and increasing manufacturing efficiency through SKU reductions and formulation simplification. We also continue to prioritize our investments in high growth segments within our Oral Care, Personal Care and Pet Nutrition businesses, including by expanding our portfolio in premium skin health.
Significant Items Impacting Comparability
On January 31, 2020, we acquired Hello Products LLC (“hello”), an oral care business, for cash consideration of $351. The acquisition was financed with a combination of debt and cash. This acquisition is part of our strategy to focus on high growth segments within our Oral Care, Personal Care and Pet Nutrition businesses. See Note 3, Acquisitions to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
The provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes $71 of income tax benefits, of which $45 relates to previously recorded foreign withholding taxes and $26 relates to a previously recorded valuation allowance against a deferred tax asset. As described more fully in “Results of Operations-Income Taxes,” below, both items were previously recorded in connection with the charge recorded in 2017 and revised in 2018 related to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “TCJA”).
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Our restructuring program, known as the “Global Growth and Efficiency Program,” concluded on December 31, 2019. Initiatives under the Global Growth and Efficiency Program fit within the program’s three focus areas of expanding commercial hubs, extending shared business services and streamlining global functions and optimizing the global supply chain and facilities. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we adjusted the accrual balances related to certain projects approved prior to the conclusion of the Global Growth and Efficiency Program to reflect our revised estimate of remaining liabilities, which resulted in a reduction of $16 ($13 aftertax) to restructuring accruals. No new restructuring projects were approved for implementation during the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred costs of $132 ($102 aftertax) resulting from the Global Growth and Efficiency Program. For more information regarding the Global Growth and Efficiency Program, see “Restructuring and Related Implementation Charges” below and Note 4, Restructuring and Related Implementation Charges to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
In December 2019, the Swiss government enacted changes to its corporate tax regime, which included, among other items, the repeal of certain preferential tax regimes and an increase to the cantonal tax rate for future periods. Additionally, the government provided transition rules which allowed companies to record goodwill for tax purposes, partially offsetting the impact on cash taxes of the higher cantonal rate over the next ten years. As a result of these changes, we recorded a net benefit of $29 to the Provision for income taxes.
In September 2019, we acquired Laboratoires Filorga Cosmétiques S.A. (“Filorga”), a skin health business, for cash consideration of €1,548 (approximately $1,712). In the third quarter of 2020, we completed the purchase of the outstanding non-controlling interest of Filorga’s joint venture based in Hong Kong and covering the Hong Kong and China markets for approximately €85 (approximately $99) in cash. See Note 3, Acquisitions to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
In 2019, we received a favorable judgment regarding certain value-added tax previously paid in Brazil. As a result of the favorable judgment, during the fourth quarter of 2019, we filed an application with the Brazilian government to recover value-added tax previously paid and recorded a benefit of $30 pretax ($20 aftertax). The recovery will be utilized to offset corporate income tax payments in Brazil in future periods.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Outlook
Looking forward, we expect global macroeconomic, political and market conditions to remain challenging, especially due to COVID-19. During the COVID-19 pandemic, we have seen improvement in category growth rates due to heightened demand for certain health and hygiene products, particularly liquid hand soap, dish liquid, bar soap and cleaners. We believe some of this increased consumption is sustainable due to consumer behavior changes resulting from COVID-19. However, we expect increased volatility across all of our categories and it is therefore difficult to predict category growth rates over the next six to twelve months. In the longer term, we expect category growth rates to remain below historical levels.
While the global marketplace in which we operate has always been highly competitive, we continue to experience heightened competitive activity in certain markets from strong local competitors, from other large multinational companies, some of which have greater resources than we do, and from new entrants into the market in many of our categories. Such activities have included more aggressive product claims and marketing challenges, as well as increased promotional spending and geographic expansion. We have seen increases in promotional activities in certain markets as retailers try aggressively to get consumers back into the stores after prolonged “stay at home” and other government restrictions ease, a trend we expect will continue. We have been negatively affected by changes in the policies or practices of our retail trade customers in key markets, such as inventory de-stocking, limitations on access to shelf space, delisting of our products or sustainability, supply chain or packaging initiatives. In addition, the retail landscape in many of our markets continues to evolve as a result of the rapid growth of eCommerce retailers, changing consumer preferences (as consumers increasingly shop online) and the increased presence of alternative retail channels, such as subscription services and direct-to-consumer businesses. These trends have been magnified due to COVID-19 in many of our geographies and we plan to continue to invest behind our eCommerce capabilities. This rapid growth in eCommerce and the emergence of alternative retail channels have created and may continue to create pricing pressures and/or adversely affect our relationships with our key retailers. In certain markets, we have incurred and are likely to continue to incur increased logistics costs due to higher eCommerce demand and volume and capacity constraints in the shipping and logistics industry. In addition, given that approximately 70% of our Net sales originate in markets outside the U.S., we have experienced and will likely continue to experience increasingly volatile foreign currency fluctuations and higher raw and packaging material costs. While we have taken, and will continue to take, measures to mitigate the effect of these conditions, in the current environment, it may become increasingly difficult to implement certain of these mitigation strategies. Should these conditions persist, they could adversely affect our future results.
As discussed above, we continue to closely monitor the impact of COVID-19 on our business. While we have taken, and will continue to take, measures to mitigate the effects of COVID-19, we cannot estimate with certainty the full extent of COVID-19’s impact on our business, results of operations, cash flows and/or financial condition. For more information about factors that could impact our business, including due to COVID-19, see “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report.
In summary, we believe that we are well prepared to meet the challenges ahead due to our strong financial condition, broad based experience operating in challenging environments, resilient global supply chain and focused business strategy. Our strategy is based on driving organic sales growth through innovation within our core businesses, leveraging faster growth in adjacent categories and expanding in high growth channels and markets; delivering margin expansion through operating leverage and efficiency; and maximizing the impact of our environmental, social and governance programs; and leading in the development of human capital, including our sustainability and social impact and diversity, equity and inclusion strategies. Our commitment to these priorities, the strength of our brands, the breadth of our global footprint and a commitment to driving efficiency in cash generation should position us well to manage through COVID-19 and increase shareholder value over time.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Results of Operations
This section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Net Sales
Worldwide Net sales were $16,471 in 2020, up 5.0% from 2019, as volume growth of 5.5% and net selling price increases of 3.0% were partially offset by negative foreign exchange of 3.5%. Acquisitions contributed 1.5% to volume. Organic sales (Net sales excluding, as applicable, the impact of foreign exchange, acquisitions and divestments), a non-GAAP financial measure as discussed below, increased 7.0% in 2020.
Net sales in the Oral, Personal and Home Care product segment were $13,588 in 2020, up 3.0% from 2019, as volume growth of 4.5% and net selling price increases of 3.5% were partially offset by negative foreign exchange of 5.0%. Acquisitions contributed 2.0% to volume. Organic sales in the Oral, Personal and Home Care product segment increased 6.0% in 2020.
The increase in organic sales in 2020 versus 2019 was due to increases in Oral Care, Personal Care and Home Care organic sales. The increase in Oral Care was primarily due to organic sales growth in the toothpaste category. The increase in Personal Care was primarily due to organic sales growth in the liquid hand soap and bar soap categories. The increase in Home Care was due to organic sales growth in the hand dish and liquid cleaner categories.
The Company’s share of the global toothpaste market was 39.8% for full year 2020, down 0.7 share points from full year 2019, and its share of the global manual toothbrush market was 31.1% for full year 2020, up 0.2 share points from full year 2019. Full year 2020 market shares in toothpaste were up in North America and Latin America, flat in Europe and down in Asia Pacific and Africa/Eurasia versus full year 2019. In the manual toothbrush category, full year 2020 market shares were up in North America, Latin America, Europe and Africa/Eurasia and down in Asia Pacific versus full year 2019. For additional information regarding the Company’s use of market share data and limitations of such data, see “Market Share Information” below.
Net sales for Hill’s Pet Nutrition were $2,883 in 2020, an increase of 14.0% from 2019, driven by volume growth of 10.5% and net selling price increases of 4.0%, partially offset by negative foreign exchange of 0.5%. Organic sales for Hill’s Pet Nutrition increased 14.5% in 2020.
The increase in organic sales in 2020 versus 2019 was primarily due to increases in organic sales in the Science Diet and Prescription Diet categories.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Gross Profit/Margin
Worldwide Gross profit increased 7% to $10,017 in 2020 from $9,325 in 2019. Gross profit in both periods included acquisition-related costs. Gross profit in 2019 included charges resulting from the Global Growth and Efficiency Program. Excluding these items in both periods, as applicable, Gross profit increased to $10,021 in 2020 from $9,336 in 2019, reflecting an increase of $472 resulting from higher Net sales and an increase of $213 resulting from higher Gross profit margin.
Worldwide Gross profit margin increased to 60.8% in 2020 from 59.4% in 2019. Excluding the items described above in both periods, as applicable, Gross profit margin increased by 130 basis points (bps) to 60.8% in 2020, from 59.5% in 2019. This increase in Gross profit margin was primarily due to cost savings from the Company’s funding-the-growth initiatives (230 bps) and higher pricing (130 bps), partially offset by higher raw and packaging material costs (230 bps), which included foreign exchange transaction costs.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased 8% to $6,019 in 2020 from $5,575 in 2019. Selling, general and administrative expenses in 2020 included benefits resulting from the Global Growth and Efficiency Program. Selling, general and administrative expenses in 2019 included charges resulting from the Global Growth and Efficiency Program. Excluding these items in both periods, as applicable, Selling, general and administrative expenses increased to $6,022 in 2020 from $5,515 in 2019, reflecting increased advertising investment of $254 and higher overhead expenses of $253.
Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of Net sales increased to 36.5% in 2020 from 35.5% in 2019. Excluding the items described above in both periods, as applicable, Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of Net sales increased by 150 bps to 36.6% in 2020 as compared to 35.1% in 2019. This increase in 2020 was due to increased advertising investment (110 bps) and higher overhead expenses (40 bps), primarily driven by higher logistics costs, both as a percentage of Net sales. In 2020, advertising investment increased as a percentage of Net sales to 11.9% from 10.8% in 2019 or 15.0% in absolute terms to $1,948 as compared with $1,694 in 2019.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Other (Income) Expense, Net
Other (income) expense, net was $113 and $196 in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Other (income) expense, net in 2020 included benefits resulting from the Global Growth and Efficiency Program. Other (income) expense, net in both periods included acquisition-related costs. Other (income) expense, net in 2019 included charges resulting from the Global Growth and Efficiency Program and a benefit related to a value-added tax matter in Brazil.
Excluding the items described above in both periods, as applicable, Other (income) expense, net was $124 in 2020 and $148 in 2019, comprised of the following:
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Operating Profit
Operating profit increased 9% to $3,885 in 2020 from $3,554 in 2019. In 2020, Operating profit included benefits resulting from the Global Growth and Efficiency Program and acquisition-related costs. In 2019, Operating profit included charges resulting from the Global Growth and Efficiency Program, acquisition-related costs and a benefit related to a value-added tax matter in Brazil. Excluding these items in both periods, as applicable, Operating profit in 2020 increased 5% due to an increase in Gross profit and decrease in Other (income) expense, largely offset by an increase in Selling, general and administrative expenses.
Operating profit margin was 23.6% in 2020, an increase of 100 bps compared with 22.6% in 2019. Excluding the items described above in both periods, as applicable, Operating profit margin was 23.5% in 2020, an increase of 10 bps from 23.4% in 2019. This increase in Operating profit in 2020 was due to an increase in Gross profit (130 bps) and a decrease in Other (income) expense, net (30 bps), largely offset by an increase in Selling, general and administrative expenses (150 bps), all as a percentage of Net sales.
Non-Service Related Postretirement Costs
Non-service related postretirement costs were $74 in 2020 compared to $108 in 2019. Non-service related postretirement costs in 2019 included charges resulting from the Global Growth and Efficiency Program. Excluding these charges, Non-service related postretirement costs were $74 in 2020 compared to $101 in 2019. The decrease in Non-service related postretirement costs in 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to lower interest cost and higher expected return on plan assets.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Interest (Income) Expense, Net
Interest (income) expense, net was $164 in 2020 compared with $145 in 2019. The increase in Interest (income) expense, net in 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to a loss on the early extinguishment of debt in 2020 of $23, representing the difference between the redemption price and the carrying amount of the debt extinguished. Excluding the loss on the early extinguishment of debt, Interest (income) expense, net was $141 in 2020 compared to $145 in 2019.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Income Taxes
The effective income tax rate was 21.6% in 2020 and 23.4% in 2019. As reflected in the table below, the non-GAAP effective income tax rate was 23.6% in 2020 and 24.1% in 2019.
_______
(1) The income tax effect on non-GAAP items is calculated based upon the tax laws and statutory income tax rates applicable in the tax jurisdiction(s) of the underlying non-GAAP adjustment.
(2) The impact of non-GAAP items on the Company’s effective tax rate represents the difference in the effective tax rate calculated with and without the non-GAAP adjustment on Income before income taxes and Provision for income taxes.
The provision for income taxes for 2020 includes $71 of income tax benefits, of which $45 relates to previously recorded foreign withholding taxes and $26 relates to a previously recorded valuation allowance against a deferred tax asset. As described more fully below, both items were previously recorded in connection with the charge recorded by the Company in 2017 and revised in 2018 related to the TCJA.
As part of the previously recorded charge for the TCJA, the Company had provided for foreign withholding taxes expected to be paid on the remittance of earnings from certain overseas subsidiaries no longer deemed indefinitely reinvested. As a result of a reorganization of the ownership structure of certain foreign subsidiaries, the Company determined that no withholding taxes will be due on the remittance by certain subsidiaries of earnings previously deemed reinvested and, accordingly, reversed $45 of previously recorded foreign withholding taxes in the first quarter of 2020.
Also as part of the previously recorded charge for the TCJA, the Company provided a valuation allowance against a deferred tax asset related to foreign tax credit carry-forwards that the Company did not expect to be able to use due to changes made by the TCJA. As a result of a new operating structure implemented within one of the Company’s divisions, the Company believes the use of these foreign tax credit carry-forwards will not be limited in the future and, accordingly, reversed the previously recorded valuation allowance of $26 in the first quarter of 2020.
The effective income tax rate in all years benefited from tax planning associated with the Company’s global business initiatives.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Net income attributable to Colgate-Palmolive Company and Earnings per share
Net income attributable to Colgate-Palmolive Company was $2,695, or $3.14 per share on a diluted basis, in 2020 compared to $2,367, or $2.75 per share on a diluted basis, in 2019. In 2020, Net income attributable to Colgate-Palmolive Company included aftertax benefits resulting from the Global Growth and Efficiency Program, aftertax acquisition-related costs, a tax benefit related to subsidiary and operating structure initiatives and an aftertax loss on the early extinguishment of debt. In 2019, Net income attributable to Colgate-Palmolive Company included aftertax charges resulting from the Global Growth and Efficiency Program, aftertax acquisition-related costs, an aftertax benefit related to a value-added tax matter in Brazil and a tax benefit related to Swiss income tax reform.
Excluding the items described above in both periods, as applicable, Net income attributable to Colgate-Palmolive Company increased 8% to $2,633 in 2020 from $2,440 in 2019, and Earnings per common share on a diluted basis increased 8% to $3.06 in 2020 from $2.83 in 2019.
_______
(1) The income tax effect on non-GAAP items is calculated based upon the tax laws and statutory income tax rates applicable in the tax jurisdiction(s) of the underlying non-GAAP adjustment.
(2) The impact of non-GAAP adjustments on diluted earnings per share may not necessarily equal the difference between “GAAP” and “non-GAAP” as a result of rounding.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Segment Results
The Company markets its products in over 200 countries and territories throughout the world in two product segments: Oral, Personal and Home Care; and Pet Nutrition. The Company evaluates segment performance based on several factors, including Operating profit. The Company uses Operating profit as a measure of the operating segment performance because it excludes the impact of corporate-driven decisions related to interest expense and income taxes.
Oral, Personal and Home Care
North America
Net sales in North America increased 9.5% in 2020 to $3,741, driven by volume growth of 8.0% and net selling price increases of 1.5%, while foreign exchange was flat. The Company’s acquisition of hello contributed 1.5% to volume in North America. Organic sales in North America increased 8.0% in 2020. Organic sales growth was led by the United States.
The increase in organic sales in North America in 2020 versus 2019 was due to increases in Oral Care, Personal Care and Home Care organic sales. The increase in Oral Care was primarily due to organic sales growth in the toothpaste category. The increase in Personal Care was primarily due to organic sales growth in the liquid hand soap category partially offset by a decline in organic sales in the underarm protection category. The increase in Home Care was primarily due to organic sales growth in the hand dish and liquid cleaner categories.
Operating profit in North America increased 1% in 2020 to $988, but decreased as a percentage of Net sales by 230 bps to 26.4%. This decrease in Operating profit as a percentage of Net sales was primarily due to an increase in Selling, general and administrative expenses (270 bps), partially offset by an increase in Gross profit (80 bps), both as a percentage of Net sales. This increase in Gross profit was primarily due to cost savings from the Company’s funding-the-growth initiatives (190 bps), partially offset by higher raw and packaging material costs (100 bps). This increase in Selling, general and administrative expenses was due to increased advertising investment (180 bps) and higher overhead expenses (90 bps), primarily driven by higher logistics costs.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Latin America
Net sales in Latin America decreased 5.0% in 2020 to $3,418, as volume growth of 0.5% and net selling price increases of 8.5% were more than offset by negative foreign exchange of 14.0%. Organic sales in Latin America increased 9.0% in 2020. Organic sales growth was led by Brazil, Argentina, Mexico and Colombia.
The increase in organic sales in Latin America in 2020 versus 2019 was due to increases in Oral Care, Personal Care and Home Care organic sales. The increase in Oral Care was primarily due to organic sales growth in the toothpaste and manual toothbrush categories. The increase in Personal Care was primarily due to organic sales growth in the bar soap and liquid hand soap categories. The increase in Home Care was primarily due to organic sales growth in the hand dish and liquid cleaner categories.
Operating profit in Latin America increased 1% in 2020 to $975, or 180 bps to 28.5% of Net sales. This increase in Operating profit as a percentage of Net sales was primarily due to an increase in Gross profit (140 bps) and a decrease in Selling, general and administrative expenses (20 bps), both as a percentage of Net sales. This increase in Gross profit was primarily due to cost savings from the Company’s funding-the-growth initiatives (330 bps) and higher pricing, which were partially offset by higher raw and packaging material costs (530 bps), which included foreign exchange transaction costs. This decrease in Selling, general and administrative expenses was due to decreased advertising investment (40 bps), partially offset by higher overhead expenses (20 bps).
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Europe
Net sales in Europe increased 12.0% in 2020 to $2,747, as volume growth of 11.0% and positive foreign exchange of 1.5% were partially offset by net selling price decreases of 0.5%. The Company’s acquisition of the Filorga skin health business contributed 7.5% to volume in Europe. Organic sales in Europe increased 3.0% in 2020. Organic sales growth was led by Poland, the Netherlands, France and Germany.
The increase in organic sales in Europe in 2020 versus 2019 was primarily due to an increase in Personal Care and Home Care organic sales. The increase in Personal Care was primarily due to organic sales growth in the liquid hand soap and body wash categories, partially offset by a decline in organic sales in the underarm protection category. The increase in Home Care was primarily due to organic sales growth in the bleach, hand dish, spray cleaner and fabric softener categories.
Operating profit in Europe increased 4% in 2020 to $652, while as a percentage of Net sales it decreased 180 bps to 23.7%. This decrease in Operating profit as a percentage of Net sales was due to increases in Selling, general and administrative expenses (230 bps) and Other (income) expense, net (80 bps), partially offset by an increase in Gross profit (130 bps), all as a percentage of Net sales. This increase in Gross profit was primarily due to cost savings from the Company’s funding-the-growth initiatives (190 bps) and mix (80 bps), primarily due to the Company’s acquisition of Filorga, partially offset by higher raw and packaging material costs (90 bps). This increase in Selling, general and administrative expenses was due to higher overhead expenses (120 bps) and increased advertising investment (110 bps). This increase in Other (income) expense, net was primarily due to amortization expense related to the Filorga acquisition.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Asia Pacific
Net sales in Asia Pacific decreased 0.5% in 2020 to $2,701, as volume declines of 1.5% and negative foreign exchange of 1.0% were partially offset by net selling price increases of 2.0%. Organic sales in Asia Pacific increased 0.5% in 2020. Organic sales growth was led by Australia, New Zealand and the Philippines, partially offset by organic sales declines in Thailand and China.
The increase in organic sales in 2020 versus 2019 was due to increases in Personal Care and Home Care organic sales, partially offset by a decline in Oral Care organic sales. The decrease in Oral Care was driven by a decline in organic sales in the manual toothbrush category, partially offset by organic sales growth in the mouthwash category. The increase in Personal Care was driven by organic sales growth in the liquid hand soap and body wash categories. The increase in Home Care was driven by organic sales growth in the hand dish, spray cleaner and cleaning wipes categories.
Operating profit in Asia Pacific increased 3% in 2020 to $773, or 90 bps to 28.6% of Net sales. This increase in Operating profit as a percentage of Net sales was primarily due to an increase in Gross profit (150 bps), partially offset by an increase in Selling, general and administrative expenses (50 bps), both as a percentage of Net sales. This increase in Gross profit was primarily due to cost savings from the Company’s funding-the-growth initiatives (240 bps) and higher pricing, partially offset by higher raw and packaging material costs (150 bps). This increase in Selling, general and administrative expenses was due to higher overhead expenses (40 bps) and increased advertising investment (10 bps).
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Africa/Eurasia
Net sales in Africa/Eurasia were $981 in 2020, even with 2019, as volume growth of 5.0% and net selling price increases of 3.5% were offset by negative foreign exchange of 8.5%. The Company’s acquisition of a 51% controlling interest in Colgate Toloram Pte. Ltd., a joint venture which owns the Nigeria-based Hypo Homecare Products Limited (the “Nigeria Joint Venture”), contributed 1.0% to volume in Africa/Eurasia. Organic sales in Africa/Eurasia increased 7.5% in 2020. Organic sales growth was led by Turkey, Russia and South Africa.
The increase in organic sales in 2020 versus 2019 was primarily due to increases in Oral Care and Personal Care organic sales. The increase in Oral Care was primarily due to organic sales growth in the toothpaste and manual toothbrush categories. The increase in Personal Care was primarily due to organic sales growth in the bar soap, body wash and liquid hand soap categories.
Operating profit in Africa/Eurasia increased 10% in 2020 to $206, or 190 bps to 21.0% of Net sales. This increase in Operating profit as a percentage of Net sales was primarily due to an increase in Gross Profit (100 bps) and a decrease in Selling, general and administrative expenses (60 bps), both as a percentage of Net sales. This increase in Gross profit was primarily due to cost savings from the Company’s funding-the-growth initiatives (270 bps) and higher pricing, partially offset by higher raw and packaging material costs (330 bps), which included foreign exchange transaction costs. This decrease in Selling, general and administrative expenses was due to decreased advertising investment (40 bps) and lower overhead expenses (20 bps).
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Hill’s Pet Nutrition
Net sales for Hill’s Pet Nutrition increased 14.0% in 2020 to $2,883, as volume growth of 10.5% and net selling price increases of 4.0% were partially offset by negative foreign exchange of 0.5%. Organic sales in Hill’s Pet Nutrition increased 14.5% in 2020. Organic sales growth was led by the United States and Europe.
The increase in organic sales in 2020 versus 2019 was due to organic sales growth in the Science Diet and Prescription Diet categories.
Operating profit in Hill’s Pet Nutrition increased 13% in 2020 to $793, while as a percentage of Net sales it decreased 30 bps to 27.5%. This decrease in Operating profit as a percentage of Net sales was due to an increase in Selling, general and administrative expenses (90 bps) and an increase in Other (income) expense, net (30 bps), partially offset by an increase in Gross profit (90 bps), all as a percentage of Net sales. This increase in Gross profit was primarily due to cost savings from the Company’s funding-the-growth initiatives (140 bps) and higher pricing, partially offset by higher raw and packaging material costs (170 bps). This increase in Selling, general and administrative expenses was due to increased advertising investment (270 bps), partially offset by lower overhead expenses (180 bps). This increase in Other (income) expense, net was primarily due to costs incurred in connection with the voluntary recall for which Hill's was not indemnified.
During the quarter ended March 31, 2019, Hill’s announced a voluntary recall, which was subsequently expanded, of select canned dog food products due to potentially elevated levels of Vitamin D resulting from a supplier error. In the United States, the voluntary recall was conducted in cooperation with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Following the announcement of the voluntary recall, and as of December 31, 2020, Hill’s and/or the Company have been named as defendants in 37 putative class action lawsuits, one putative class action filed on behalf of a European Union class and one individual action, all related to the voluntary recall and filed in various jurisdictions in the United States. In addition, two putative class actions related to the voluntary recall have been filed in Canada. Eight of the putative class actions lawsuits in the United States and one of the putative class action lawsuits in Canada have been voluntarily dismissed. During the quarter ended December 31, 2020, the parties to the putative class action lawsuits in the United States (other than the class action filed on behalf of a European Union class) entered into a settlement agreement, which was preliminarily approved by the court in February 2021. The amount of the settlement is not material to the Company’s results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. Hill’s is indemnified by the supplier related to the voluntary recall. Sales of products voluntarily recalled represent less than 2% of Hill’s annual Net sales. The sales loss and other costs associated with the voluntary recall and its subsequent expansion did not have a material impact on the Company’s Net sales or Operating profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 and are not expected to have a material impact in future periods.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Corporate
Corporate operations include Corporate overhead costs, research and development costs, stock-based compensation expense related to stock options and restricted stock unit awards, restructuring and related implementation costs and gains and losses on sales of non-core product lines. The components of Operating profit (loss) for the Corporate segment are presented as follows:
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Restructuring and Related Implementation Charges
Global Growth and Efficiency Program
The Company’s restructuring program (the “Global Growth and Efficiency Program”), which commenced in the fourth quarter of 2012, concluded on December 31, 2019. Initiatives under the Global Growth and Efficiency Program fit within the program’s three focus areas of expanding commercial hubs, extending shared business services and streamlining global functions and optimizing the global supply chain and facilities. Substantially all initiatives under the Global Growth and Efficiency Program had been implemented as of December 31, 2019.
In the third quarter of 2020, the Company adjusted the accrual balances related to certain projects approved prior to the conclusion of the Global Growth and Efficiency Program to reflect its revised estimate of remaining liabilities. This adjustment resulted in a reduction of $16 ($13 aftertax), of which $3 was recorded in Selling, general and administrative expenses and $13 was recorded in Other (income) expense, net. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company also made cash payments of $53 related to projects approved prior to the conclusion of the Global Growth and Efficiency Program, and the remaining accrual balance at December 31, 2020 was $31. No new restructuring projects were approved for implementation during the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, restructuring and related implementation charges are reflected in the Consolidated Statements of Income as follows:
Restructuring and related implementation charges and the adjustment recorded in the third quarter of 2020 were recorded in the Corporate segment as these initiatives were predominantly centrally directed and controlled and were not included in internal measures of segment operating performance. See Note 4, Restructuring and Related Implementation Charges to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This Annual Report on Form 10-K discusses certain financial measures on both a GAAP and a non-GAAP basis. The Company uses the non-GAAP financial measures described below internally in its budgeting process, to evaluate segment and overall operating performance and as a factor in determining compensation. The Company believes that these non-GAAP financial measures are useful in evaluating the Company’s underlying business performance and trends; however, this information should be considered as supplemental in nature and is not meant to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the related financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP. In addition, these non-GAAP financial measures may not be the same as similar measures presented by other companies.
Net sales growth (GAAP) and organic sales growth (Net sales growth excluding the impact of foreign exchange, acquisitions and divestments) (non-GAAP) are discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Management believes the organic sales growth measure provides investors and analysts with useful supplemental information regarding the Company’s underlying sales trends by presenting sales growth excluding, the external factor of foreign exchange, as well as the impact of acquisitions and divestments, as applicable. A reconciliation of organic sales growth to Net sales growth for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is provided below.
Worldwide Gross profit, Gross profit margin, Selling, general and administrative expenses, Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of Net sales, Other (income) expense, net, Operating profit, Operating profit margin, Non-service related postretirement costs, Interest (income) expense, net, effective income tax rate, Net income attributable to Colgate-Palmolive Company and Earnings per share on a diluted basis are discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K both on a GAAP basis and excluding, as applicable, the benefits and charges resulting from the Global Growth and Efficiency Program, the charge related to U.S. tax reform, acquisition-related costs, the benefits related to a value-added tax matter in Brazil and Swiss income tax reform, a benefit related to a reorganization of the ownership structure of certain foreign subsidiaries and a new operating structure implemented within one of the Company’s divisions and the loss on early extinguishment of debt prior to maturity. These non-GAAP financial measures exclude items that, either by their nature or amount, management would not expect to occur as part of the Company’s normal business on a regular basis, such as restructuring charges, charges for certain litigation and tax matters, gains and losses from certain acquisitions, divestitures and certain unusual, non-recurring items. Investors and analysts use these financial measures in assessing the Company’s business performance, and management believes that presenting these financial measures on a non-GAAP basis provides them with useful supplemental information to enhance their understanding of the Company’s underlying business performance and trends. These non-GAAP financial measures also enhance the ability to compare period-to-period financial results. A reconciliation of each of these non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is presented within the applicable section of Results of Operations.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
The following tables provide a quantitative reconciliation of Net sales growth to organic sales growth for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 versus the prior year:
Market Share Information
Management uses market share information as a key indicator to monitor business health and performance. References to market share in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are based on a combination of consumption and market share data provided by third-party vendors, primarily Nielsen, and internal estimates. All market share references represent the percentage of the dollar value of sales of our products, relative to all product sales in the category in the countries in which the Company competes and purchases data (excluding Venezuela from all periods).
Market share data is subject to limitations on the availability of up-to-date information. In particular, market share data is currently not generally available for certain retail channels, such as eCommerce or certain discounters. The Company measures year-to-date market shares from January 1 of the relevant year through the most recent period for which market share data is available, which typically reflects a lag time of one or two months. The Company believes that the third-party vendors we use to provide data are reliable, but we have not verified the accuracy or completeness of the data or any assumptions underlying the data. In certain limited circumstances, the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted the ability of our third-party vendors to provide the Company with reliable updated market share data. In addition, market share information calculated by the Company may be different from market share information calculated by other companies due to differences in category definitions, the use of data from different countries, internal estimates and other factors.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company expects cash flow from operations and debt issuances will be sufficient to meet foreseeable business operating and recurring cash needs (including for debt service, dividends, capital expenditures, share repurchases and acquisitions). The Company believes its strong cash generation and financial position should continue to allow it broad access to global credit and capital markets.
Cash Flow
Net cash provided by operations increased to $3,719 in 2020 as compared to $3,133 in 2019, primarily due to changes in working capital, higher net income and lower voluntary contributions to the Company’s pension plans, which were partially offset by higher income tax payments. The Company’s working capital as a percentage of Net sales was (4.4)% in 2020 and (1.6)% in 2019. This change in working capital as a percentage of Net sales is primarily due to higher accrued liabilities, higher accounts payable and higher accrued income taxes, partially offset by an increase in inventory. The Company defines working capital as the difference between current assets (excluding Cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities, the latter of which is reported in Other current assets) and current liabilities (excluding short-term debt).
Investing activities used $779 of cash in 2020 compared to $2,099 during 2019. As more fully described below, investing activities in 2020 include the Company’s acquisition of hello. Investing activities in 2019 include the Company’s acquisition of Filorga and the Nigeria Joint Venture. Purchases of marketable securities and investments decreased in 2020 to $143 from $184 in 2019. Proceeds from the sale of marketable securities and investments decreased in 2020 to $124 from $131 in 2019.
Capital expenditures in the year ended December 31, 2020 were $410, an increase from $335 in 2019. Capital expenditures increased in 2020 primarily due to capacity expansion of manufacturing facilities and sustainability projects. Capital expenditures for 2021 are expected to be approximately 3.0% to 3.5% of Net sales. The Company continues to focus its capital spending on projects that are expected to yield high aftertax returns.
On January 31, 2020, the Company acquired hello for cash consideration of $351 as part of the Company’s continued strategy to focus on the high growth segments within its Oral Care, Personal Care and Pet Nutrition businesses. On September 19, 2019, the Company acquired Filorga for cash consideration of €1,516 (approximately $1,674) plus additional consideration of €32 (approximately $38), the majority of which related to repayment of loans from former shareholders of Filorga. In July 2020, the Company completed the purchase of the outstanding non-controlling interest of Filorga’s joint venture based in Hong Kong and covering the Hong Kong and China markets for approximately €85 (approximately $99) in cash. On August 15, 2019, the Company acquired a 51% controlling interest in the Nigeria Joint Venture for $31.
These acquisitions were financed with a combination of debt and cash. As a result of the incremental debt related to these acquisitions, in accordance with the Company’s previously announced intention to moderate share repurchases, net of proceeds from the exercise of stock options, the Company continued to moderate its share repurchases, net in 2020. In addition, due to the initial uncertainties resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and our intent to preserve cash, the Company discontinued all share repurchases other than those pursuant to equity plans during the second quarter of 2020. The Company resumed its moderated share repurchases, net in the third quarter of 2020. We expect share repurchases, net to return to historical levels in 2021.
Financing activities used $2,919 of cash during 2020 compared to $870 during 2019. The increase in cash used was primarily due to net payments on debt in 2020 as compared to net proceeds from the issuance of debt in 2019.
Long-term debt, including the current portion, decreased to $7,343 as of December 31, 2020, as compared to $7,587 as of December 31, 2019, and total debt decreased to $7,601 as of December 31, 2020 as compared to $7,847 as of December 31, 2019. The Company’s debt issuances and redemptions support the Company’s capital structure objectives of funding its business and growth initiatives while minimizing its risk-adjusted cost of capital.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company redeemed prior to maturity all of its outstanding 2.450% notes due 2021 with a principal amount of $300, originally issued on November 8, 2011, and all of its outstanding 2.300% notes due 2022 with a principal amount of $500, originally issued on May 3, 2012. These redemptions were financed with commercial paper borrowings and cash. The Company recorded a loss on this early extinguishment of debt of $23, which is included in Interest (income) expense, net in the Consolidated Statements of Income, representing the difference between the redemption price and the carrying amount of the debt extinguished.
During the first quarter of 2019, the Company issued €500 of seven-year notes at a fixed coupon rate of 0.500% and €500 of fifteen-year notes at a fixed coupon rate of 1.375%. During the fourth quarter of 2019, the Company issued €500 of two-year notes at a fixed coupon rate of 0.000% and €500 of twenty-year notes at a fixed coupon rate of 0.875%. The debt issuances were under the Company’s shelf registration statement. Proceeds from the debt issuances were used for general corporate purposes, which included the retirement of commercial paper and, in the case of the debt issuances in the first quarter of 2019, the repayment of the Company’s $500 1.750% fixed rate notes, which became due in March 2019, and €500 floating rate notes, which became due in May 2019.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had access to unused domestic and foreign lines of credit of $4,657 (including under the facilities discussed below) and could also issue long-term debt pursuant to an effective shelf registration statement. In November 2018, the Company entered into an amended and restated $2,650 revolving credit facility with a syndicate of banks that was scheduled to expire in November 2023. In August 2019, the term of the facility was extended by one year and it now expires in November 2024. In August 2020, the Company entered into a $1,500 364-day credit facility with a syndicate of banks that is scheduled to expire in August 2021. Commitment fees related to the credit facilities are not material.
Domestic and foreign commercial paper outstanding was $1,389 and $829 as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The average daily balances outstanding of commercial paper in 2020 and 2019 were $1,050 and $1,868, respectively. The Company classifies commercial paper and certain current maturities of notes payable as long-term debt when it has the intent and ability to refinance such obligations on a long-term basis, including, if necessary, by utilizing its available lines of credit (under the facilities discussed above).
The following is a summary of the Company’s commercial paper and global short-term borrowings as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(1) Commercial paper includes a current portion of $250, included in Notes and loans payable, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Certain of the agreements with respect to the Company’s bank borrowings contain financial and other covenants as well as cross-default provisions. Noncompliance with these requirements could ultimately result in the acceleration of amounts owed. The Company is in full compliance with all such requirements and believes the likelihood of noncompliance is remote. Refer to Note 6, Long-Term Debt and Credit Facilities to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information about the Company’s long-term debt and credit facilities.
Dividend payments in 2020 were $1,654, an increase from $1,614 in 2019. Dividend payments increased to $1.75 per share in 2020 from $1.71 per share in 2019. In the first quarter of 2020, the Company increased the quarterly common stock dividend to $0.44 per share from $0.43 per share, effective in the second quarter of 2020.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
The Company repurchases shares of its common stock in the open market and in private transactions to maintain its targeted capital structure and to fulfill certain requirements of its compensation and benefit plans. On June 18, 2018, the Board authorized the repurchase of shares of the Company’s common stock having an aggregate purchase price of up to $5,000 under the 2018 Program. The Board also has authorized share repurchases on an ongoing basis to fulfill certain requirements of the Company’s compensation and benefit programs. The shares are repurchased from time to time in open market or privately negotiated transactions at the Company’s discretion, subject to market conditions, customary blackout periods and other factors.
Aggregate share repurchases in 2020 consisted of approximately 18.2 million common shares under the 2018 Program and 0.4 million common shares to fulfill the requirements of compensation and benefit plans, for a total purchase price of $1,476. Aggregate repurchases in 2019 consisted of 16.0 million common shares under the 2018 Program, and 1.2 million common shares to fulfill the requirements of compensation and benefit plans, for a total purchase price of $1,202. Share repurchases net of proceeds from exercise of stock options were $602 and $704 in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cash and cash equivalents increased $5 during 2020 to $888 at December 31, 2020, compared to $883 at December 31, 2019. Cash and cash equivalents held by the Company’s foreign subsidiaries was $832 and $798, respectively, at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The following represents the scheduled maturities of the Company’s contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
_______
(1)The Company classifies commercial paper and notes maturing within the next 12 months as long-term debt when it has the intent and ability to refinance such obligations on a long-term basis. The amounts in this table exclude such obligations.
(2)Includes the net interest payments on fixed and variable rate debt and associated interest rate swaps. Interest payments associated with floating rate instruments are based on management’s best estimate of projected interest rates for the remaining term of variable rate debt.
(3)The Company had outstanding contractual obligations with suppliers at the end of 2020 for the purchase of raw, packaging and other materials and services in the normal course of business. These purchase obligation amounts represent only those items which are based on agreements that are legally binding and that specify all significant terms including minimum quantity, price and term and do not represent total anticipated purchases.
Long-term liabilities associated with the Company’s postretirement plans are excluded from the table above due to the uncertainty of the timing of these cash disbursements. The amount and timing of cash funding related to these benefit plans will generally depend on local regulatory requirements, various economic assumptions (the most significant of which are detailed in “Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates” below) and voluntary Company contributions. Based on current information, the Company is not required to make a mandatory contribution to its qualified U.S. pension plan in 2021. The Company does not expect to make any voluntary contributions to its U.S. postretirement plans in 2021. In addition, total benefit payments to be paid to participants for the year ending December 31, 2021 from the Company’s assets are estimated to be approximately $90.
Additionally, liabilities for unrecognized income tax benefits are excluded from the table above as the Company is unable to reasonably predict the ultimate amount or timing of a settlement of such liabilities. See Note 11, Income Taxes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
As more fully described in Part I, Item 3 “Legal Proceedings” and Note 13, Commitments and Contingencies to the Consolidated Financial Statements, the Company has commitments and contingencies with respect to lawsuits, environmental matters, taxes and other matters arising in the ordinary course of business.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have off-balance sheet financing or unconsolidated special purpose entities.
Managing Foreign Currency, Interest Rate, Commodity Price and Credit Risk Exposure
The Company is exposed to market risk from foreign currency exchange rates, interest rates and commodity price fluctuations. Volatility relating to these exposures is managed on a global basis by utilizing a number of techniques, including working capital management, selling price increases, selective borrowings in local currencies and entering into selective derivative instrument transactions, issued with standard features, in accordance with the Company’s treasury and risk management policies. The Company’s treasury and risk management policies prohibit the use of derivatives for speculative purposes and leveraged derivatives for any purpose.
The sensitivity of our financial instruments to market fluctuations is discussed below. See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 7, Fair Value Measurements and Financial Instruments to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of derivatives and hedging policies and fair value measurements.
Foreign Exchange Risk
As the Company markets its products in over 200 countries and territories, it is exposed to currency fluctuations related to manufacturing and selling its products in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. The Company manages its foreign currency exposures through a combination of cost-containment measures, sourcing strategies, selling price increases and the hedging of certain costs in an effort to minimize the impact on earnings of foreign currency rate movements. See “Results of Operations” above for a discussion of the foreign exchange impact on Net sales in each operating segment.
The assets and liabilities of foreign subsidiaries are translated into U.S. dollars at year-end exchange rates with resulting translation gains and losses accumulated in a separate component of shareholders’ equity. Income and expense items are translated into U.S. dollars at average rates of exchange prevailing during the year.
The Company primarily utilizes foreign currency contracts, including forward and swap contracts, option contracts, foreign and local currency deposits and local currency borrowings to hedge portions of its exposures relating to foreign currency purchases, assets and liabilities created in the normal course of business and the net investment in certain foreign subsidiaries. The duration of foreign currency contracts generally does not exceed 12 months and the contracts are valued using observable market rates.
The Company’s foreign currency forward contracts that qualify for cash flow hedge accounting resulted in a net unrealized loss of $11 and $6 at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Changes in the fair value of cash flow hedges are recorded in Other comprehensive income (loss) and are reclassified into earnings in the same period or periods during which the underlying hedged transaction is recognized in earnings. At the end of 2020, an unfavorable 10% change in exchange rates would have resulted in a net unrealized loss of $96.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Interest Rate Risk
The Company manages its mix of fixed and floating rate debt against its target with debt issuances and by entering into interest rate swaps in order to mitigate fluctuations in earnings and cash flows that may result from interest rate volatility. The Company utilizes forward-starting interest rate swaps to mitigate the risk of variability in interest rate for future debt issuances. The notional amount, interest payment and maturity date of the swaps generally match the principal, interest payment and maturity date of the related debt, and the swaps are valued using observable benchmark rates.
Based on year-end 2020 variable rate debt levels, a 1% increase in interest rates would have increased Interest (income) expense, net by $15 in 2020.
The Company is assessing the impact of the discontinuation of LIBOR as a benchmark interest rate on its current financial instruments and contractual arrangements, including debt outstanding, and believes it will not be material as the Company does not have significant exposure to LIBOR in either its debt or other financing arrangements. The Company will continue to monitor its exposure in subsequent periods.
Commodity Price Risk
The Company is exposed to price volatility related to raw materials used in production, such as essential oils, resins, pulp, tropical oils, tallow, corn, poultry and soybeans. The Company manages its raw material exposures through a combination of cost containment measures, ongoing productivity initiatives and the limited use of commodity hedging contracts. Futures contracts are used on a limited basis, primarily in the Hill’s Pet Nutrition segment, to manage volatility related to anticipated raw material inventory purchases of certain traded commodities.
The Company’s open commodity derivative contracts that qualify for cash flow hedge accounting resulted in a net unrealized gain of $3 and $0 at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. At the end of 2020, an unfavorable 10% change in commodity futures prices would have resulted in a net unrealized gain of $1.
Credit Risk
The Company is exposed to the risk of credit loss in the event of nonperformance by counterparties to financial instrument contracts; however, nonperformance is considered unlikely and any nonperformance is unlikely to be material as it is the Company’s policy to contract with diverse, credit-worthy counterparties based upon both strong credit ratings and other credit considerations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In January 2021, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2021-1, “Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848): Scope.” This ASU clarifies that certain optional expedients and exceptions in Topic 848 apply to derivatives that are affected by the discounting transition. This guidance was effective upon issuance for the Company and is not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
In October 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-10, “Codification Improvements.” This ASU improves the consistency of the codification topics by including all disclosure guidance in the appropriate disclosure section and also clarifies the application of various provisions in the codification. This guidance was effective for the Company beginning on January 1, 2021 and is not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-04, “Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848): Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting.” The ASU provides optional expedients and exceptions for applying generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) to contracts, hedging relationships and other transactions that reference LIBOR or another reference rate expected to be discontinued because of reference rate reform. This guidance was effective upon issuance of this ASU for contract modifications and hedging relationships on a prospective basis and is not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-03, “Codification to Financial Instruments.” This ASU improves and clarifies various financial instruments topics, including the current expected credit losses (“CECL”) standard issued in 2016. The ASU addresses seven different issues that describe the areas of improvement and the related amendments to GAAP, intended to make the standards easier to understand and apply by eliminating inconsistencies and providing clarifications. The amendments related to Issue 1, Issue 2, Issue 4 and Issue 5 were effective upon issuance of this update. The amendments related to Issue 3, Issue 6 and Issue 7 were effective for the Company beginning on January 1, 2020. The guidance did not have a material impact on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
In January 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-01, “Investments-Equity Securities (Topic 321), Investments-Equity Method and Joint Ventures (Topic 323), and Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815)-Clarifying the Interactions between Topic 321, Topic 323, and Topic 815.” The guidance provides clarification of the interaction of rules for equity securities, the equity method of accounting and forward contracts and purchase options on certain types of securities. This guidance was effective for the Company beginning on January 1, 2021. This guidance is not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, “Income taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes.” This ASU simplifies the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles in ASC 740 and also clarifies and amends existing guidance to improve consistent application. This guidance was effective for the Company beginning on January 1, 2021. This guidance is not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
In November 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-11, “Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments- Credit Losses.” This ASU clarifies and addresses certain items related to amendments in ASU 2016-13. This guidance was effective for the Company beginning on January 1, 2020 and did not have a material impact on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
In April 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-04, “Codification Improvements to Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326), Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815), and Financial Instruments (Topic 825).” This ASU clarifies three topics related to financial instruments accounting. This guidance was effective for the Company beginning on January 1, 2020 and did not have a material impact on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-13, “Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework - Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement.” This guidance removes certain disclosure requirements related to the fair value hierarchy, modifies existing disclosure requirements related to measurement uncertainty and adds new disclosure requirements. The new disclosure requirements include disclosing the changes in unrealized gains and losses for the period included in other comprehensive income for recurring Level 3 fair value measurements held at the end of the reporting period and the range and weighted average of significant unobservable inputs used to develop Level 3 fair value measurements. This guidance was effective for the Company beginning on January 1, 2020 and did not have a material impact on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU No. 2017-04, “Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment,” eliminating the requirement to calculate implied fair value, essentially eliminating step two from the goodwill impairment test. The standard requires goodwill impairment to be based upon the results of step one of the impairment test, which is defined as the excess of the carrying value of a reporting unit over its fair value. The impairment charge will be limited to the amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. The standard was effective for the Company on a prospective basis beginning on January 1, 2020 and did not have an impact on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, “Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326).” This ASU introduces the current expected credit loss (CECL) model, which will require an entity to measure credit losses for certain financial instruments and financial assets, including trade receivables. Under this update, on initial recognition and at each reporting period, an entity will be required to recognize an allowance that reflects the entity’s current estimate of credit losses expected to be incurred over the life of the financial instrument. This guidance was effective for the Company beginning on January 1, 2020 and did not have a material impact on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to use judgment and make estimates. The level of uncertainty in estimates and assumptions increases with the length of time until the underlying transactions are completed. Actual results could ultimately differ from those estimates. The accounting policies that are most critical in the preparation of the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements are those that are both important to the presentation of the Consolidated Financial Statements and require significant or complex judgments and estimates on the part of management. The Company’s critical accounting policies are reviewed periodically with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
In certain instances, accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America allow for the selection of alternative accounting methods. The Company’s significant policies that involve the selection of alternative methods are accounting for inventories and shipping and handling costs.
▪The Company accounts for inventories using both the first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) method (75% of inventories) and the last-in, first-out (“LIFO”) method (25% of inventories). There would have been no material impact on reported earnings for 2020 or 2019 had all inventories been accounted for under the FIFO method.
▪Shipping and handling costs may be reported as either a component of Cost of sales or Selling, general and administrative expenses. The Company accounts for such costs, primarily related to warehousing and outbound freight, as fulfillment costs and reports them in the Consolidated Statements of Income as a component of Selling, general and administrative expenses. Accordingly, the Company’s Gross profit margin is not comparable with the gross profit margin of those companies that include shipping and handling charges in cost of sales. If such costs had been included as a component of Cost of sales, the Company’s Gross profit margin would have been lower by 845 bps in 2020 and by 810 bps in both 2019 and 2018, with no impact on reported earnings.
The areas of accounting that involve significant or complex judgments and estimates are pensions and other retiree benefit cost assumptions, stock-based compensation, asset impairments, uncertain tax positions, tax valuation allowances, legal and other contingency reserves.
▪In accounting for pension and other postretirement benefit costs, the most significant actuarial assumptions are the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. The discount rate used to measure the benefit obligation for U.S. defined benefit plans was 2.65% and 3.40% as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The discount rate used to measure the benefit obligation for other U.S. postretirement plans was 2.88%, and 3.56% as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Discount rates used for the U.S. and international defined benefit and other postretirement plans are based on a yield curve constructed from a portfolio of high-quality bonds whose projected cash flows approximate the projected benefit payments of the plans. The assumed expected long-term rate of return on plan assets for U.S. plans was 5.70% as of December 31, 2020 and 6.30% as of 2019. In determining the expected long-term rate of return, the Company considers the nature of the plans’ investments and the historical rate of return.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Average annual rates of return for the U.S. plans for the most recent 1-year, 5-year, 10-year, 15-year and 25-year periods were 15%, 9%, 8%, 7% and 7%, respectively. In addition, the current assumed rate of return for the U.S. plans is based upon the nature of the plans’ investments with a target asset allocation of approximately 74% in fixed income securities, 21% in equity securities and 5% in real estate and other investments. A 1% change in the assumed rate of return on plan assets of the U.S. pension plans would impact future Net income attributable to Colgate-Palmolive Company by approximately $19. A 1% change in the discount rate for the U.S. pension plans would impact future Net income attributable to Colgate-Palmolive Company by approximately $3. A third assumption is the long-term rate of compensation increase, a change in which would partially offset the impact of a change in either the discount rate or the expected long-term rate of return. This rate was 3.50% as of December 31, 2020, and 2019. Refer to Note 10, Retirement Plans and Other Retiree Benefits to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of the Company’s pension and other postretirement plans.
▪The assumption requiring the most judgment in accounting for other postretirement benefits (other than the discount rate noted above) is the medical cost trend rate. The Company reviews external data and its own historical trends for health care costs to determine the medical cost trend rate. The assumed rate of increase for the U.S. postretirement benefit plans is 6.00% for 2021, declining to 4.75% by 2026 and remaining at 4.75% for the years thereafter. The effect on the total of service cost and interest costs components of a 1% increase in the assumed long-term medical cost trend rate would decrease Net income attributable to Colgate-Palmolive Company by $10.
▪The Company recognizes the cost of employee services received in exchange for awards of equity instruments, such as stock options and restricted stock units (both performance-based and time-vested), based on the fair value of those awards at the date of grant. The Company uses the Black-Scholes-Merton (“Black-Scholes”) option pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock option awards. The weighted-average estimated fair value of each stock option award granted in the year ended December 31, 2020 was $11.26. The Black-Scholes model uses various assumptions to estimate the fair value of stock option awards. These assumptions include the expected term of stock option awards, expected volatility rate, risk-free interest rate and expected dividend yield. While these assumptions do not require significant judgment, as the significant inputs are determined from historical experience or independent third-party sources, changes in these inputs could result in significant changes in the fair value of stock option awards. A one-year change in expected term would result in a change in fair value of approximately 4%. A 1% change in volatility would change fair value by approximately 6%. The Company uses a Monte-Carlo simulation to determine the fair value of performance-based restricted stock units at the date of grant. The Monte-Carlo simulation model uses substantially the same inputs as the Black-Scholes model.
▪Goodwill and indefinite-life intangible assets, such as the Company’s global brands, are subject to impairment tests at least annually or when events or changes in circumstances indicate an asset may be impaired. In assessing impairment, the Company performs either a quantitative or a qualitative analysis.
Determining the fair value of the Company’s reporting units for goodwill and the fair value of its intangible assets requires significant estimates and judgments by management. When a quantitative analysis is performed, the Company generally uses the income approach, which requires several estimates, including future cash flows consistent with management’s strategic plans, sales growth rates, foreign exchange rates and the selection of royalty rates and a discount rate. Estimating sales growth rates requires significant judgment by management in areas such as future economic conditions, category growth rates, product pricing, consumer tastes and preferences and future expansion expectations. In selecting an appropriate royalty rate, the Company considers recent market transactions for similar brands and products. In determining an appropriate discount rate, the Company considers the current interest rate environment and its estimated cost of capital. Other qualitative factors the Company considers, in addition to those quantitative measures discussed above, include assessments of general macroeconomic conditions, industry-specific considerations and historical financial performance. The Company generally engages a third-party valuation firm to assist it in determining the fair value of intangible assets acquired in business combinations.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
In determining the fair value of the Company’s reporting units, fair value is also determined using the market approach, which is generally derived from metrics of comparable publicly traded companies. As multiple valuation methodologies are used, the Company also performs a qualitative analysis comparing the fair value of a reporting unit under each method to assess its reasonableness and ensure consistency of results.
Determining the expected life of a brand requires management judgment and is based on an evaluation of several factors including market share, brand history, future expansion expectations, the level of in-market support anticipated by management, legal or regulatory restrictions and the economic environment in the countries in which the brand is sold.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, in the first quarter of 2020, the Company assessed whether a “triggering event” had occurred indicating a possible impairment of its goodwill and indefinite-life intangible assets. As a result of this assessment, the Company determined that a “triggering event” had occurred relative to its recently acquired Filorga skin health business and, as required, performed a quantitative analysis, with the assistance of a third-party valuation firm, of the value of the Filorga reporting unit and its indefinite-life intangible assets. Based on the analysis, the Company determined that the fair value of the Filorga reporting unit and the related indefinite-life intangible assets continued to exceed their carrying values and were not impaired.
As of the date of the annual goodwill impairment test, the fair value of the Filorga reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by approximately 10%. Either a reduction in the long-term growth rate of 50 basis points or an increase in the discount rate of 25 basis points would result in the fair value of the Filorga reporting unit exceeding its carrying value by less than 5%. As of the date of the annual impairment test, the fair value of the Filorga indefinite-life intangible assets exceeded their carrying value by less than 10%. Either a reduction in the long-term growth rate of 50 basis points or an increase in the discount rate of 25 basis points would result in the fair value of the Filorga indefinite-life intangible assets approximating their carrying value. Given the inherent uncertainties in estimating the future impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on global macroeconomic conditions and interest rates in general and on the Filorga business in particular, actual results may differ from management’s current estimates and could have an adverse impact on one or more of the assumptions used in our quantitative models related to the Filorga reporting unit and the related indefinite-life intangible assets, resulting in potential impairment charges in subsequent periods. Given the recent acquisition of Filorga, where there is inherently a lower surplus of fair value over carrying value, management will continue to assess triggering events that may necessitate additional qualitative or quantitative analyses of our reporting units and indefinite-life intangible assets in future periods.
Except for the recently acquired Filorga business, as described above, where there is inherently a lower surplus of fair value over carrying value, the estimated fair value of the Company’s reporting units substantially exceeds the recorded carrying value. The fair value of the Company’s indefinite-life intangible assets other than Filorga exceeds their recorded carrying value by at least 20%. Therefore, it is not reasonably likely that significant changes in these estimates would occur that would result in an impairment charge related to these assets.
▪The recognition and measurement of uncertain tax positions involves consideration of the amounts and probabilities of various outcomes that could be realized upon ultimate resolution.
▪Tax valuation allowances are established to reduce deferred tax assets, such as tax loss carryforwards, to net realizable value. Factors considered in estimating net realizable value include historical results by tax jurisdiction, carryforward periods, income tax strategies and forecasted taxable income.
▪Legal and other contingency reserves are based on management’s assessment of the risk of potential loss, which includes consultation with outside legal counsel and other advisors. Such assessments are reviewed each period and revised based on current facts and circumstances, if necessary. While it is possible that the Company’s cash flows and results of operations in a particular quarter or year could be materially affected by the impact of such contingencies, based on current knowledge it is the opinion of management that these matters will not have a material effect on the Company’s financial position, or its ongoing results of operations or cash flows. Refer to Note 13, Commitments and Contingencies to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of the Company’s contingencies.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
The Company generates revenue through the sale of well-known consumer products to trade customers under established trading terms. While the recognition of revenue and receivables requires the use of estimates, there is a short time frame (typically less than 60 days) between the shipment of product and cash receipt, thereby reducing the level of uncertainty in these estimates. Refer to Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further description of the Company’s significant accounting policies.
(Dollars in Millions Except Per Share Amounts)
Cautionary Statement on Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K may contain forward-looking statements as that term is defined in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 or by the SEC in its rules, regulations and releases that set forth anticipated results based on management’s current plans and assumptions. Such statements may relate, for example, to sales or volume growth, net selling price increases, organic sales growth, profit or profit margin growth, earnings per share levels, financial goals, the impact of foreign exchange volatility, the impact of COVID-19, cost-reduction plans, tax rates, new product introductions, commercial investment levels, acquisitions, divestitures, share repurchases, or legal or tax proceedings, among other matters. These statements are made on the basis of the Company’s views and assumptions as of this time and the Company undertakes no obligation to update these statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law or by the rules and regulations of the SEC. Moreover, the Company does not, nor does any other person, assume responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of those statements. The Company cautions investors that any such forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and that actual events or results may differ materially from those statements. Actual events or results may differ materially because of factors that affect international businesses and global economic conditions, as well as matters specific to the Company and the markets it serves, including the uncertain economic and political environment in different countries and its effect on consumer spending habits, foreign currency rate fluctuations, exchange controls, tariffs, price or profit controls, labor relations, changes in foreign or domestic laws, or regulations or their interpretation, political and fiscal developments, including changes in trade, tax and immigration policies, increased competition and evolving competitive practices (including from the growth of eCommerce and the entry of new competitors and business models), the ability to operate and respond effectively during a pandemic, epidemic or widespread public health concern, including COVID-19, ability to manage disruptions in our global supply chain and/or key office facilities, ability to manage the availability and cost of raw and packaging materials and logistics costs, the ability to maintain or increase selling prices as needed, changes in the policies of retail trade customers, the emergence of alternative retail channels, the growth of eCommerce and the rapidly changing retail landscape (as consumers increasingly shop online), the ability to develop innovative new products, the ability to continue lowering costs and operate in an agile manner, the ability to maintain the security of our information technology systems from a cyber-security incident or data breach, the ability to address the effects of climate change and achieve our sustainability and social impact goals, the ability to complete acquisitions and divestitures as planned, the ability to successfully integrate acquired businesses, the ability to attract and retain key employees and integrate diversity, equity and inclusion initiatives across our organization, the uncertainty of the outcome of legal proceedings, whether or not the Company believes they have merit, and the ability to address uncertain or unfavorable global economic conditions, disruptions in the credit markets and tax matters. For information about these and other factors that could impact the Company’s business and cause actual results to differ materially from forward-looking statements, refer to Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors.”