Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is designed to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and other factors that may affect our future results. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes that appear in Part II - Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
The year 2020 represented a transformative period in our Company's 173-year history. During the year, we completed the vertical integration of our legacy iron ore pellet business with the acquisitions of steelmakers AK Steel and ArcelorMittal USA, becoming the largest flat-rolled steel producer in North America. Our new unique, vertically integrated business model provides a competitive advantage over other steelmakers that procure a larger proportion of their steelmaking raw materials from external sources, and allows us to control our production from upstream mining to downstream stamping and tubing.
We believe the Acquisitions give us a leading position in the highly desirable automotive end market, where we supply best-in-class volumes, quality and delivery performance, and give us the most comprehensive flat steel product offering in the industry. Due to the much larger operational footprint we now have, we anticipate synergies of approximately $310 million from asset optimization, economies of scale and streamlining overhead, over half of which has already been set in motion.
We are now focused on maximizing the value of the iron ore pellets we produce from our legacy and recently acquired mines in Michigan and Minnesota. A majority of the pellets we produce is dedicated to internal consumption, and we do not rely on external sources of pellets. As such, our new Steelmaking segment captures effectively all of the production activity in the steelmaking process, which begins at our mines.
In 2020, we also completed construction of and began production at our state-of-the-art direct reduction plant in Toledo, Ohio. This facility produces high-quality HBI, and is the first of its kind in the Great Lakes region. Our HBI provides a high-quality and environmentally friendly alternative to the scrap and imported pig iron that our potential customers currently utilize. We expect to begin selling this product to third parties during the first quarter of 2021 and reach nameplate capacity at our direct reduction plant during the second quarter of 2021.
Along with these notable accomplishments, we have been able to successfully navigate through the COVID-19 pandemic while preserving the health and safety of both our workforce and our Company for the long term. The COVID-19 pandemic caused its fair share of challenges, as disruptions in demand led to lower sales output and necessitated the unplanned idling of certain production facilities. These production outages, along with the lower
demand and lower prices that came as a result of the pandemic, generated weaker results during the year than what we would normally expect.
As the demand environment began to recover, our results in the second half of the year improved dramatically and operations at temporarily idled facilities resumed. Now, with steel prices and scrap prices in the U.S. recently reaching all-time highs, we believe our decisive actions and accomplishments during 2020 will allow us to deliver strong financial results and free cash flow in 2021. We also believe our new vertically integrated business model is well-equipped to navigate and succeed through future pricing or demand volatility that is common in our industry.
Despite the ongoing pandemic, we also continued our best practices from both a safety and environmental standpoint. During 2020, our safety TRIR (including contractors) was 0.92 per 200,000 hours worked. On environmental matters, we recently made a commitment to reduce GHG emissions 25% by 2030 from 2017 levels, a higher reduction target than our competitors and a demonstration of the newfound leadership role we plan to take in the domestic steel industry.
Recent Developments
Acquisition of ArcelorMittal USA
On December 9, 2020, pursuant to the terms of the AM USA Transaction Agreement, we purchased ArcelorMittal USA from ArcelorMittal. In connection with the closing of the AM USA Transaction, as contemplated by the terms of the AM USA Transaction Agreement, ArcelorMittal’s former joint venture partner in Kote and Tek exercised its put right pursuant to the terms of the Kote and Tek joint venture agreements. As a result, we purchased all of such joint venture partner’s interests in Kote and Tek. Following the closing of the AM USA Transaction, we own 100% of the interests in Kote and Tek.
The assets of ArcelorMittal USA acquired by us at the closing of the AM USA Transaction include six steelmaking facilities, eight finishing facilities, three cokemaking operations, two iron ore mining and pelletizing operations and one coal mining complex. Refer to NOTE 3 - ACQUISITIONS for additional information.
Financing Transactions
On December 9, 2020, we entered into the ABL Amendment. The ABL Amendment modified the ABL Facility to, among other things, increase the amount of tranche A revolver commitments available thereunder by an additional $1.5 billion and increase certain dollar baskets related to certain negative covenants that apply to the ABL Facility. After giving effect to the ABL Amendment, the aggregate principal amount of tranche A revolver commitments under the ABL Facility is $3.35 billion and the aggregate principal amount of tranche B revolver commitments under the ABL Facility remains at $150 million.
On February 11, 2021, we sold 20 million of our common shares, and the indirect, wholly owned subsidiary of ArcelorMittal to which approximately 78 million common shares were issued as part of the consideration paid by us in connection with the closing of the AM USA Transaction sold 40 million common shares, in each case at a price per share to the underwriter of $16.12, in an underwritten public offering. We also granted the underwriter an option to purchase up to an additional 9 million common shares from us at a price per share to the underwriter of $16.12. The underwriter has until March 10, 2021 to exercise such option, which it may do in full, in part or not at all. We did not receive any proceeds from the sale of the common shares by the selling shareholder in the offering. We intend to use the net proceeds to us from the offering, plus cash on hand, to redeem up to approximately $334 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 9.875% 2025 Senior Secured Notes. We intend to use any remaining net proceeds to us following such redemption to reduce borrowings under our ABL Facility.
On February 17, 2021, we issued $500 million aggregate principal amount of 4.625% 2029 Senior Notes and $500 million aggregate principal amount of 4.875% 2031 Senior Notes in an offering that was exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act. We intend to use the net proceeds from the notes offering to redeem all of the outstanding 4.875% 2024 Senior Secured Notes and 6.375% 2025 Senior Notes issued by Cleveland-Cliffs Inc. and all of the outstanding 7.625% 2021 AK Senior Notes, 7.50% 2023 AK Senior Notes and 6.375% 2025 AK Senior Notes issued by AK Steel Corporation (n/k/a Cleveland-Cliffs Steel Corporation), and pay fees and expenses in connection with such redemptions, and reduce borrowings under our ABL Facility.
Company Structure
We have updated our segment structure to coincide with our new business model and are organized into four operating segments based on differentiated products, Steelmaking, Tubular, Tooling and Stamping, and European Operations. Our previous Mining and Pelletizing segment is included within Steelmaking as iron ore pellets are a
primary raw material for our steel products. We have one reportable segment - Steelmaking. Our other operating segments are classified as our Other Businesses.
COVID-19
In December 2019, COVID-19 surfaced in Wuhan, China, and then spread to other countries, including the United States. In March 2020, the World Health Organization characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic. Efforts to contain the spread of COVID-19 intensified throughout 2020, and many countries, including the United States, took steps to restrict travel, temporarily close businesses and issue quarantine orders. It remains unclear how long and to what degree of severity the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will be felt.
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was signed into law. The CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions relating to refundable payroll tax credits, deferment of employer-side social security payments, NOL carryback periods, AMT credit refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property. During 2020, the CARES Act provided liquidity relief by enabling us to accelerate the receipt of $60 million of AMT credit refunds in July 2020, defer pension contributions until January 2021, and defer employer social security payments until 2021 and 2022.
We continue to utilize stringent social distancing procedures in our operating facilities, including checking employees’ temperatures and symptoms before entering the workplace each day and deep cleaning our operational facilities. Although we continue to utilize these measures, the outbreak of COVID-19 has heightened the risk that a significant portion of our workforce will suffer illness or otherwise be unable to perform their ordinary work functions.
Although steel and iron ore production are considered “essential” by the states in which we operate, certain of our facilities and construction activities were temporarily idled during the second quarter of 2020 due primarily to temporarily reduced product demand. Most of these temporarily idled facilities were restarted during the second quarter of 2020, and the remaining operations were restarted during the third quarter of 2020. Our Columbus and Monessen facilities acquired through the AM USA Transaction are temporarily idled due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
We cannot predict whether our operations will experience additional disruptions in the future. We may also continue to experience supply chain disruptions or operational issues with our vendors, as our suppliers and contractors face similar challenges related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Because the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve, we cannot currently predict the extent to which our business, results of operations, financial condition or liquidity will ultimately be impacted.
To mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we took a number of steps throughout 2020 to solidify our liquidity position, including issuing $520 million aggregate principal amount of secured debt, adding a $150 million FILO tranche to our ABL Facility, idling several facilities both temporarily and permanently, temporarily deferring our Chief Executive Officer’s compensation by 40%, temporarily deferring salaries by up to 20%, temporarily deferring other salaried employee benefits, and temporarily suspending capital expenditures. Lastly, our Board suspended future dividends, which was a typical cash obligation of approximately $100 million on an annualized basis.
Results of Operations
Overview
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a Net loss of $81 million. For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, we had Net income of $293 million and $1,128 million, respectively. Our total revenues, diluted EPS and Adjusted EBITDA were as follows:
See "- Results of Operations - Adjusted EBITDA" below for a reconciliation of our Net Income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA.
Revenues
Revenues from iron products made up 100% of our revenues by product line for the year ended December 31, 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our consolidated Revenues were approximately $5.4 billion, an increase of approximately $3.4 billion, or 169%, compared to 2019. The increase was due to the addition of $4.0 billion in revenues as a result of the Acquisitions, partially offset by a decrease in revenue from iron products of $655 million resulting from lower sales volumes of 6.9 million long tons compared to 2019. The lower sales volumes of iron products in 2020, as compared to 2019, were partially due to the diversion of pellets for internal consumption following the Acquisitions. Overall, we experienced lower customer demand during 2020 as a result of the reduced manufacturing activity caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Revenues by Market
The following table represents our consolidated Revenues and percentage of revenues to each of the markets we supply:
Automotive Market
North American light vehicle production for 2020 declined 20% to approximately 13 million units from the prior year due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, which forced automotive businesses to shut down from the end of the first quarter of 2020 until near the end of the second quarter of 2020. During the third quarter of 2020, auto makers saw pent-up demand bring sales back to more normal levels as buyers and dealers adapted to new procedures and virtual shopping. Fourth quarter 2020 sales for the automotive industry were more in line with expected sales for the time of year, returning to near pre-COVID-19 levels.
Infrastructure and Manufacturing
Domestic construction activity and the replacement of aging infrastructure directly affects sales of our carbon, stainless and electrical steel products, particularly for GOES. Additionally, during 2020, there were nearly 1.4 million new housing starts in the U.S., an increase of approximately 6% from 2019, and home sales reached nearly 6 million, the highest annual mark since 2006, despite the supply of existing homes reaching all-time lows. This provides a positive indication that domestic GOES customers could continue to experience steady demand consistent with the construction and electrical transformer replacement markets.
Distributors and Converters
Steel distributors and converters typically source from the commodity carbon, stainless and electrical spot markets. The price for domestic HRC, which is an important attribute in the profitability of this end market, averaged $588 per net ton for the year ended December 31, 2020. The price of HRC was negatively impacted by lower demand related to the COVID-19 pandemic, and hit a low point of $438 per net ton on April 30, 2020. However, after the industry recovered and supply-demand dynamics improved, the price rebounded dramatically, improving to a peak of $1,030 per net ton by December 31, 2020.
Steel Producers Market
The steel producers market represents third-party sales to other steel producers, including those who operate blast furnaces and EAFs. It includes sales of raw materials and semi-finished and finished goods, including iron ore pellets, coal, coke, HBI and steel products. Iron ore product revenues declined during 2020, as compared to 2019, partially as a result of the Acquisitions as our iron ore pellet production was consumed internally and the respective intercompany revenue was eliminated in consolidation. Additionally, we experienced lower customer demand during 2020 as a result of the reduced manufacturing activity caused by the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating Costs
Cost of goods sold
Cost of goods sold increased by $3,688 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year, primarily due to the addition of 4 million net tons of steel shipments resulting from the Acquisitions, partially offset by lower sales volumes of iron products. During 2020, Cost of goods sold was unfavorably impacted by temporary idle-related costs of approximately $225 million, resulting from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
As a result of the Acquisitions, our Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $131 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019.
Acquisition-related costs
The Acquisition-related costs of $90 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, include severance of $38 million and other various third-party expenses related to the Acquisitions of $52 million. Refer to NOTE 3 - ACQUISITIONS for further information on the Acquisitions.
Miscellaneous - net
Miscellaneous - net increased by $33 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year, which was primarily due to an increase in expenses incurred at our Toledo direct reduction plant, primarily related to the hiring and training of employees leading up to the start of production.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net increased by $137 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year, primarily due to the incremental debt that we incurred in connection with the AK Steel Merger. The increase was offset partially by an increase in capitalized interest, primarily related to the construction of the Toledo direct reduction plant.
Gain (loss) on extinguishment of debt
The Gain (loss) on extinguishment of debt of $130 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily relates to the repurchase of $748 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding senior notes of various series using the net proceeds from the issuance of an additional $555 million aggregate principal amount of our 9.875% 2025 Senior Secured Notes on April 24, 2020 and other sources of cash. This compares to a loss on extinguishment of debt of $18 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily related to the redemption of all of our then-outstanding 4.875% 2021 Senior Notes and the repurchase of $600 million aggregate principal amount of our 5.75% 2025 Senior Notes. Refer to NOTE 8 - DEBT AND CREDIT FACILITIES for further details.
Other non-operating income
The increase of $54 million in Other non-operating income primarily relates to an increase in net periodic benefit credits other than service cost component predominantly due to the expected return on assets resulting from the Acquisitions and increased asset values for the plans held in 2019. Refer to NOTE 10 - PENSIONS AND OTHER POSTRETIREMENT BENEFITS for further details.
Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate is affected by permanent items, primarily depletion. It also is affected by discrete items that may occur in any given period, but are not consistent from period to period. The following represents a summary of our tax provision and corresponding effective rates:
A reconciliation of our income tax attributable to continuing operations compared to the U.S. federal statutory rate is as follows:
The increase in income tax benefit in 2020, as compared to the prior year, is directly related to the increase in the pre-tax book loss year-over-year. The Luxembourg legal entity reduction relates to initiatives resulting in the dissolution of entities and settlement of related financial instruments in the year ended December 31, 2019. The 2019 NOL deferred tax asset reduction resulted in tax expense of $846 million, which was fully offset by a decrease in the valuation allowance.
See NOTE 12 - INCOME TAXES for further information.
Adjusted EBITDA
We evaluate performance based on Adjusted EBITDA, which is a non-GAAP measure. This measure is used by management, investors, lenders and other external users of our financial statements to assess our operating performance and to compare operating performance to other companies in the steel industry, although it is not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. In addition, management believes Adjusted EBITDA is a useful measure to assess the earnings power of the business without the impact of capital structure and can be used to assess our ability to service debt and fund future capital expenditures in the business.
The following table provides a reconciliation of our Net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA:
The following table provides a summary of our Adjusted EBITDA by segment:
The year ended December 31, 2020 results were unfavorably impacted by decreased customer demand resulting from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we incurred temporary idle-related costs resulting from production curtailments, excluding idle depreciation, depletion and amortization expense, of approximately $214 million during 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA from Corporate and eliminations primarily relates to Selling, general and administrative expenses at our Corporate headquarters.
The discussion of our Consolidated Results of Operations for 2019 compared to 2018 can be found in Part II, Item 7., "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations," of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 20, 2020.
Steelmaking
The following is a summary of our Steelmaking segment results included in our consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. These results include the AK Steel operations subsequent to March 13, 2020, the ArcelorMittal USA operations subsequent to December 9, 2020, and our results from operations previously reported as part of our Mining and Pelletizing segment.
The following is a summary of the Steelmaking segment operating results:
The following table represents our segment Revenues by product line:
Operating Results
Despite the downward pressures on markets as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020, the operating results during the second half of the year showed significant signs of improvement heading into 2021, as we have seen pricing for HRC continue to rise and sales volumes begin to return to normal. Steelmaking revenues increased by $2,975 million compared to 2019, due to the addition of sales following the Acquisitions. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in revenue from iron products of $655 million resulting from lower sales volumes of 7 million long tons compared to 2019, partially due to the diversion of pellets for internal consumption following the Acquisitions, as well as lower overall demand from customers as a result of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of goods sold increased $3,335 million during 2020, compared to 2019, predominantly due to additional sales resulting from the Acquisitions; however, this increase was also unfavorably impacted by idle-related costs of approximately $225 million, driven by the temporary idling of facilities in response to lower customer demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
As a result, Adjusted EBITDA was $433 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $636 million for the prior year. Refer to "- Results of Operations" above for additional information.
Production
During 2020, we produced 4 million net tons of raw steel, 17 million long tons of iron ore pellets and 1 million net tons of coke. During 2020, certain of our operations were temporarily idled in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, with most restarting and resuming production in the second quarter of 2020 and the remainder in the third quarter of 2020. Dearborn Works' hot strip mill, anneal and temper operations and AK Coal remain permanently idled as part of the permanent cost reduction efforts. Our Columbus and Monessen facilities acquired through the AM USA Transaction are temporarily idled due to impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. During 2019, we produced 20 million long tons of iron ore pellets.
Liquidity, Cash Flows and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are Cash and cash equivalents and cash generated from our operations, availability under the ABL Facility and other financing activities. Our capital allocation decision-making process is focused on preserving healthy liquidity levels, while maintaining the strength of our balance sheet and creating financial flexibility to manage through the inherent cyclical demand for our products and volatility in commodity prices. We are focused on maximizing the cash generation of our operations, reducing debt, and aligning capital investments with our strategic priorities and the requirements of our business plan, including regulatory and permission-to-operate related projects.
Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in the U.S., our primary focus has been on maintaining adequate levels of liquidity to manage through a potentially prolonged economic downturn. In alignment with this, we made several operational adjustments, including facility closures, idles and extended maintenance outages. Along with the cost savings achieved through these operational adjustments, during 2020, we reduced planned capital expenditures for the year, reduced overhead costs and suspended our quarterly dividend payment. Additionally, on April 17, 2020 and April 24, 2020, we issued $400 million aggregate principal amount and an additional $555 million aggregate principal amount, respectively, of 9.875% 2025 Senior Secured Notes to further bolster our liquidity position and pay-down existing debt. We also issued an additional $120 million aggregate principal amount of 6.75% 2026 Senior Secured Notes on June 19, 2020, the net proceeds of which we used to finance construction of our Toledo direct reduction plant. Prior to such use, the net proceeds were used to temporarily reduce the outstanding borrowings under our ABL Facility. We believe these measures have helped us to maintain healthy liquidity levels during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Now that business conditions have improved and we expect to generate healthy free cash flow during 2021, we believe we have the ability to lower our long-term debt balance. Our stated initial target will be to reduce total debt to less than three times our annual Adjusted EBITDA. We also look at the composition of our debt, as well, as we are interested in both extending our maturity profile and increasing our ratio of unsecured debt to secured debt. These actions will better prepare us to navigate more easily through potentially volatile industry conditions in the future. In furtherance of these goals, we consummated certain financing transactions in February 2021.
On February 11, 2021, we sold 20 million common shares and the indirect, wholly owned subsidiary of ArcelorMittal to which approximately 78 million common shares were issued as part of the consideration paid by us in connection with the closing of the AM USA Transaction sold 40 million common shares, in each case at a price per share to the underwriter of $16.12, in an underwritten public offering. We also granted the underwriter an option to purchase up to an additional 9 million common shares from us at a price per share to the underwriter of $16.12. The underwriter has until March 10, 2021 to exercise such option, which it may do in full, in part or not at all. We did not receive any proceeds from the sale of the common shares by the selling shareholder in the offering. We intend to use the net proceeds to us from the offering, plus cash on hand, to redeem up to approximately $334 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 9.875% 2025 Senior Secured Notes. We intend to use any remaining net proceeds to us following such redemption to reduce borrowings under our ABL Facility.
On February 17, 2021, we issued $500 million aggregate principal amount of 4.625% 2029 Senior Notes and $500 million aggregate principal amount of 4.875% 2031 Senior Notes in an offering that was exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act. We intend to use the net proceeds from the notes offering to redeem all of the outstanding 4.875% 2024 Senior Secured Notes and 6.375% 2025 Senior Notes issued by Cleveland-Cliffs Inc. and all of the outstanding 7.625% 2021 AK Senior Notes, 7.50% 2023 AK Senior Notes and 6.375% 2025 AK Senior Notes issued by AK Steel Corporation (n/k/a Cleveland-Cliffs Steel Corporation), and pay fees and expenses in connection with such redemptions, and reduce borrowings under our ABL Facility.
In connection with the underwritten public offering, we provided notice to redeem $322.4 million aggregate principal amount of our 9.875% 2025 Senior Secured Notes on March 11, 2021. In connection with the notes offering, we provided notice to redeem all of the outstanding 4.875% 2024 Senior Secured Notes, 6.375% 2025 Senior Notes,
7.625% 2021 AK Senior Notes, 7.50% 2023 AK Senior Notes and 6.375% 2025 AK Senior Notes on March 12, 2021. Refer to NOTE 22 - SUBSEQUENT EVENTS for more information regarding February 2021 financing transactions.
The application of the net proceeds to us from the February 2021 financing transactions will shift our debt horizon, by providing a four-year window in which none of our long-term notes are due, clearing the way for us to fully focus on operational integration.
Based on our outlook for the next 12 months, which is subject to continued changing demand from customers and volatility in domestic steel prices, we expect to have ample liquidity through cash generated from operations and availability under our ABL Facility sufficient to meet the needs of our operations and service our debt obligations.
The following discussion summarizes the significant items impacting our cash flows during 2020 and comparative years as well as expected impacts to our future cash flows over the next 12 months. Refer to the Statements of Consolidated Cash Flows for additional information.
Operating Activities
Net cash used by operating activities was $261 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $563 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change in cash used by operating activities during 2020, compared to cash provided by operating activities in 2019, was due primarily to the slowing economy in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in reduced customer demand and the need to temporarily idle many of our operations, which had an adverse effect on our operating results. Our working capital was negatively impacted as a result of ArcelorMittal USA's accounts receivable factoring arrangement that was in place prior to the AM USA Transaction. This negatively impacted working capital by $315 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and is expected to impact the first quarter of 2021 by approximately $260 million.
Our U.S. Cash and cash equivalents balance at December 31, 2020 was $90 million, or 84% of our consolidated Cash and cash equivalents balance, excluding cash related to our consolidated VIE of $5 million. Additionally, we had a cash balance at December 31, 2020 of $4 million classified as part of Other current assets in the Statements of Consolidated Financial Position related to our discontinued operations.
Investing Activities
Net cash used by investing activities was $2,042 million and $644 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had net cash outflows of $658 million related to the AM USA Transaction, net of cash acquired. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we had net cash outflows of $869 million related to the AK Steel Merger, net of cash acquired, which included $590 million used to repay the former AK Steel Corporation revolving credit facility and $324 million used to purchase outstanding 7.50% 2023 AK Senior Notes. Refer to NOTE 3 - ACQUISITIONS for additional details on the Acquisitions.
Additionally, we had capital expenditures, including capitalized interest, of $525 million and $656 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We had cash outflows, including deposits and capitalized interest, for the development of the Toledo direct reduction plant of $348 million and $544 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we also had cash outflows, including deposits and capitalized interest, of $43 million on the upgrades at Northshore. Additionally, we spent $177 million and $69 million on sustaining capital expenditures during 2020 and 2019, respectively. Sustaining capital expenditures include capital expenditures related to infrastructure, mobile equipment, fixed equipment, product quality, environment, health and safety.
During 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we temporarily limited our cash used for capital expenditures to critical sustaining capital, but have now resumed growth capital spending. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we completed construction of our Toledo direct reduction plant. We anticipate total cash used for capital expenditures during the next 12 months to be between $600 million and $650 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $2,059 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash used by financing activities of $394 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily related to the issuances in separate offerings consummated on March 13, 2020 and June 19, 2020 of $845 million combined aggregate principal amount of 6.75% 2026 Senior Secured Notes, the issuances in separate offerings consummated on April 17, 2020 and April 24, 2020 of $955 million combined aggregate principal amount of 9.875% 2025 Senior Secured Notes and borrowings
of $2,060 million under the ABL Facility. The net proceeds from the initial issuance of $725 million aggregate principal amount of the 6.75% 2026 Senior Secured Notes on March 13, 2020, along with cash on hand, were used to purchase $373 million aggregate principal amount of 7.625% 2021 AK Senior Notes and $367 million aggregate principal amount of 7.50% 2023 AK Senior Notes, in each case issued by AK Steel Corporation (n/k/a Cleveland-Cliffs Steel Corporation), that we accepted for purchase pursuant to our tender offers for any and all such notes then-outstanding in connection with the AK Steel Merger and to pay for the $44 million of debt issuance costs in the first quarter of 2020. The net proceeds from the additional issuance of $555 million aggregate principal amount of the 9.875% 2025 Senior Secured Notes on April 24, 2020 were used to repurchase $736 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding senior notes of various series in private exchanges exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act. The net proceeds from the additional issuance of $120 million aggregate principal amount of 6.75% 2026 Senior Secured Notes on June 19, 2020 were used to finance construction of our Toledo direct reduction plant. Prior to such use, the net proceeds were used to temporarily reduce the outstanding borrowings under our ABL Facility. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we repaid $550 million under the ABL Facility.
Net cash used by financing activities during 2019 primarily related to the repurchase of 24 million common shares for $253 million in the aggregate under the $300 million share repurchase program, which was active until December 31, 2019. Additionally, we issued $750 million aggregate principal amount of 5.875% 2027 Senior Notes, which provided net proceeds of approximately $714 million. The net proceeds from the notes offering, along with cash on hand, were used to redeem in full all of our then-outstanding 4.875% 2021 Senior Notes and to purchase $600 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 5.75% 2025 Senior Notes pursuant to a tender offer. In total, during 2019, we purchased $724 million aggregate principal amount of senior notes for $729 million in cash.
Additional uses of cash from financing activities during 2019 included payments of regular quarterly cash dividends and a special cash dividend on our common shares of $72 million and a cash payment of $44 million related to the third and final annual installment of the distribution of Empire partnership equity.
We have temporarily suspended future dividend distributions as a result of impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic in order to preserve cash during this time of economic uncertainty. We anticipate future uses of cash and cash provided by financing activities during the next 12 months to include opportunistic debt transactions as part of our liability management strategy, similar to the transactions that occurred during 2020 and February 2021, in addition to providing supplemental financing to meet cash requirements for business improvement opportunities.
The discussion of our Liquidity, Cash Flows and Capital Resources results for 2019 compared to 2018 can be found in Part II, Item 7., "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations", in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 20, 2020.
The following represents our future cash commitments and contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
Refer to NOTE 21 - COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES for additional information regarding our future commitments and obligations.
Capital Resources
We expect to fund our business obligations from available cash, current and future operations and existing and future borrowing arrangements. We also may pursue other funding strategies in the capital markets to strengthen our liquidity, extend debt maturities and/or fund strategic initiatives. The following represents a summary of key liquidity measures:
Our primary sources of funding are cash and cash equivalents, which totaled $111 million as of December 31, 2020, cash generated by our business, availability under the ABL Facility and other financing activities. Cash and cash equivalents include cash on hand and on deposit. The combination of cash and availability under the ABL Facility gives us $1.9 billion in liquidity entering the first quarter of 2021, which is expected to be adequate to fund operations, letter of credit obligations, sustaining and expansion capital expenditures and other cash commitments for at least the next 12 months.
As of February 24, 2021, we had total liquidity of approximately $2.6 billion, consisting of approximately $200 million in cash and approximately $2.4 billion of availability under its ABL credit facility, of which approximately $850 million is expected to be used to redeem the senior notes for which notice of redemption was provided in connection with the offerings consummated in February 2021.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the ABL Facility liquidity requirements and, therefore, the springing financial covenant requiring a minimum Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of 1.0 to 1.0 was not applicable. We believe that the cash on hand and the ABL Facility provide us sufficient liquidity to support our operating, investing and financing activities. We have the capability to issue additional unsecured notes and, subject to the limitations set forth in our existing senior notes indentures, additional secured debt, if we elect to access the debt capital markets. However, our ability to issue additional notes could be limited by market conditions.
We intend from time to time to seek to retire or purchase our outstanding senior notes with cash on hand, borrowings from existing credit sources or new debt financings and/or exchanges for debt or equity securities, in open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Such repurchases, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors, and the amounts involved may be material.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the normal course of business, we are a party to certain arrangements that are not reflected on our Statements of Consolidated Financial Position. These arrangements include minimum "take or pay" purchase commitments, such as minimum electric power demand charges, minimum coal, diesel and natural gas purchase commitments, minimum railroad transportation commitments and minimum port facility usage commitments; and financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk, such as bank letters of credit and bank guarantees.
Information about our Guarantors and the Issuer of our Guaranteed Securities
The accompanying summarized financial information has been prepared and presented pursuant to SEC Regulation S-X, Rule 3-10, “Financial Statements of Guarantors and Issuers of Guaranteed Securities Registered or
Being Registered,” and Rule 13-01 "Financial Disclosures about Guarantors and Issuers of Guaranteed Securities and Affiliates Whose Securities Collateralized a Registrant's Securities." Certain of our subsidiaries (the "Guarantor subsidiaries") have fully and unconditionally, and jointly and severally, guaranteed the obligations under (a) the 5.75% 2025 Senior Notes, the 6.375% 2025 Senior Notes, the 5.875% 2027 Senior Notes and the 7.00% 2027 Senior Notes issued by Cleveland-Cliffs Inc. on a senior unsecured basis and (b) the 4.875% 2024 Senior Secured Notes, the 6.75% 2026 Senior Secured Notes and the 9.875% 2025 Senior Secured Notes on a senior secured basis. See NOTE 7 - DEBT AND CREDIT FACILITIES for further information.
The following presents the summarized financial information on a combined basis for Cleveland-Cliffs Inc. (parent company and issuer of the guaranteed obligations) and the Guarantor subsidiaries, collectively referred to as the obligated group. Transactions between the obligated group have been eliminated. Information for the non-Guarantor subsidiaries was excluded from the combined summarized financial information of the obligated group.
Each Guarantor subsidiary is consolidated by Cleveland-Cliffs Inc. as of December 31, 2020. Refer to Exhibit 22.1, incorporated herein by reference, for the detailed list of entities included within the obligated group as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
The guarantee of a Guarantor subsidiary with respect to Cliffs' 5.75% 2025 Senior Notes, 6.375% 2025 Senior Notes, 5.875% 2027 Senior Notes, 7.00% 2027 Senior Notes, 4.875% 2024 Senior Secured Notes, 6.75% 2026 Senior Secured Notes and 9.875% 2025 Senior Secured Notes will be automatically and unconditionally released and discharged, and such Guarantor subsidiary’s obligations under the guarantee and the related indentures (the “Indentures”) will be automatically and unconditionally released and discharged, upon the occurrence of any of the following, along with the delivery to the trustee of an officer’s certificate and an opinion of counsel, each stating that all conditions precedent provided for in the applicable Indenture relating to the release and discharge of such Guarantor subsidiary’s guarantee have been complied with:
(a) any sale, exchange, transfer or disposition of such Guarantor subsidiary (by merger, consolidation, or the sale of) or the capital stock of such Guarantor subsidiary after which the applicable Guarantor subsidiary is no longer a subsidiary of the Company or the sale of all or substantially all of such Guarantor subsidiary’s assets (other than by lease), whether or not such Guarantor subsidiary is the surviving entity in such transaction, to a person which is not the Company or a subsidiary of the Company; provided that (i) such sale, exchange, transfer or disposition is made in compliance with the applicable Indenture, including the covenants regarding consolidation, merger and sale of assets and, as applicable, dispositions of assets that constitute notes collateral, and (ii) all the obligations of such Guarantor subsidiary under all debt of the Company or its subsidiaries terminate upon consummation of such transaction;
(b) designation of any Guarantor subsidiary as an “excluded subsidiary” (as defined in the Indentures); or
(c) defeasance or satisfaction and discharge of the Indentures.
Each entity in the summarized combined financial information follows the same accounting policies as described in the consolidated financial statements. The accompanying summarized combined financial information does not reflect investments of the obligated group in non-Guarantor subsidiaries. The financial information of the obligated group is presented on a combined basis; intercompany balances and transactions within the obligated group have been eliminated. The obligated group's amounts due from, amounts due to, and transactions with, non-Guarantor subsidiaries and related parties have been presented in separate line items.
Summarized Combined Financial Information of the Issuer and Guarantor Subsidiaries:
The following table is summarized combined financial information from the Statements of Condensed Consolidated Financial Position of the obligated group:
The following table is summarized combined financial information from the Statements of Condensed Consolidated Operations of the obligated group:
1 Includes Realization of deferred revenue of $35 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the obligated group had the following balances with non-Guarantor subsidiaries and other related parties:
Additionally, for the year ended December 31, 2020, the obligated group had Revenues of $893 million and Cost of goods sold of $602 million, in each case with other related parties.
Market Risks
We are subject to a variety of risks, including those caused by changes in commodity prices and interest rates. We have established policies and procedures to manage such risks; however, certain risks are beyond our control.
Pricing Risks
In the ordinary course of business, we are exposed to market risk and price fluctuations related to the sale of our products, which are impacted primarily by market prices for HRC, and the purchase of energy and raw materials used in our operations, which are impacted by market prices for electricity, natural gas, ferrous and stainless steel scrap, chrome, coal, coke, nickel and zinc. Our strategy to address market risk has generally been to obtain competitive prices for our products and services and allow operating results to reflect market price movements dictated by supply and demand; however, we make forward physical purchases and enter into hedge contracts to manage exposure to price risk related to the purchases of certain raw materials and energy used in the production process.
Our financial results can vary for our operations as a result of fluctuations in market prices. We attempt to mitigate these risks by aligning fixed and variable components in our customer pricing contracts, supplier purchasing agreements and derivative financial instruments.
Some customer contracts have fixed-pricing terms, which increase our exposure to fluctuations in raw material and energy costs. To reduce our exposure, we enter into annual, fixed-price agreements for certain raw materials. Some of our existing multi-year raw material supply agreements have required minimum purchase quantities. Under adverse economic conditions, those minimums may exceed our needs. Absent exceptions for force
majeure and other circumstances affecting the legal enforceability of the agreements, these minimum purchase requirements may compel us to purchase quantities of raw materials that could significantly exceed our anticipated needs or pay damages to the supplier for shortfalls. In these circumstances, we would attempt to negotiate agreements for new purchase quantities. There is a risk, however, that we would not be successful in reducing purchase quantities, either through negotiation or litigation. If that occurred, we would likely be required to purchase more of a particular raw material in a particular year than we need, negatively affecting our results of operations and cash flows.
Certain of our customer contracts include variable-pricing mechanisms that adjust selling prices in response to changes in the costs of certain raw materials and energy, while other of our customer contracts exclude such mechanisms. We may enter multi-year purchase agreements for certain raw materials with similar variable-price mechanisms, allowing us to achieve natural hedges between the customer contracts and supplier purchase agreements. Therefore, in some cases, price fluctuations for energy (particularly natural gas and electricity), raw materials (such as scrap, chrome, zinc and nickel) or other commodities may be, in part, passed on to customers rather than absorbed solely by us. There is a risk, however, that the variable-price mechanisms in the sales contracts may not necessarily change in tandem with the variable-price mechanisms in our purchase agreements, negatively affecting our results of operations and cash flows.
Our strategy to address volatile natural gas rates and electricity rates includes improving efficiency in energy usage, identifying alternative providers and utilizing the lowest cost alternative fuels. If we are unable to align fixed and variable components between customer contracts and supplier purchase agreements, we use cash-settled commodity price swaps and options to hedge the market risk associated with the purchase of certain of our raw materials and energy requirements. Additionally, we routinely use these derivative instruments to hedge a portion of our natural gas, electricity and zinc requirements. Our hedging strategy is designed to protect us from excessive pricing volatility. However, since we do not typically hedge 100% of our exposure, abnormal price increases in any of these commodity markets might still negatively affect operating costs. The following table summarizes the impact of a 10% and 25% change in market price from the December 31, 2020 estimated price on our derivative instruments, thereby impacting our pre-tax income by the same amount.
Valuation of Goodwill and Other Long-Lived Assets
We assign goodwill arising from acquired companies to the reporting units that are expected to benefit from the synergies of the acquisition. Goodwill is tested on a qualitative basis for impairment at the reporting unit level on an annual basis (October 1) and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value. These events or circumstances could include a significant change in the business climate, legal factors, operating performance indicators, competition or sale or disposition of a significant portion of a reporting unit. As necessary, should our qualitative test indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carry amount, we perform a quantitative test to determine the amount of impairment, if any, to the carrying value of the reporting unit and its associated goodwill.
Application of the goodwill impairment test requires judgment, including the identification of reporting units, assignment of assets and liabilities to reporting units, assignment of goodwill to reporting units and if a quantitative assessment is deemed necessary in determination of the fair value of each reporting unit. The fair value of each reporting unit is estimated using a discounted cash flow methodology, which considers forecasted cash flows discounted at an estimated weighted average cost of capital. Assessing the recoverability of our goodwill requires significant assumptions regarding the estimated future cash flows and other factors to determine the fair value of a reporting unit, including, among other things, estimates related to forecasts of future revenues, expected Adjusted EBITDA, expected capital expenditures and working capital requirements, which are based upon our long-range plan estimates. The assumptions used to calculate the fair value of a reporting unit may change from year to year based on operating results, market conditions and other factors. Changes in these assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value for each reporting unit.
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment upon the occurrence of events or changes in circumstances that would indicate that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable. Such indicators may include: a significant decline in expected future cash flows; a sustained, significant decline in market pricing; a significant adverse change in legal or environmental factors or in the business climate; changes in estimates of our recoverable reserves; and unanticipated competition. Any adverse change in these factors could have a significant impact on the recoverability of our long-lived assets and could have a material impact on our consolidated statements of operations and statement of financial position.
A comparison of each asset group's carrying value to the estimated undiscounted net future cash flows expected to result from the use of the assets, including cost of disposition, is used to determine if an asset is recoverable. Projected future cash flows reflect management's best estimate of economic and market conditions over the projected period, including growth rates in revenues and costs, and estimates of future expected changes in operating margins and capital expenditures. If the carrying value of the asset group is higher than its undiscounted net future cash flows, the asset group is measured at fair value and the difference is recorded as a reduction to the long-lived assets. We estimate fair value using a market approach, an income approach or a cost approach. While we concluded that an event triggering the need for an impairment assessment did not occur during the year ended December 31, 2020, a prolonged COVID-19 pandemic could impact the results of operations due to changes to assumptions that would indicate that the carrying value of our asset groups may not be recoverable.
Interest Rate Risk
Interest payable on our senior notes is at fixed rates. Interest payable under our ABL Facility is at a variable rate based upon the applicable base rate plus the applicable base rate margin depending on the excess availability. As of December 31, 2020, we had $1,510 million outstanding under the ABL Facility. An increase in prevailing interest rates would increase interest expense and interest paid for any outstanding borrowings under the ABL Facility. For example, a 100 basis point change to interest rates under the ABL Facility at the December 31, 2020 borrowing level would result in a change of $15 million to interest expense on an annual basis.
Supply Concentration Risks
Many of our operations and mines rely on one source for each of electric power and natural gas. A significant interruption or change in service or rates from our energy suppliers could materially impact our production costs, margins and profitability.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to NOTE 1 - BASIS OF PRESENTATION AND SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES of the consolidated financial statements for a description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the respective dates of adoption and effects on results of operations and financial condition.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. Preparation of financial statements requires management to make assumptions, estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses, and the related disclosures of contingencies. Management bases its estimates on various assumptions and historical experience, which are believed to be reasonable; however, due to the inherent nature of estimates, actual results may differ significantly due to changed conditions or assumptions. On a regular basis, management reviews the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates and judgments to ensure that our financial statements are fairly presented in accordance with GAAP. However, because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such differences could be material. Management believes that the following critical accounting estimates and judgments have a significant impact on our financial statements.
Business Combinations
Assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination are recognized and measured based on their estimated fair values at the acquisition date, while the acquisition-related costs are expensed as incurred. Any excess of the purchase consideration when compared to the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired, if any, is recorded as goodwill. We engaged independent valuation specialists to assist with the determination of the fair value of assets acquired, liabilities assumed, noncontrolling interest, and goodwill, for the Acquisitions. If the initial accounting for the business combination is incomplete by the end of the reporting period in which the acquisition occurs, an estimate will be recorded. Subsequent to the acquisition date, and not later than one
year from the acquisition date, we will record any material adjustments to the initial estimate based on new information obtained that would have existed as of the date of the acquisition. Any adjustment that arises from information obtained that did not exist as of the date of the acquisition will be recorded in the period the adjustment arises.
Valuation of Goodwill and Other Long-Lived Assets
The valuation of goodwill and other long-lived assets includes various assumptions and are considered critical accounting estimates. Refer to "-Market Risks" above for additional information.
Mineral Reserves
We regularly evaluate our mineral reserves and update them as required in accordance with SEC Industry Guide 7. We perform an in-depth evaluation of our mineral reserve estimates by mine on a periodic basis, in addition to routine annual assessments. The determination of mineral reserves requires us, with the support of our third-party experts, to make significant estimates and assumptions related to key inputs including (1) the determination of the size and scope of the iron ore body through technical modeling, (2) the estimates of future iron ore prices, production costs and capital expenditures, and (3) management’s mine plan for the proven and probable mineral reserves. The significant estimates and assumptions could be affected by future industry conditions, geological conditions and ongoing mine planning. Additional capital and development expenditures may be required to maintain effective production capacity. Generally, as mining operations progress, haul distances increase. Alternatively, changes in economic conditions or the expected quality of mineral reserves could decrease capacity of mineral reserves. Technological progress could alleviate such factors or increase capacity of mineral reserves.
We use our mineral reserve estimates, combined with our estimated annual production levels, to determine the mine closure dates utilized in recording the fair value liability for asset retirement obligations for our active operating mines. Refer to NOTE 14 - ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATIONS, for further information. Since the liability represents the present value of the expected future obligation, a significant change in mineral reserves or mine lives could have a substantial effect on the recorded obligation. We also utilize mineral reserves for evaluating potential impairments of mine asset groups as they are indicative of future cash flows and in determining maximum useful lives utilized to calculate depreciation, depletion and amortization of long-lived mine assets and in determining the estimated fair value of mineral reserves established through the purchase price allocation in a business combination. The consolidated asset retirement obligation balance was $342 million as of December 31, 2020, of which $83 million related to active iron ore mine operations. The total asset balance associated with our Steelmaking reportable segment was $15,849 million as of December 31, 2020, of which $1,661 million related to long-lived assets associated with our combined iron ore mine asset groups, and is inclusive of $235 million related to iron ore mineral reserves acquired through the AM USA Transaction. Depreciation, depletion and amortization expense for the our combined iron ore mine asset groups was $78 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Increases or decreases in mineral reserves or mine lives could significantly affect these items.
Asset Retirement Obligations
The accrued closure obligation is predominantly related to our indefinitely idled and closed iron ore mining operations and provides for contractual and legal obligations associated with the eventual closure of those operations. We perform an in-depth evaluation of the liability every three years in addition to our routine annual assessments. In 2020, we employed third-party specialists to assist in the evaluation. Our obligations are determined based on detailed estimates adjusted for factors that a market participant would consider (e.g., inflation, overhead and profit), which are escalated at an assumed rate of inflation to the estimated closure dates, and then discounted using the current credit-adjusted risk-free interest rate. The estimate also incorporates incremental increases in the closure cost estimates and changes in estimates of mine lives for our active mine sites. The closure date for each of our active mine sites is determined based on the exhaustion date of the remaining iron ore reserves, which is dependent on our estimate of mineral reserves. The estimated obligations for our active mine sites are particularly sensitive to the impact of changes in mine lives given the difference between the inflation and discount rates. The closure dates for a majority of our steelmaking facilities are indefinite, and as such, the asset retirement obligations are recorded at present values using estimated ranges of the economic lives of the underlying assets. Changes in the base estimates of legal and contractual closure costs due to changes in legal or contractual requirements, available technology, inflation, overhead or profit rates also could have a significant impact on the recorded obligations. Refer to NOTE 14 - ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATIONS, for further information.
Environmental Remediation Costs
We have a formal policy for environmental protection and remediation. Our obligations for known environmental matters at active and closed operations have been recognized based on estimates of the cost of investigation and remediation at each facility. If the obligation can only be estimated as a range of possible amounts, with no specific amount being more likely, the minimum of the range is accrued. Management reviews its environmental remediation sites quarterly to determine if additional cost adjustments or disclosures are required. The characteristics of environmental remediation obligations, where information concerning the nature and extent of clean-up activities is not immediately available and which are subject to changes in regulatory requirements, result in a significant risk of increase to the obligations as they mature. Expected future expenditures are not discounted to present value unless the amount and timing of the cash disbursements can be reasonably estimated.
Income Taxes
Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities and reserves for unrecognized tax benefits reflect management's best assessment of estimated future taxes to be paid. We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and various foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining the consolidated income tax expense.
Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between tax and financial statement recognition of revenue and expense. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and recent financial operations. In projecting future taxable income, we begin with historical results adjusted for the results of discontinued operations and changes in accounting policies and incorporate assumptions including the amount of future state, federal and foreign pretax operating income, the reversal of temporary differences, and the implementation of feasible and prudent tax planning strategies. These assumptions require significant judgment about the forecasts of future taxable income and are consistent with the plans and estimates we are using to manage the underlying businesses.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had a valuation allowance of $836 million and $441 million, respectively, against our deferred tax assets. Of these amounts, $439 million and $44 million relate to the U.S. deferred tax assets at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and $397 million and $397 million relate to foreign deferred tax assets, respectively.
At December 31, 2018, we determined that it was appropriate to release all of the valuation allowance related to U.S. federal deferred tax assets as it is more likely than not that the entire deferred tax asset will be realized before the end of the carryforward period. See NOTE 12 - INCOME TAXES for further information and considerations related to the release.
Our losses in Luxembourg in recent periods represent sufficient negative evidence to require a full valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets in that jurisdiction. We intend to maintain a valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets related to these operating losses, unless and until sufficient positive evidence exists to support the realization of such assets.
Changes in tax laws and rates also could affect recorded deferred tax assets and liabilities in the future. The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations in various jurisdictions across our global operations. The ultimate impact of the U.S. income tax reform legislation may differ from our current estimates due to changes in the interpretations and assumptions made as well as additional regulatory guidance that may be issued.
Accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in the financial statements requires that a tax benefit from an uncertain tax position be recognized when it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including resolutions of any related appeals or litigation processes, based on technical merits.
We recognize tax liabilities in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes, and we adjust these liabilities when our judgment changes because of evaluation of new information not previously available. Due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in payment that is materially different from our current estimate of the tax liabilities. These differences will be reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense in the period in which they are determined. Refer to NOTE 12 - INCOME TAXES, for further information.
Employee Retirement Benefit Obligations
We offer defined benefit pension plans, defined contribution pension plans and OPEB plans, primarily consisting of retiree healthcare benefits, to most employees in North America as part of a total compensation and benefits program.
The following is a summary of our U.S. defined benefit pension and OPEB funding and expense:
Assumptions used in determining the benefit obligations and the value of plan assets for defined benefit pension plans and OPEB plans, primarily consisting of retiree healthcare benefits, that we offer are evaluated periodically by management. Critical assumptions, such as the discount rate used to measure the benefit obligations, the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, the medical care cost trend, and the rate of compensation increase are reviewed annually.
The following represents weighted-average assumptions used to determine benefit obligations and net benefit costs:
The following represents assumed weighted-average health care cost trend rates:
The discount rates used to measure plan liabilities as of the December 31 measurement date are determined individually for each plan. The discount rates are determined by matching the projected cash flows used to determine the plan liabilities to a projected yield curve of high-quality corporate bonds available at the measurement date. Discount rates for expense are calculated using the granular approach for each plan.
Depending on the plan, we use either company-specific base mortality tables or tables issued by the Society of Actuaries. We adopted the Pri-2012 mortality tables from the Society of Actuaries in 2019. On December 31, 2020, the assumed mortality improvement projection was updated from generational scale MP-2019 to generational scale MP-2020 for the Pri-2012 mortality tables.
Following are sensitivities of potential further changes in these key assumptions on the estimated 2021 pension and OPEB expense and the pension and OPEB obligations as of December 31, 2020:
Changes in actuarial assumptions, including discount rates, employee retirement rates, mortality, compensation levels, plan asset investment performance and healthcare costs, are determined based on analyses of actual and expected factors. Changes in actuarial assumptions and/or investment performance of plan assets may have a significant impact on our financial condition due to the magnitude of our retirement obligations.
Refer to NOTE 10 - PENSIONS AND OTHER POSTRETIREMENT BENEFITS for further information.
Forward-Looking Statements
This report contains statements that constitute "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of the federal securities laws. As a general matter, forward-looking statements relate to anticipated trends and expectations rather than historical matters. Forward-looking statements are subject to uncertainties and factors relating to our operations and business environment that are difficult to predict and may be beyond our control. Such uncertainties and factors may cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. These statements speak only as of the date of this report, and we undertake no ongoing obligation, other than that imposed by law, to update these statements. Uncertainties and risk factors that could affect our future performance and cause results to differ from the forward-looking statements in this report include, but are not limited to:
•disruptions to our operations relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the heightened risk that a significant portion of our workforce or on-site contractors may suffer illness or otherwise be unable to perform their ordinary work functions;
•continued volatility of steel and iron ore market prices, which directly and indirectly impact the prices of the products that we sell to our customers;
•uncertainties associated with the highly competitive and cyclical steel industry and our reliance on the demand for steel from the automotive industry, which has been experiencing a trend toward light weighting that could result in lower steel volumes being consumed;
•potential weaknesses and uncertainties in global economic conditions, excess global steelmaking capacity, oversupply of iron ore, prevalence of steel imports and reduced market demand, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•severe financial hardship, bankruptcy, temporary or permanent shutdowns or operational challenges, due to the COVID-19 pandemic or otherwise, of one or more of our major customers, including customers in the automotive market, key suppliers or contractors, which, among other adverse effects, could lead to reduced demand for our products, increased difficulty collecting receivables, and customers and/or suppliers asserting force majeure or other reasons for not performing their contractual obligations to us;
•risks related to U.S. government actions with respect to Section 232, the USMCA and/or other trade agreements, tariffs, treaties or policies, as well as the uncertainty of obtaining and maintaining effective antidumping and countervailing duty orders to counteract the harmful effects of unfairly traded imports;
•impacts of existing and increasing governmental regulation, including climate change and other environmental regulation that may be proposed under the Biden Administration, and related costs and liabilities, including failure to receive or maintain required operating and environmental permits, approvals, modifications or other authorizations of, or from, any governmental or regulatory authority and costs related to implementing improvements to ensure compliance with regulatory changes, including potential financial assurance requirements;
•potential impacts to the environment or exposure to hazardous substances resulting from our operations;
•our ability to maintain adequate liquidity, our level of indebtedness and the availability of capital could limit cash flow necessary to fund working capital, planned capital expenditures, acquisitions, and other general corporate purposes or ongoing needs of our business;
•adverse changes in credit ratings, interest rates, foreign currency rates and tax laws;
•limitations on our ability to realize some or all of our deferred tax assets, including our NOLs;
•our ability to realize the anticipated synergies and benefits of the Acquisitions and to successfully integrate the businesses of AK Steel and ArcelorMittal USA into our existing businesses, including uncertainties associated with maintaining relationships with customers, vendors and employees;
•additional debt we assumed, incurred or issued in connection with the Acquisitions, as well as additional debt we incurred in connection with enhancing our liquidity during the COVID-19 pandemic, may negatively impact our credit profile and limit our financial flexibility;
•known and unknown liabilities we assumed in connection with the Acquisitions, including significant environmental, pension and OPEB obligations;
•the ability of our customers, joint venture partners and third-party service providers to meet their obligations to us on a timely basis or at all;
•supply chain disruptions or changes in the cost or quality of energy sources or critical raw materials and supplies, including iron ore, industrial gases, graphite electrodes, scrap, chrome, zinc, coke and coal;
•liabilities and costs arising in connection with any business decisions to temporarily idle or permanently close a mine or production facility, which could adversely impact the carrying value of associated assets and give rise to impairment charges or closure and reclamation obligations, as well as uncertainties associated with restarting any previously idled mine or production facility;
•problems or disruptions associated with transporting products to our customers, moving products internally among our facilities or suppliers transporting raw materials to us;
•uncertainties associated with natural or human-caused disasters, adverse weather conditions, unanticipated geological conditions, critical equipment failures, infectious disease outbreaks, tailings dam failures and other unexpected events;
•our level of self-insurance and our ability to obtain sufficient third-party insurance to adequately cover potential adverse events and business risks;
•disruptions in, or failures of, our information technology systems, including those related to cybersecurity;
•our ability to successfully identify and consummate any strategic investments or development projects, cost-effectively achieve planned production rates or levels, and diversify our product mix and add new customers;
•our actual economic iron ore and coal reserves or reductions in current mineral estimates, including whether we are able to replace depleted reserves with additional mineral bodies to support the long-term viability of our operations;
•the outcome of any contractual disputes with our customers, joint venture partners, lessors, or significant energy, raw material or service providers, or any other litigation or arbitration;
•our ability to maintain our social license to operate with our stakeholders, including by fostering a strong reputation and consistent operational and safety track record;
•our ability to maintain satisfactory labor relations with unions and employees;
•availability of workers to fill critical operational positions and potential labor shortages caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as our ability to attract, hire, develop and retain key personnel, including within the acquired AK Steel and ArcelorMittal USA businesses;
•unanticipated or higher costs associated with pension and OPEB obligations resulting from changes in the value of plan assets or contribution increases required for unfunded obligations; and
•potential significant deficiencies or material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting.
For additional factors affecting our businesses, refer to Part I - Item 1A. Risk Factors. You are urged to carefully consider these risk factors.