Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The historical consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report reflect all of the assets, liabilities and results of operations of Calumet Specialty Products Partners, L.P. and its consolidated subsidiaries (“Calumet,” the “Company,” “we,” “our,” or “us”). The following discussion analyzes the financial condition and results of operations of the Company for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. In addition, as discussed in Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, we closed the San Antonio Transaction on November 10, 2019. The historical results of operations of the San Antonio Refinery are contained in our financial position and results through November 10, 2019. Unitholders should read the following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations of the Company in conjunction with the historical consolidated financial statements and notes of the Company included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a leading independent producer of high-quality, specialty hydrocarbon products in North America. We are headquartered in Indianapolis, Indiana, and own specialty and fuel products facilities primarily located in northwest Louisiana, northern Montana, western Pennsylvania, Texas and eastern Missouri. We own and lease additional facilities, primarily related to production and distribution of our products throughout the United States (“U.S.”). Our business is organized into three segments: our core specialty products segment, fuel products segment and corporate segment. In our specialty products segment, we process crude oil and other feedstocks into a wide variety of customized lubricating oils, solvents, waxes, synthetic lubricants, and other products. Our specialty products are sold to domestic and international customers who purchase them primarily as raw material components for various industrial and consumer-facing applications. We also blend, package, and market specialty products through our Royal Purple, Bel-Ray, and TruFuel brands. In our fuel products segment, we process crude oil into a variety of fuel and fuel-related products, including gasoline, diesel, jet fuel, asphalt and other products, and from time to time resell purchased crude oil to third-party customers. Our corporate segment primarily consists of general and administrative expenses not allocated to the specialty products or fuel products segments. Please read Note 20 - “Segments and Related Information” under Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for further information. On February 16, 2021, the Company announced plans to re-segment its financial reporting starting in 2021. Please read Note 21 - “Subsequent Events” in Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional information.
2020 Update
Outlook and Trends
The COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted the global economy, creating significant volatility and disruption of markets that directly impacted Calumet. At Calumet, safety comes first and we have developed and successfully executed a plan to manage health and safety risks and business continuity to protect our workforce and business during the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition to the impacts from COVID-19, dramatic fluctuations in international oil production contributed to a sharp drop in prices for crude oil and refined products in the first half of 2020. As local state governments began to lift COVID-19 related restrictions in the second half of 2020, economic conditions began to recover. Below are factors that impacted our results of operations during 2020:
•Reduction in demand for our fuels products as the domestic and global economies are adversely affected by the
global pandemic and the significant governmental measures being implemented to control the
spread of the virus.
•Reduction in demand for certain specialty products as a variety of customers and industries are adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Our broad range of applications and diversification of end-use markets has allowed our specialty products business to maintain margin despite the pandemic.
•Availability and pricing of crude oil and other feedstocks as producers and sellers of those products are adversely affected by the global pandemic and the global oversupply of crude oil.
•The average price per barrel of New York Mercantile Exchange West Texas Intermediate (“NYMEX WTI”) crude oil decreased approximately 31% in 2020 as compared to 2019.
•In 2020, Canadian sour crude traded at a tighter spread to NYMEX WTI as compared to 2019. Processing crude oils based on Western Canadian Select (“WCS”) and other cost-advantaged crude continues to be an advantage.
•Our average feedstock runs were 84,829 barrels per day (“bpd”) in 2020, compared to 103,603 bpd in 2019. The decrease is primarily attributed to the divestment of the San Antonio refinery with a capacity of 21,000 bpd, termination of third-party naphthenic lubricating oils production in the fourth quarter of 2019, and general economic optimization given narrow fuels margins. We intend to improve utilization rates by minimizing unplanned downtime at our facilities, while optimizing economics.
•Our specialty product margins have remained relatively stable but certain of our end markets are susceptible to changes in Gross Domestic Product. Over the long term, we continue to consider our specialty products segment our core business and subject to economic conditions and available liquidity, we plan to seek appropriate ways to further invest in our specialty products segment.
•It is not possible to predict what future Renewable Identification Numbers (“RINs”) costs may be given the volatile price of RINs but we continue to anticipate that RINs have the potential to remain a significant expense for our fuel products segment (exclusive of the favorable impact of exemptions received). The average 2020 RINs market price increased more than 200% relative to the average 2019 RINs price, negatively impacting our financial results. Please read Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis - Renewable Fuels Standard Update” below for additional information.
•We continue to evaluate opportunities to divest non-core businesses and assets in line with our strategy of deleveraging and focusing more directly on specialty products. In addition, we may also consider the disposition of certain core assets or businesses, to the extent such a transaction would improve our capital structure or otherwise be accretive to the Company. There can be no assurance as to the timing or success of any such potential transaction, or any other transaction, or that we will be able to sell such assets or businesses on satisfactory terms, if at all. In addition, as economic conditions improve, we may seek acquisitions of assets that management believes will be financially accretive and consistent with our strategic goals.
To meet the economic challenges of 2020, we reduced our fixed and variable costs associated with cost of sales, restructured our organization to match activity where necessary, and reduced our planned capital investment program by more than 30%, keeping our focus on prudent replacement, maintenance and turnaround projects.
Contingencies
For a summary of litigation and other contingencies, please read Note 8 - “Commitments and Contingencies” under Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.” Based on information available to us at the present time, we do not believe that any liabilities beyond the amounts already accrued, which may result from these contingencies, will have a material adverse effect on our liquidity, financial condition or results of operations.
Financial Results
We reported a net loss of $149.0 million in 2020, versus a net loss of $43.6 million in 2019. We reported Adjusted EBITDA (as defined in Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis - Non-GAAP Financial Measures”) of $141.5 million in 2020, versus $262.8 million in 2019. We generated cash from operating activities of $62.8 million in 2020, versus $191.9 million in 2019.
Please read Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis - Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to Net Loss, our most directly comparable financial performance measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
Specialty products segment Adjusted EBITDA was $238.0 million in 2020 compared to $207.9 million in the prior year, representing growth in the most challenging of conditions. Specialty products segment Adjusted EBITDA Margin grew to 21.2% in 2020 from 15.4% in 2019. Segment results were impacted by softer demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, but the impact was largely offset from stronger margins in both the specialty oils and waxes business and the finished lubricants and chemicals business. Continued focus on cost improvements in fixed operating, transportation and SG&A contributed to the segment’s performance. Results were also impacted by a $7.8 million unfavorable LCM inventory adjustment in 2020 compared to a $9.5 million favorable LCM inventory adjustment in 2019, as well as $3.9 million of losses related to the liquidation of LIFO inventory layers in 2020 compared to $2.8 million of gains in 2019. Specialty products represented approximately 26% of total production in 2020, compared to 24% in 2019.
Fuel products segment Adjusted EBITDA was negative $30.3 million in 2020 compared to positive $152.5 million in 2019. Fuel products segment results for fiscal year 2020 were impacted by decreased sales volumes, weaker U.S. Gulf Coast crack spreads, a tightening in the average pricing discount between WCS and NYMEX WTI of $3 per barrel when compared to the prior year, and increasing RINs prices. Results were also impacted by a $16.2 million unfavorable LCM inventory adjustment in 2020 compared to a $26.3 million favorable LCM inventory adjustment in 2019, as well as $0.6 million of losses related to the liquidation of LIFO inventory layers in 2020 compared to $3.2 million of gains in 2019. Fuel products represented approximately 74% of total production during the year, compared to 76% in 2019.
Corporate segment Adjusted EBITDA was negative $66.2 million in 2020 versus negative $97.6 million in 2019, due primarily to cost reductions in outside services and corporate staffing.
Acquisitions
On March 2, 2020, we acquired a 100% ownership interest in Paralogics, LLC, a producer of candle and industrial wax
blends, using cash on hand. This investment expanded Calumet’s presence in the specialty wax blending and packaging market
while adding new capabilities into Calumet's existing wax business value chain, adding approximately 20 million pounds of
annual blending and formulating capabilities.
Business Divestitures
In March 2019, we sold our interest in Biosyn Holdings, LLC (“Biosyn”) to The Heritage Group, a related party, for total proceeds of $5.0 million which was recorded in the “other” component of other income (expense) in the consolidated statements of operations.
In November 2019, we completed the sale of all of the issued and outstanding membership interests in Calumet San Antonio Refining, LLC, which owned the San Antonio Refinery. The sale included the refinery and related assets, including associated hydrocarbon inventories, a crude oil terminal and pipeline to Starlight Relativity Acquisition Company LLC (“Starlight”), a Delaware limited liability company (the “San Antonio Transaction”). Total consideration received was $59.1 million, which consisted of a base sales price of $63.0 million minus an adjustment of $3.9 million for net working capital, inventories and reimbursement of certain transaction costs. The San Antonio refinery was included in the Company’s fuel products segment. The Company recognized a net loss of $8.7 million in gain (loss) on sale of business in the consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019, related to the San Antonio Transaction. In February 2020, the Company and Starlight agreed to the final purchase price adjustment payment related to net working capital and inventory to Starlight of $6.9 million, which is reflected in the net loss recognized by the Company for the year ended December 31, 2019.
In connection with the San Antonio Transaction, the Partnership, Calumet San Antonio, TexStar Midstream Logistics, L.P. (“TexStar”), TexStar Midstream Logistics Pipeline, LP and Tailwater Capital, LLC entered into a Settlement and Release Agreement (the “Settlement Agreement”), pursuant to which the Partnership agreed to pay TexStar and its affiliates a cash payment of $1.0 million and the parties mutually agreed to dismiss the litigation and release each other with respect to the legal dispute relating to the termination of the Throughput and Deficiency Agreement (the “Pipeline Agreement”). As a result of the Settlement Agreement, we derecognized the $38.1 million liability related to the Pipeline Agreement, which was included in the Gain (loss) on sale of business calculation for the San Antonio Transaction.
Liquidity Update
As of December 31, 2020, we had total liquidity of $263.8 million comprised of $109.4 million of cash and $154.4 million of availability under our revolving credit facility. As of December 31, 2020, our revolving credit facility had a $286.1 million borrowing base, $23.7 million in outstanding standby letters of credit and $108.0 million outstanding borrowings. We believe we will continue to have sufficient liquidity from cash on hand, cash flow from operations, borrowing capacity and other means by which to meet our financial commitments, debt service obligations, anticipated capital expenditures and contingencies. Please read Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis - Liquidity and Capital Resources” and Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” for additional information.
In 2020, we consummated a transaction whereby we exchanged approximately $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 2022 Notes for $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of newly issued 2024 Secured Notes (the “Exchange Transaction”).
In 2019, we redeemed $900 million in aggregate principal amount of our 6.50% Notes due April 2021 (“2021 Notes”) with the net proceeds from the issuance of $550.0 million of 11.00% senior notes due 2025 (“2025 Notes”), together with borrowings under our revolving credit facility and cash on hand. In conjunction with the redemption, we incurred net, debt extinguishment costs of $2.2 million.
Renewable Fuel Standard Update
Along with the broader refining industry, we remain subject to compliance costs under the Renewable Fuel Standard (“RFS”). Under the regulation of the EPA, the RFS provides annual requirements for the total volume of renewable transportation fuels which are mandated to be blended into finished petroleum fuels. If a refiner does not meet its required annual Renewable Volume Obligation, the refiner can purchase blending credits in the open market, referred to as RINs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our non-cash RINs expense was $100.9 million, as compared to a RINs gain for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $6.0 million. Our annual gross RINs Obligation, which includes RINs that are required to be secured through either our own blending or through the purchase of RINs in the open market, is approximately 80 million RINs spread across four compliance categories (D3, D4, D5 and D6). The gross RINs obligations exclude our own renewables blending as well as the potential for any subsequent hardship waivers.
In August 2019, the EPA granted our fuel product refineries a “small refinery exemption” under the RFS for the compliance year 2018, as provided for under the Clean Air Act (“CAA”), as amended. In granting those exemptions, the EPA, in consultation with the Department of Energy, determined that for the compliance year 2018, compliance with the RFS would represent a “disproportionate economic hardship” for these small refineries. The RINs exemption resulted in a decrease in the RINs Obligation and was recorded as a reduction to cost of sales in the consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019.
We continue to anticipate that expenses related to RFS compliance have the potential to remain a significant expense for our fuel products segment. If legal or regulatory changes occur that have the effect of increasing our RINs Obligation or eliminating or narrowing the availability of the “small refinery exemption” under the RFS program, we could be required to purchase additional RINs in the open market, which may materially increase our costs related to RFS compliance and could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and liquidity.
Key Performance Measures
Our sales and net loss are principally affected by demand for specialty products and fuel products, price of raw materials, prevailing crack spreads for fuel products, the price of natural gas used as fuel in our operations and our results from derivative instrument activities.
Our primary raw materials are crude oil and other specialty feedstocks, and our primary outputs are specialty petroleum products and fuel products. The prices of crude oil, specialty products and fuel products are subject to fluctuations in response to changes in supply, demand, market uncertainties and a variety of factors beyond our control. We monitor these risks and from time-to-time enter into derivative instruments designed to help mitigate the impact of commodity price fluctuations on our business. The primary purpose of our commodity risk management activities is to economically hedge our cash flow exposure to commodity price changes so that we can meet our debt service and capital expenditure requirements despite fluctuations in crude oil and fuel products prices. We also may hedge when market conditions exist that we believe to be out of the ordinary and particularly supportive of our financial goals. We enter into derivative contracts for future periods for quantities that do not exceed our projected purchases of crude oil and sales of fuel products. Please read Note 11 - “Derivatives” under Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.”
Our management uses several financial and operational measurements to analyze our performance. These measurements include the following:
•sales volumes;
•segment gross profit;
•segment Adjusted EBITDA; and
•selling, general and administrative expenses.
Sales volumes. We view the volumes of specialty products and fuel products sold as an important measure of our ability to effectively utilize our operating assets. Our ability to meet the demands of our customers is driven by the volumes of crude oil and feedstocks that we run through our facilities. Higher volumes improve profitability both through the spreading of fixed costs over greater volumes and the additional gross profit achieved on the incremental volumes.
Segment gross profit. Specialty products and fuel products gross profit are important measures of our ability to maximize the profitability of our specialty products and fuel products segments. We define gross profit as sales less the cost of crude oil and other feedstocks and other production-related expenses, the most significant portion of which includes labor, plant fuel, utilities, contract services, maintenance, depreciation and processing materials. We use gross profit as an indicator of our ability to manage our business during periods of crude oil and natural gas price fluctuations, as the prices of our specialty products and fuel products generally do not change immediately with changes in the price of crude oil and natural gas. The increase or decrease in selling prices typically lags behind the rising or falling costs, respectively, of crude oil feedstocks for specialty products. Other than plant fuel, production-related expenses generally remain stable across broad ranges of specialty products and fuel products throughput volumes but can fluctuate depending on maintenance activities performed during a specific period.
Our fuel products segment gross profit per barrel may differ from standard U.S. Gulf Coast, PADD 4 Billings, Montana or 3/2/1 and 2/1/1 market crack spreads due to many factors, including our fuel products mix as shown in our production table being different than the ratios used to calculate such market crack spreads, LCM and LIFO inventory adjustments reflected in gross profit, operating costs including fixed costs, actual crude oil costs differing from market indices and our local market pricing differentials for fuel products in the Shreveport, Louisiana and Great Falls, Montana vicinities as compared to U.S. Gulf Coast and PADD 4 Billings, Montana postings.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA. We believe that specialty products and fuel products segment Adjusted EBITDA measures are useful as they exclude transactions not related to our core cash operating activities and provide metrics to analyze our ability to pay distributions to our unitholders and pay interest to our noteholders as Adjusted EBITDA is a component in the calculation of Distributable Cash Flow and allows us to meaningfully analyze the trends and performance of our core cash operations as well as to make decisions regarding the allocation of resources to segments. The corporate segment Adjusted EBITDA primarily reflects general and administrative costs not related to our core cash operating activities.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth information about our continuing operations. Facility production volume differs from sales volume due to changes in inventories and the sale of purchased fuel product blendstocks, such as ethanol and biodiesel, and the resale of crude oil in our fuel products segment. The historical results of operations of the San Antonio Refinery are included through the effective date of its disposition, November 10, 2019.
(1)Total sales volume includes sales from the production at our facilities and certain third-party facilities pursuant to supply and/or processing agreements, sales of inventories and the resale of crude oil to third-party customers. Total sales volume also includes the sale of purchased fuel product blendstocks, such as ethanol and biodiesel, as components of finished fuel products in our fuel products segment sales.
The decrease in total sales volume in 2020 compared to 2019, is due primarily to the sale of the San Antonio refinery, the terminated third-party naphthenic lubricating oil production arrangement, intentional Stock-Keeping Unit (“SKU”) rationalization and elimination of low margin toll processing, and softened demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
(2)Total feedstock runs represent the barrels per day of crude oil and other feedstocks processed at our facilities and at certain third-party facilities pursuant to supply and/or processing agreements.
The decrease in total feedstock runs in 2020 compared to 2019 is due primarily to the sale of the San Antonio refinery, the terminated third-party naphthenic lubricating oil production arrangement, terminated low margin tolling of packaged and synthetic products, and softened demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
(3)Total facility production represents the barrels per day of specialty products and fuel products yielded from processing feedstocks at our facilities and at certain third-party facilities pursuant to supply and/or processing agreements. The difference between total facility production and total feedstock runs is primarily a result of the time lag between the input of feedstocks and the production of finished products, intermediates transferred to internal sites for further processing, and volume loss.
The changes in total facility production in 2020 over 2019 are due primarily to the sale of the San Antonio refinery and the operational items discussed above.
(4)Represents production of finished lubricants and specialty chemicals products, including the products from our Royal Purple, Bel-Ray and Calumet Packaging facilities.
The following table reflects our consolidated results of operations and includes the non-GAAP financial measures EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow. For a reconciliation of EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow to Net loss and Net cash provided by operating activities, our most directly comparable financial performance and liquidity measures calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, please read “Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We include in this Annual Report the non-GAAP financial measures EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow. We provide reconciliations of EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow to Net loss, our most directly comparable financial performance measure. We also provide a reconciliation of Distributable Cash Flow, Adjusted EBITDA and EBITDA to Net cash provided by operating activities, our most directly comparable liquidity measure. Both Net loss and Net cash provided by operating activities are calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow are used as supplemental financial measures by our management and by external users of our financial statements, such as investors, commercial banks, research analysts and others, to assess:
•the financial performance of our assets without regard to financing methods, capital structure or historical cost basis;
•the ability of our assets to generate cash sufficient to pay interest costs and support our indebtedness;
•our operating performance and return on capital as compared to those of other companies in our industry, without regard to financing or capital structure; and
•the viability of acquisitions and capital expenditure projects and the overall rates of return on alternative investment opportunities.
Management believes that these non-GAAP measures are useful to analysts and investors as they exclude transactions not related to our core cash operating activities and provide metrics to analyze our ability to pay interest costs and distributions. However, the indentures governing our senior notes contain covenants that, among other things, restrict our ability to pay distributions. We believe that excluding these transactions allows investors to meaningfully analyze trends and performance of our core cash operations.
We define EBITDA for any period as net loss plus interest expense (including amortization of debt issuance costs), income taxes and depreciation and amortization.
During the first quarter of 2020, the CODM changed the definition and calculation of Adjusted EBITDA, which we use for evaluating performance, allocating resources and managing the business. The revised definition and calculation of Adjusted EBITDA now includes LCM inventory adjustments and LIFO adjustments, see items (g) and (h) below, which were previously excluded. This revised definition and calculation better reflects the performance of our Company’s business segments including cash flows. Adjusted EBITDA has been revised for all periods presented to consistently reflect this change.
We define Adjusted EBITDA for any period as EBITDA adjusted for (a) impairment; (b) unrealized gains and losses from mark-to-market accounting for hedging activities; (c) realized gains and losses under derivative instruments excluded from the determination of net income (loss); (d) non-cash equity-based compensation expense and other non-cash items (excluding items such as accruals of cash expenses in a future period or amortization of a prepaid cash expense) that were deducted in computing net income (loss); (e) debt refinancing fees, premiums and penalties; (f) any net gain or loss realized in connection with an asset sale that was deducted in computing net income (loss), (g) LCM inventory adjustments; (h) the impact of liquidation of inventory layers calculated using the LIFO method; and (i) all extraordinary, unusual or non-recurring items of gain or loss, or revenue or expense.
We define Distributable Cash Flow for any period as Adjusted EBITDA less replacement and environmental capital expenditures, turnaround costs, cash interest expense (consolidated interest expense less non-cash interest expense), gain (loss) from unconsolidated affiliates, net of cash distributions and income tax expense (benefit).
We define Adjusted EBITDA Margin as Adjusted EBITDA divided by sales.
The definition of Adjusted EBITDA presented in this Annual Report is consistent with the calculation of “Consolidated Cash Flow” contained in the indentures governing our 2022, 2023, 2024 and 2025 Notes (as defined in this Annual Report). We are required to report Consolidated Cash Flow to the holders of our 2022, 2023, 2024 and 2025 Notes and Adjusted EBITDA to the lenders under our revolving credit facility, and these measures are used by them to determine our compliance with certain covenants governing those debt instruments. Please read “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Debt and Credit Facilities” for additional details regarding the covenants governing our debt instruments.
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow should not be considered alternatives to Net loss, Operating income (loss), Net cash provided by operating activities or any other measure of financial performance presented in accordance with GAAP. In evaluating our performance as measured by EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow, management recognizes and considers the limitations of these measurements. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect our liabilities for the payment of income taxes, interest expense or other obligations such as capital expenditures. Accordingly, EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow are only three of several measurements that management utilizes. Moreover, our EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of another company because all companies may not calculate EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow in the same manner.
The following tables present a reconciliation of Net loss to EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow; Distributable Cash Flow, Adjusted EBITDA and EBITDA to Net cash provided by operating activities and Segment Adjusted EBITDA to EBITDA and Net loss, and our most directly comparable GAAP financial performance and liquidity measures, for each of the periods indicated.
(1)Replacement capital expenditures are defined as those capital expenditures which do not increase operating capacity or reduce operating costs and exclude turnaround costs. Environmental capital expenditures include asset additions to meet or exceed environmental and operating regulations.
(2)Represents consolidated interest expense less non-cash interest expense.
(3)Impairment charges for 2019 primarily relate to $25.4 million of impairment charges related to an cost method investment.
(4)Total segment Adjusted EBITDA includes the non-cash impact of the following LCM inventory adjustments and gains (losses) related to the liquidation of LIFO inventory layers.
Year Ended December 31, 2020, Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Sales. Sales decreased $1,184.4 million, or 34.3%, to $2,268.2 million in 2020 from $3,452.6 million in 2019. Sales for each of our principal product categories in these periods were as follows:
(1)Represents packaged and synthetic specialty products at our Royal Purple, Bel-Ray and Calumet Packaging facilities.
(2)Represents (a) by-products, including fuels and asphalt, produced in connection with the production of specialty products at the Princeton and Cotton Valley refineries and Dickinson and Karns City facilities and (b) polyolester synthetic lubricants produced at the Missouri facility.
(3)Represents asphalt, heavy fuel oils and other products produced in connection with the production of fuels at the Shreveport, Great Falls and formerly owned San Antonio refineries and crude oil sales to third-party customers.
The components of the $229.8 million specialty products segment sales decrease in 2020 were as follows:
Specialty products segment sales for 2020 decreased $229.8 million, or 17.0%, primarily due to a decrease in the average selling price per barrel as well as lower sales volumes. The decrease in volume was a result of softened demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic, planned turnaround activity at our Princeton refinery, unplanned downtime at multiple third party facilities in the third quarter of 2020 due to Hurricane Laura, and the intentional reduction of low margin SKUs, including the termination of a third-party naphthenic lubricating oil production agreement. The average selling price per barrel decreased by $11.63 per barrel primarily due to the 31% reduction in average crude oil prices year over year.
The components of the $954.6 million fuel products segment sales decrease in 2020 were as follows:
Fuel products segment sales for 2020 decreased $954.6 million, or 45.5%, due to the divestiture of the San Antonio refinery in the fourth quarter of 2019, a decrease in the average selling price per barrel, and a decrease in sales volumes. The decrease in the average selling price per barrel was primarily due to the 31% reduction in average crude oil prices year over year resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross Profit. Gross profit decreased $241.6 million, or 53.5%, to $210.1 million in 2020 from $451.7 million in 2019. Gross profit for our specialty and fuel products segments was as follows:
The components of the $4.4 million increase in the specialty products segment gross profit for 2020, as compared to 2019, were as follows:
The increase in specialty products segment gross profit of $4.4 million year over year was primarily due to a $65.8 million favorable net impact of increased product margins and lower operating costs of $15.4 million. The increase in gross profit was partially offset by a $52.8 million negative impact from decreased volumes as a result of the softened demand and the termination of third-party naphthenic lubricating oils production, as well as a $24.0 million unfavorable impact of non-cash LCM and LIFO inventory adjustments for the year ended 2020 in comparison to 2019.
The components of the $246.0 million decrease in the fuel products segment gross profit (loss) for 2020, as compared to 2019, were as follows:
The decrease in fuel products segment gross profit (loss) of $246.0 million year over year was primarily due to an increase in RINs expense of $104.0 million, a $95.0 million unfavorable net impact of lower margins, the absence of the gross profit generated by the San Antonio refinery in the prior year, which was divested in fourth quarter of 2019, and a $45.0 million unfavorable impact of non-cash LCM and LIFO inventory adjustments. The unfavorable change in gross profit (loss) was partially offset by a $12.4 million decrease in operating costs in 2020 in comparison to 2019.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses decreased $45.6 million, or 33.4%, to $91.1 million in 2020 from $136.7 million in 2019. The decrease was due primarily to a $35.9 million decrease in professional services fees, a $12.0 million decrease labor and benefits, and a $2.1 million decrease in travel and entertainment expenses, partially offset by a $0.6 million increase in insurance expense. The overall decrease in general and administrative expenses was driven by the cost reduction plan implemented at the beginning of 2020, which was designed to right-size general and administrative spending consistent with Phase II of our previously announced self-help program.
Transportation. Transportation decreased $11.9 million, or 9.7%, to $111.0 million in 2020 from $122.9 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to outbound freight expense decreasing in line with the overall decrease in sales volumes.
Taxes other than income taxes. Taxes other than income taxes decreased $10.7 million, or 52.2%, to $9.8 million in 2020 from $20.5 million in 2019. The decrease is primarily due to lower property taxes resulting from refunds on our Great Falls refinery for years 2017, 2018 and 2019 and a lower assessment for 2020.
Loss on impairment and disposal of assets. Loss on impairment and disposal of assets decreased $30.2 million, to $6.8 million in 2020. Loss on impairment and disposal of assets in the current year primarily consisted of a $5.1 million write-off of an other receivable for the remaining payment related to the sale of Anchor Drilling Fluids USA, LLC in 2017. Loss on impairment and disposal of assets in the prior year primarily consisted of $10.7 million for the Company’s cease of use of the assets associated with the TexStar Midstream Logistics, L.P. Throughput and Deficiency Agreement and $25.4 million in impairment charges for the Company’s investment in FHC.
(Gain) loss on sale of business, net. (Gain) loss on sale of business, net increased $9.7 million, or 111.5%, to a gain of $1.0 million in 2020, compared to a loss of $8.7 million in 2019. The gain in the current year is the result of certain post-closing adjustments related to the sale of the San Antonio refinery. The loss in 2019 is the result of our divestment of the refinery in San Antonio, Texas.
Other operating (income) expense. Other operating (income) expense decreased $20.0 million to expense of $16.5 million in 2020 compared to income of $3.5 million in 2019. The change was primarily due to $10.4 million of RINs expense associated with the San Antonio refinery for the 2019 compliance period as well as increased environmental expenses of $1.2 million.
Interest expense. Interest expense decreased $8.7 million, or 6.5%, to $125.9 million in 2020 from $134.6 million in 2019. The decrease is due primarily to lower financing costs related to our Supply and Offtake Agreements, partially offset by higher interest related to our 2025 Notes.
Gain on derivative instruments. There was a $52.4 million gain on derivative instruments in 2020, compared to a $9.0 million gain in the same period in 2019. The increase in the gain on derivative instruments was largely driven by WCS crude oil basis swaps (both realized and unrealized) that locked in WCS/WTI differentials greater than the average market differential during 2020 in comparison to 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of cash have historically included cash flow from operations, proceeds from public equity offerings, proceeds from notes offerings and bank borrowings. Principal uses of cash have included capital expenditures, acquisitions, distributions to our limited partners and general partner and debt service. We may from time to time seek to retire or purchase our outstanding debt through cash purchases and/or exchanges for equity securities, in open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, tender offers or otherwise. Such repurchases or exchanges, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. The amounts involved may be material. In addition, in May 2018 The Heritage Group disclosed in a Schedule 13D filing that it is considering various alternatives with respect to its investment in us, including potential consolidation, acquisitions or sales of our assets or common units, as well as potential changes to our capital structure. The Heritage Group also disclosed that it may make formal proposals to us, holders of our common units or other third parties regarding such strategic alternatives.
In general, we expect that our short-term liquidity needs, including debt service, working capital, replacement and environmental capital expenditures and capital expenditures related to internal growth projects, will be met primarily through projected cash flow from operations, borrowings under our revolving credit facility and asset sales.
In 2020, we consummated a transaction whereby we exchanged approximately $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 2022 Notes for $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of newly issued 2024 Secured Notes (the “Exchange Transaction”).
In 2019, we redeemed all of the 2021 Notes with the net proceeds from the issuance of the 2025 Notes, together with borrowings under the Company’s revolving credit facility and cash on hand. In conjunction with the redemption, the Company incurred debt extinguishment costs of $2.2 million, net. Also in 2019, we sold our interest in Biosyn to The Heritage Group, a related party, for total proceeds of $5.0 million. Lastly, in 2019, we received $59.1 million in cash for the San Antonio Transaction.
We expect to fund planned capital expenditures in 2021 of approximately $60 million to $70 million primarily with cash on hand and cash flows from operations. Future internal growth projects or acquisitions may require expenditures in excess of our then-current cash flow from operations and borrowing availability under our revolving credit facility and may require us to issue debt or equity securities in public or private offerings or incur additional borrowings under bank credit facilities to meet those costs.
The borrowing base on our revolving credit facility decreased from approximately $401.9 million as of December 31, 2019, to approximately $286.1 million at December 31, 2020, resulting in a corresponding decrease in our borrowing availability from approximately $359.4 million at December 31, 2019, to approximately $154.4 million at December 31, 2020. Total liquidity, consisting of unrestricted cash and available funds under our revolving credit facility, decreased from $378.5 million at December 31, 2019 to $263.8 million at December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows from Operating, Investing and Financing Activities
We believe that we have sufficient liquid assets, cash flow from operations, borrowing capacity and adequate access to capital markets to meet our financial commitments, debt service obligations and anticipated capital expenditures. We continue to seek to lower our operating costs, selling expenses and general and administrative expenses as a means to further improve our cash flow from operations with the objective of having our cash flow from operations support all of our capital expenditures and interest payments. However, we are subject to business and operational risks that could materially adversely affect our cash flows. A material decrease in our cash flow from operations including a significant, sudden decrease in crude oil prices would likely produce a corollary effect on our borrowing capacity under our revolving credit facility and potentially our ability to comply with the covenants under our revolving credit facility. A significant, sudden increase in crude oil prices, if sustained, would likely result in increased working capital requirements which would be funded by borrowings under our revolving credit facility. In addition, our cash flow from operations may be impacted by the timing of settlement of our derivative activities. Gains and losses from derivative instruments that do not qualify as cash flow hedges are recorded in unrealized gain (loss) on derivative instruments until settlement and will impact operating cash flow in the period settled.
The following table summarizes our primary sources and uses of cash in each of the most recent two years:
Operating Activities. Operating activities provided cash of $62.8 million during 2020 compared to providing cash of $191.9 million during 2019. The change was impacted by decreased net income of $105.4 million and an increase in working capital requirements of $6.4 million from the comparative period.
Investing Activities. Cash provided by (used) in investing activities decreased to cash used in investing activities of $46.3 million in 2020 compared to cash provided by investing activities of $14.5 million in 2019. The decrease is primarily due to absence of the $55.1 million proceeds we received for the sale of the San Antonio refinery in 2019, as well as decreased proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment of $3.6 million in 2020 vs. 2019.
Financing Activities. Financing activities provided cash of $73.8 million during 2020 compared to using cash of $343.0 million during 2019. The increase is primarily due to an increase in net proceeds from borrowing under our revolving credit facility of $108.0 million, as well as a decrease in repayments for borrowings on our senior note of $898.5 million, partially offset by a $49.1 million change in our net position for proceeds made and payments received in the current year in comparison to the prior year as it relates to our Supply and Offtake Agreements.
Capital Expenditures
Our property, plant and equipment capital expenditure requirements consist of capital improvement expenditures, replacement capital expenditures, environmental capital expenditures and turnaround capital expenditures. Capital improvement expenditures include expenditures to acquire assets to grow our business, to expand existing facilities, such as projects that increase operating capacity, or to reduce operating costs. Replacement capital expenditures replace worn out or obsolete equipment or parts. Environmental capital expenditures include asset additions to meet or exceed environmental and operating regulations. Turnaround capital expenditures represent capitalized costs associated with our periodic major maintenance and repairs.
The following table sets forth our capital improvement expenditures, replacement capital expenditures, environmental capital expenditures and turnaround capital expenditures in each of the periods shown (including capitalized interest):
2021 Capital Spending Forecast
We are forecasting total capital expenditures of approximately $60 million to $70 million in 2021. We anticipate that capital expenditure requirements will be provided primarily through cash flow from operations, cash on hand, available borrowings under our revolving credit facility and by accessing capital markets as necessary. If future capital expenditures require expenditures in excess of our then-current cash flow from operations and borrowing availability under our revolving credit facility, we may be required to issue debt or equity securities in public or private offerings or incur additional borrowings under bank credit facilities to meet those costs.
Debt and Credit Facilities
As of December 31, 2020, our primary debt and credit instruments consisted of:
•$600.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility maturing in February 2023, subject to borrowing base limitations, with a maximum letter of credit sub-limit equal to $300.0 million, which amount may be increased to 90% of revolver commitments in effect with the consent of the Agent (as defined in the Credit Agreement) (“revolving credit facility”);
•$150.0 million of 7.625% Senior Notes due 2022 (“2022 Notes”);
•$325.0 million of 7.75% Senior Notes due 2023 (“2023 Notes”);
•$200.0 million of 9.25% Senior Secured First Lien Notes due 2024 (“2024 Secured Notes”); and
•$550.0 million of 11.00% Senior Notes due 2025 (“2025 Notes”).
We were in compliance with all covenants under our debt instruments in place as of December 31, 2020, and believe we have adequate liquidity to conduct our business.
Inventory Financing
Please refer to Note 9 - “Inventory Financing Agreements” in Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional information regarding our Supply and Offtake Agreements.
Short-Term Liquidity
As of December 31, 2020, our principal sources of short-term liquidity were (i) approximately $154.4 million of availability under our revolving credit facility, (ii) inventory financing agreements related to our Great Falls and Shreveport refineries and (iii) $109.4 million of cash on hand. Borrowings under our revolving credit facility can be used for, among other things, working capital, capital expenditures, and other lawful partnership purposes including acquisitions. For additional information regarding our revolving credit facility, please read Note 10 “Long-Term Debt” in Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Long-Term Financing
In addition to our principal sources of short-term liquidity listed above, subject to market conditions, we may meet our cash requirements (other than distributions of Available Cash (as defined in our partnership agreement) to our common unitholders) through the issuance of long-term notes or additional common units.
From time to time, we issue long-term debt securities referred to as our senior notes. All of our outstanding senior notes, other than the 2024 Secured Notes, are unsecured obligations that rank equally with all of our other senior debt obligations to the extent they are unsecured. As of December 31, 2020, we had $150.0 million in 2022 Notes, $325.0 million in 2023 Notes, $200.0 million in 2024 Secured Notes, and $550.0 million in 2025 Notes outstanding. On December 31, 2019, we had $350.0 million in 2022 Notes, $325.0 million in 2023 Notes, and $550.0 million in 2025 Notes outstanding.
To date, our debt balances have not adversely affected our operations, our ability to repay or refinance our indebtedness. Based on our historical record, we believe that our capital structure will continue to allow us to achieve our business objectives.
For more information regarding our senior notes, please read Note 10 - “Long-Term Debt” under Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report.
On February 12, 2021, we entered into a sale and leaseback transaction with Stonebriar Commercial Finance LLC (“Stonebriar”), whereby we sold and leased back certain of our fuels terminal assets at the Shreveport refinery. Please read Note 21 - “Subsequent Events” in Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional information.
Master Derivative Contracts and Collateral Trust Agreement
Under our credit support arrangements, our payment obligations under all of our master derivatives contracts for commodity hedging generally are secured by a first priority lien on our and our subsidiaries’ real property, plant and equipment, fixtures, intellectual property, certain financial assets, certain investment property, commercial tort claims, chattel paper, documents, instruments and proceeds of the foregoing (including proceeds of hedge arrangements). We had no additional letters of credit or cash margin posted with any hedging counterparty as of December 31, 2020. Our master derivatives contracts and Collateral Trust Agreement (as defined below) continue to impose a number of covenant limitations on our operating and financing activities, including limitations on liens on collateral, limitations on dispositions of collateral and collateral maintenance and insurance requirements. For financial reporting purposes, we do not offset the collateral provided to a counterparty against the fair value of our obligation to that counterparty. Any outstanding collateral is released to us upon settlement of the related derivative instrument liability.
Our various hedging agreements contain language allowing our hedge counterparties to request additional collateral if a specified credit support threshold is exceeded. However, these credit support thresholds are set at levels that would require a substantial increase in hedge exposure to require us to post additional collateral. As a result, we do not expect further increases in fuel products crack spreads or interest rates to significantly impact our liquidity due to requirements to post additional collateral.
Additionally, we have a collateral trust agreement (the “Collateral Trust Agreement”) which governs how secured hedging counterparties and holders of the 2024 Notes share collateral pledged as security for the payment obligations owed by us to the secured hedging counterparties under their respective master derivatives contracts and the holders of the 2024 Notes. The Collateral Trust Agreement limits to $150.0 million the extent to which forward purchase contracts for physical commodities are covered by, and secured under, the Collateral Trust Agreement and the Parity Lien Security Documents (as defined in the Collateral Trust Agreement). There is no such limit on financially settled derivative instruments used for commodity hedging. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the Collateral Trust Agreement, we have the ability to add secured hedging counterparties from time to time.
Credit Ratings
The ratings on our senior unsecured notes by S&P of B- remained unchanged from the prior year. In July 2019, Moody’s upgraded our Company rating from Caa1 to B3, and our senior unsecured bond rating from Caa2 to Caa1, with a stable outlook. The ratings on our senior unsecured notes by Fitch of B- remained unchanged from the prior year. Our 2024 Secured Notes issued in 2020 are rated B1 by Moody’s, B+ by S&P, and BB- by Fitch.
Equity Transactions
In April 2016, the board of directors of our general partner suspended payment of our quarterly cash distribution. The board of directors of our general partner will continue to evaluate our ability to reinstate the distribution.
Seasonality Impacts on Liquidity
The operating results for the fuel products segment, including the asphalt products we produce, generally follow seasonal demand trends. Asphalt demand is generally lower in the first and fourth quarters of the year, as compared to the second and third quarters, due to the seasonality of the road construction and roofing industries we supply. Demand for gasoline and diesel is generally higher during the summer months than during the winter months due to seasonal increases in highway traffic. In addition, our natural gas costs can be higher during the winter months, as demand for natural gas as a heating fuel increases during the winter. As a result, our operating results for the first and fourth calendar quarters may be lower than those for the second and third calendar quarters of each year due to seasonality related to these and other products that we produce and sell.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not enter into any material off-balance sheet transactions during fiscal year 2020.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to use estimates and make judgements and assumptions about future events that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses, and the related disclosures. Considerable judgement is often involved in making these determinations. Critical estimates are those that require the most difficult, subjective or complex judgements in the preparation of the financial statements and the accompanying notes. We evaluate these estimates and judgements on a regular basis. We believe our assumptions and estimates are reasonable and appropriate. However, the use of different assumptions could result in significantly different results and actual results could differ from those estimates. The following discussion of accounting estimates is intended to supplement the Summary of Significant Accounting Policies presented in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8.
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. These consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions given the level of complexity and subjectivity involved in forming these estimates.
We consider an accounting estimate to be critical if:
•The accounting estimate requires us to make assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the accounting estimate is made; and
•We reasonably could have used different estimates in the current period, or changes in these estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period as new information becomes available, and a change in these estimates would have a material impact on our financial condition or results from operations.
Valuation of Goodwill
We assess goodwill for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate its carrying value may not be recoverable. The Company tests goodwill either quantitatively or qualitatively for impairment.
In assessing the qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, we assess relevant events and circumstances that may impact the fair value and the carrying amount of the reporting unit. The identification of relevant events and circumstances and how these may impact a reporting unit’s fair value or carrying amount involve significant judgment and assumptions. The judgment and assumptions include the identification of macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, overall financial performance and Company specific events and the assessment on whether each relevant factor will impact the impairment test positively or negatively and the magnitude of any such impact.
In the first step of the quantitative assessment, our assets and liabilities, including existing goodwill and other intangible assets, are assigned to the identified reporting units to determine the carrying value of the reporting units. If the carrying value of a reporting unit is in excess of its fair value, an impairment may exist, and we must perform an impairment analysis, in which the implied fair value of the goodwill is compared to its carrying value to determine the impairment charge, if any.
When performing the quantitative assessment, as required in the impairment test, the fair value of the reporting unit is determined using the income approach. The income approach focuses on the income-producing capability of an asset, measuring the current value of the asset by calculating the present value of its future economic benefits such as cash earnings, cost savings, corporate tax structure and product offerings. Value indications are developed by discounting expected cash flows to their present value at a rate of return that incorporates the risk-free rate for the use of funds, the expected rate of inflation, and risks associated with the reporting unit. If the carrying value of a reporting unit is in excess of its fair value, an impairment would be recognized in an amount equal to the excess that the carrying value exceeded the estimated fair value, limited to the carrying value of goodwill.
Inputs used to estimate the fair value of the Company’s reporting units are considered Level 3 inputs of the fair value hierarchy and include the following:
•The Company’s financial projections for its reporting units are based on its analysis of various supply and demand factors which include, among other things, industry-wide capacity, planned utilization rates, end-user demand, crack spreads, capital expenditures and economic conditions. Such estimates are consistent with those used in the Company’s planning and capital investment reviews and include recent historical prices and published forward prices.
•The discount rate used to measure the present value of the projected future cash flows is based on a variety of factors, including market and economic conditions, operational risk, regulatory risk and political risk. This discount rate is also compared to recent observable market transactions, if possible.
For Level 3 measurements, significant increases or decreases in long-term growth rates or discount rates in isolation or in combination could result in a significantly lower or higher fair value measurement.
Fair values calculated for the purpose of testing our goodwill for impairment are estimated using the expected present value of future cash flows method and comparative market prices when appropriate. Significant judgment is involved in performing these fair value estimates since the results are based on forecasted assumptions.
The most likely factors that would significantly impact our financial projections are changes in customer demand levels and loss of significant portions of our business. We believe that the assumptions and estimates used in the assessment of our goodwill as of October 1, 2020 were reasonable.
Valuation of Definite Long-Lived Assets
Property, plant and equipment and intangible assets with finite lives are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. If the estimated undiscounted future cash flows related to the asset are less than the carrying value, we recognize a loss equal to the difference between the carrying value and the estimated fair value, usually determined by the estimated discounted future cash flows of the asset. When a decision has been made to dispose of property, plant and equipment prior to the end of the previously estimated useful life, depreciation estimates are revised to reflect the use of the asset over the shortened estimated useful life.
Estimated undiscounted future cash flows are used for the purpose of testing our definite long-lived assets for impairment. Fair values calculated for the purpose of measuring impairments on definite long-lived assets are estimated using the expected present value of future cash flows method and comparative market prices when appropriate. Significant judgment is involved in estimating undiscounted future cash flows and performing these fair value estimates since the results are based on forecasted assumptions.
We base our estimated undiscounted future cash flows and fair value estimates on projected financial information which we believe to be reasonable. However, actual results may differ from these projections.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a summary of recently issued and adopted accounting standards applicable to us, please read Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”