Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (this discussion, as well as discussions under the same heading in our other periodic reports, are referred to as the “MD&A”) should be read together with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in this report, and all cross references to notes included in this MD&A refer to the identified note in such consolidated financial statements. This section of the Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons of 2020 to 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons of 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on March 10, 2020.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This MD&A contains forward-looking statements. See the discussion about these statements under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” at the beginning of this report.
Overview
We are North America’s leading provider of the cleanest fuel for the transportation market, based on the number of stations operated and the amount of GGEs of RNG and conventional natural gas delivered. Through our sales of RNG, which is derived from biogenic methane produced by the breakdown of organic waste, we help thousands of vehicles, from airport shuttles to city buses to waste and heavy-duty trucks, to reduce their amount of climate-harming greenhouse gas from 60% and to over 400% based on CARB determinations, depending on the source of the RNG, while also reducing criteria pollutants such as Oxides of Nitrogen, or NOx. RNG is delivered as CNG and LNG. Our sales of RNG have
increased dramatically, from 13.0 million GGEs in 2013 (the year we introduced our RNG to the vehicle fuel market) to 153.3 million GGEs in 2020.
As a clean energy solutions provider, we supply RNG and conventional natural gas, in the form of CNG and LNG, for medium and heavy-duty vehicles; design and build, as well as operate and maintain, public and private fueling stations; sell and service compressors and other equipment used in RNG production and at fueling stations; transport and sell RNG and conventional natural gas via “virtual” natural gas pipelines and interconnects; sell Environmental Credits we generate by selling RNG as a vehicle fuel; and obtain federal, state and local tax credits, grants and incentives.
We serve fleet vehicle operators in a variety of markets, including heavy-duty trucking, airports, refuse and public transit. We believe these fleet markets will continue to present a growth opportunity for our vehicle fuels for the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2020, we serve over 1,000 fleet customers operating over 48,000 vehicles, and we own, operate or supply 565 fueling stations in 39 states and the District of Columbia in the United States and five provinces in Canada.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted, and is likely to continue to result, in significant economic disruption and has adversely affected and will likely continue to adversely affect our business. Our operations have been designated “essential critical infrastructure work” in the energy sector by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, meaning that we have been able to continue operating to the fullest extent possible. While continuing our business operations, we are focused on protecting the health and wellbeing of our employees, customers and the communities in which we operate. Except as described herein, the COVID-19 pandemic has not resulted in any adverse effects to our operations, including financial reporting systems, internal control over financial reporting and disclosure controls and procedures. Additionally, our technicians and O&M services continued to operate effectively, and we believe our supply chain has not been disrupted. All of our natural gas fueling stations have remained fully operational during the COVID-19 pandemic and continue to provide access to customers--many that are supplying essential services. Further, we have not experienced any challenges implementing business continuity plans and have not incurred, and do not expect to incur, material expenditures related to the same.
We have adopted and applied protocols and procedures in accordance with federal, state and local government policies and mandates and Centers for Disease Control (CDC) guidelines for our offices. Specifically, we have implemented enhanced cleaning and disinfecting protocols and procedures like temperature and COVID-19 screening questionnaires for the health and safety of our employees, customers and the communities in which we operate. We have provided personal protective equipment (including masks and gloves) and hand sanitizer, we have modified office seating, we expect all our employees to maintain appropriate physical distancing, and we continue to restrict employee travel in accordance with the various state health orders.
We began to see the negative effects of COVID-19 on volumes delivered in mid-March 2020 and continued to see declines in volumes delivered through December 31, 2020, as compared to the respective periods in 2019. We saw our volumes bottom in the second quarter of 2020 and have since seen improvement in volumes as volumes delivered for the fourth quarter of 2020 increased 7% over the second quarter of 2020. While volumes delivered in December 2020 were 2% lower compared to December 2019, this decline was lower than the decline of 4% when comparing September 2020 to September 2019. The most significant negative effects of COVID-19 in relation to our volumes continue to be seen in the airports (fleet services) and public transit customer markets, which were down by between 15% and 32% during the three months ended December 31, 2020 compared to the comparable 2019 period due to federal, state and local government mandates to restrict normal daily activities, as well as travel bans, quarantines and “shelter-in-place” orders, with growth in the refuse market in the three months ended December 31, 2020 from the three months ended December 31, 2019, where demand continues to be strong. Although many of these restrictions have been lifted or scaled back in recent months, the continued prevalence of COVID-19 in certain areas has resulted in the re-imposition of certain restrictions and may lead to other restrictions being re-implemented in response to efforts to reduce the spread of COVID-19. These measures, which may remain in place for a significant amount of time, may further adversely affect airports, public transit and government fleet customer markets.
Our volume of GGEs delivered for the year ended December 31, 2020 declined 5% compared to the prior year.
Although we are experiencing gradual improvements since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, there is no guarantee this will continue due to uncertainties regarding the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. We are projecting growth in volumes for 2021 compared to 2020; however, it is possible that the prolonged effect of the COVID-19 pandemic could negatively affect our future volumes. Declines in volume have resulted and could continue to result in lower gross margin dollars year-over-year and likely a lower gross margin per GGE due to lower output on fixed operating costs and the effect of less revenue from Environmental Credits. Lower volumes have affected and may continue to affect our AFTC revenue as a portion of the decline in volume is from AFTC-eligible volumes. We continue to experience lower operating expenses, which has helped mitigate the lower gross profit margins from lower volumes, and we have benefitted from other gains on station asset disposals. Given the dynamic nature of these circumstances, significant uncertainty exists concerning the duration of business disruption and the full extent of the effect of COVID-19 on our business, results of operations and financial condition. Additionally, the effects of COVID-19, low oil prices and the adoption of government policies and programs, or increased popular sentiment, in favor of other vehicle technologies or fuels may delay adoption of natural gas vehicles, particularly heavy-duty natural gas trucks, by new or existing customers. For more information, see “Risk Factors” in Part II, Item 1A of this report.
We believe we have sufficient liquidity to support business operations through this volatile period, including total cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments of $138.5 million as of December 31, 2020. We will also collect receivables related to the 2020 and 2021 AFTC revenue in 2021 and the first half of 2022; we expect AFTC revenue to be approximately $20 million for 2021 giving consideration to the effect of COVID-19 described above. As of December 31, 2020, we had $4.4 million of current debt. In addition, actions we have taken and are continuing to take have reduced costs and spending across our organization. This includes limiting travel, reducing hiring activities and limiting discretionary spending. Additionally, we could suspend, or limit repurchases under, the Repurchase Program, which was authorized for up to $30.0 million and of which $14.5 million, excluding fees and commissions, had been spent through December 31, 2020. We have not repurchased any shares under the Repurchase Program in 2021.
Performance Overview
This performance overview discusses matters on which our management focuses in evaluating our financial condition and operating results.
Sources of Revenue
The following table represents our sources of revenue:
(1) Our volume-related revenue primarily consists of sales of RNG and conventional natural gas, in the form of CNG and LNG, performance of O&M services, and sales of RINs and LCFS Credits in addition to changes in fair value of our derivative instruments. More information about our volume of fuel and O&M services delivered in the periods is included below under “Key Operating Data,” and more information about our derivative instruments, which consist of commodity swap and customer fueling contracts, is included below under “2018-2020 Developments.” Additionally,
a discussion of volume-related revenue is included below under “Results of Operations.” The following table summarizes our volume-related revenue in the periods:
a. The change in fair value of derivative instruments is related to the Company’s commodity swap and customer fueling contracts. The amounts are classified as revenue because the Company’s commodity swap contracts are used to economically offset the risk associated with the diesel-to-natural gas price spread resulting from customer fueling contracts under the Company’s Zero Now truck financing program.
(2) Represents the federal alternative fuel tax credit, that we refer to as AFTC, which expired on December 31, 2016, but in February 2018, was reinstated for vehicle fuel sales made in 2017. In December 2019, the AFTC was reinstated retroactively for vehicle fuels sales made in 2018 through 2020. See “2018-2020 Developments” below for more information.
Key Operating Data
In evaluating our operating performance, our management focuses primarily on: (1) the amount of RNG, CNG and LNG GGEs delivered (which we define as (i) the volume of GGEs we sell to our customers as fuel, plus (ii) the volume of GGEs dispensed at facilities we do not own but where we provide O&M services on a per-gallon or fixed fee basis, plus (iii) our proportionate share of the GGEs sold as CNG by our joint venture with Mansfield Ventures, LLC, Mansfield Clean Energy Partners, LLC (“MCEP”), (2) our station construction cost of sales, (3) our gross margin (which we define as revenue minus cost of sales), and (4) net income (loss) attributable to us. The following tables present our key operating data for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019 and 2020:
RNG sold as vehicle fuel is included in the CNG or LNG amounts in the table above as applicable based on the form in which it was sold. GGEs of RNG sold as vehicle fuel for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019 and 2020, were as follows:
RNG sold as vehicle fuel is included in the table above as applicable based on the services provided. GGEs of RNG sold as vehicle fuel for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019 and 2020, were as follows:
(1) As noted above, amounts include our proportionate share of the GGEs sold as CNG by our joint venture MCEP. GGEs sold by this joint venture were 0.5 million, 0.4 million and 0.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019 and 2020, respectively.
(2) Represents GGEs at stations where we provide both fuel and O&M services.
(3) Includes $26.7 million, $47.1 million and $19.8 million of AFTC revenue for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019, and 2020, respectively.
(4) Gross margin includes an unrealized gain (loss) from the change in fair value of commodity swap and customer fueling contracts of $10.3 million, $(6.6) million and $2.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019 and 2020, respectively. See Note 7 for more information regarding the commodity swap and customer contracts.
2018 -2020 Developments
Total Joint Venture. On December 21, 2020, we announced a memorandum of understanding with Total to create a joint venture to develop carbon negative RNG production facilities in the United States, as well as credit support to build additional downstream RNG infrastructure. Total will provide $50.0 million, and we will provide $30.0 million for the proposed joint venture. Total will also be providing credit support of $65.0 million to support our development in the RNG value chain, including $45.0 million for contracted RNG fueling infrastructure.
bp Joint Venture. On December 18, 2020, we entered a Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) with bp Products North America Inc, a subsidiary of bp. Pursuant to the MOU the Company and bp intend to create a joint venture to develop, own, and operate RNG production facilities at dairies. Contemporaneous with the execution of the MOU, the Company and bp executed a loan agreement whereby bp advanced $50.0 million (in the form of a loan) to fund capital costs and expenses incurred prior to formation of the joint venture. We expect that all unpaid principal and accrued interest outstanding under the loan agreement will be contributed to the joint venture, provided that if the joint venture is not formed by April 30, 2022 the Company is obligated to repay the outstanding principal and accrued interest within five days of April 30, 2022.
Chevron Adopt-a-Port. In June 2020, we entered into an agreement with Chevron Corp. (“Chevron”) to provide truck operators serving the ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach with cleaner, carbon negative RNG to reduce emissions. Under the agreement, Chevron will provide funding to allow truck operators to subsidize the cost of buying new RNG-powered trucks and will supply RNG to our stations near the ports.
AFTC. The AFTC, which had previously expired on December 31, 2016, was reinstated on February 9, 2018 to apply to vehicle fuel sales made from January 1, 2017 through December 31, 2017. As a result, all AFTC revenue for vehicle fuel we sold in the 2017 calendar year, which totaled $25.2 million, was recognized and collected during the year ended December 31, 2018. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2018, the Internal Revenue Service approved, and we recognized as revenue, $1.5 million of AFTC credit claims related to prior years. On December 20, 2019, the AFTC was retroactively extended beginning January 1, 2018 through December 31, 2020. As a result, AFTC revenue for vehicle fuel we sold in 2018 and 2019, which totaled $47.1 million, was recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019. AFTC revenue recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $19.8 million. The AFTC credit for 2018,
2019 and 2020 was equal to $0.50 per GGE of CNG that we sold as vehicle fuel, and $0.50 per diesel gallon of LNG that we sold as vehicle fuel. In December 2020 AFTC was extended for vehicle fuel sales made through December 31, 2021.
Share Repurchase Program. On March 12, 2020, our Board of Directors approved the Repurchase Program for up to $30.0 million (exclusive of fees and commissions) of our outstanding common stock. The Repurchase Program does not have an expiration date, does not obligate us to acquire any specific number of shares, and may be suspended or discontinued at any time. As of December 31, 2020, we had utilized $14.5 million under the Repurchase Program to purchase 7,744,386 shares of our common stock for a total cost of $14.6 million. We have not repurchased any shares under the Repurchase Program in 2021.
Zero Now Truck Financing Program. We launched the Zero Now truck financing program, which is intended to facilitate and increase the deployment of commercially available RNG heavy-duty trucks in the United States and encourage these operators to fuel their trucks at our stations. The Zero Now program is unique and complex, and has involved our entry into various arrangements in order to launch the program, including a term credit agreement for delayed draw loans of up to $100.0 million; a credit support agreement with THUSA, a wholly owned subsidiary of Total, under which THUSA has guaranteed our obligations under the term credit agreement in exchange for a quarterly fee; and commodity swap arrangements with an affiliate of THUSA and Total covering five million diesel gallons of natural gas fuel volume annually from April 2019 through June 2024, which are intended to manage diesel price fluctuation risks related to the natural gas fuel supply commitments we expect to make in our anticipated fueling agreements with fleet operators that participate in the Zero Now program. See the disclosure under “Key Customer Markets-Zero Now” in Item 1. “Business” of this report for information about these agreements and the structure of the program.
Debt Repurchase and Repayment.
On October 1, 2018, we paid to the holders of our 5.25% Convertible Senior Notes due October 2018, in cash, all amounts then owed under the notes, totaling an aggregate of $110.5 million in principal amount plus $2.9 million in accrued and unpaid interest. Upon such payment, all such notes were surrendered and canceled in full and we have no further obligations under these notes.
In December 2018, we purchased from the holders thereof all outstanding 7.5% Notes due July 2019, having an aggregate outstanding principal amount of $50.0 million, for a cash purchase price of $50.5 million. Upon such purchase, all such notes were surrendered and canceled in full and we have no further obligations under these notes. As a result of the early retirement of these notes we saved $1.7 million in interest expense in 2019.
In May 2020, we repaid the remaining $50.0 million of 7.5% Notes and related accrued and unpaid interest thereon. Upon such payment, the 7.5% Notes were paid in full.
See Note 12 for more information about our outstanding debt.
Expanded bp RNG Supply Agreement. In October 2018, our supply agreement with bp was amended to extend the term and add additional RNG supply. We share with bp in the RINs and LCFS Credits generated from the increased RNG supply sold through our vehicle fueling infrastructure and to other customers.
Total Private Placement. On May 9, 2018, we entered into a stock purchase agreement with Total Marketing Services, S.E., or TMS, a wholly owned subsidiary of Total, for the sale and issuance to TMS of 50,856,296 shares of our common stock for a per share purchase price of $1.64 and an aggregate purchase price of $83.4 million, all in a private placement (the “Total Private Placement”). The Total Private Placement closed on June 13, 2018, upon the satisfaction of all conditions to closing. We used the net proceeds from the Total Private Placement for working capital and general corporate purposes, which included retiring a portion of our outstanding indebtedness.
The agreements related to the Total Private Placement also contain representations, warranties and covenants made by us and TMS regarding, among other matters, certain director designation rights we have granted to TMS (along with undertakings by certain of our stockholders, including all of our directors and executive officers, to vote their shares in favor of such director designees in future elections of directors), certain registration rights we have granted to TMS for the
shares that were issued and sold, certain limitations on TMS’s purchase of additional securities of our Company without the approval of our board of directors, and various other matters that are customary for transactions of this nature.
NG Advantage. In February 2020, we converted the principal and accrued interest under the November 2019 Convertible Note (as defined in Note 4) into common units of NG Advantage, LLC (“NG Advantage”) and received common units pursuant to the guaranty agreement entered in February 2018, resulting in an increase in our controlling interest in NG Advantage to 93.3%.
Debt Level and Debt Compliance
As of December 31, 2020, we had total indebtedness, excluding finance lease obligations, of $85.8 million in principal amount, of which $3.6 million is expected to become due in 2021. Certain of the agreements governing our outstanding debt, which are discussed in Note 12, have certain financial and non-financial covenants with which we must comply. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all of these covenants.
Key Trends
Market for RNG, CNG and LNG as a Vehicle Fuel
According to CARB, RNG and conventional natural gas are cleaner than gasoline and diesel fuel based on the greenhouse gas emissions produced by vehicles operated by these fuels. Additionally, RNG and conventional natural gas are generally less expensive for vehicle operators than gasoline and diesel on an energy equivalent basis. According to the U.S. Energy Information Administration, demand for renewable and conventional natural gas fuels in the United States has increased in recent years and is expected to continue to increase. We expect our sales of RNG and conventional natural gas to grow as more companies look to operate in an increasingly sustainable way. In addition to pressure from politicians, regulators and non-governmental organizations, the investment community has dramatically increased demands on companies to diminish their contributions to climate change. We believe that RNG is the best tool available today to reduce climate-harming greenhouse gas and meet sustainability objectives.
The market for our vehicle fuels, however, is a relatively new and developing market. As a result, it is difficult to accurately predict demand for our vehicle fuels, in general and in any specific geographic and customer markets, and consequently our timing and level of investment in particular markets may not be consistent with any growth in demand in these markets. Further, the new and developing nature of the market for our vehicle fuels has led to slow, volatile or unpredictable growth in some sectors. For example, to date, adoption and deployment of vehicles using our fuels, in general and in certain of our key customer markets, including heavy-duty trucking, have been slower and more limited than we anticipated.
We believe challenging market conditions are caused by a number of factors, including the following:
● Low and volatile prices for oil, diesel and gasoline, which decreases the price advantage of our fuels. In addition, these pricing conditions have led us to reduce the prices we charge some customers for our fuels, which has reduced our profit margins.
● There has been increased focus by some parties, including lawmakers, regulators, policymakers, environmental and advocacy organizations and other powerful groups, on electric or other alternative vehicles or vehicle fuels. For example, California lawmakers and regulators have implemented various measures designed to increase the use of electric, hydrogen and other zero-emission vehicles, including establishing firm goals for the number of these vehicles operating on state roads by specified dates and enacting various laws and other programs in support of these goals. Among other things, we believe many California lawmakers and regulators desire to limit and ultimately discontinue the production and use of internal combustion engines because such engines have “tailpipe” emissions.
● We believe the lack of substantial growth in the heavy-duty trucking market has been driven in part by the experience of operators with, or perceptions of, unsatisfactory performance by prior models of heavy-duty truck
engines, actual or perceived insufficiencies in the financial incentives to convert, and improvements in diesel engine technology. If these conditions continue, then the growth levels in this market will continue to be low. We believe the newest models of heavy-duty truck engines have substantially addressed concerns with prior models. Further, we have launched our Zero Now truck financing program and the Chevron Adopt-a-Port program to combat operator concerns, but these programs may not ultimately be successful.
To the extent these or other factors have contributed to curtailed demand or slowing growth in the market for our vehicle fuels, we believe they have also contributed to decreases in station construction activity in certain periods, as the success of this activity is dependent on the success of the market for our vehicle fuels generally. Moreover, we believe these factors have materially contributed to the volatility and declines in our stock price and market capitalization in recent years, which has and could in the future lead to decreased cash flows and indications of asset or goodwill impairment. If these adverse macroeconomic conditions and other uncertainties in our industry persist, our financial results and stock price may continue to be adversely affected.
In spite of these market conditions, we believe our key customer markets, including heavy-duty trucking, airports, refuse, and public transit, are well-suited for the adoption of our vehicle fuels because they consume relatively high volumes of fuel, refuel at centralized locations or along well-defined routes and/or are facing increasingly stringent emissions or other environmental requirements. We also expect the lower greenhouse gas emissions associated with our RNG vehicle fuel will result in increased demand for this fuel, resulting in our continued delivery of increasing volumes of RNG to our vehicle fleet customers. Additionally, we anticipate that, over time, cities and communities in the United States and Canada will follow large cities in Europe in banning diesel vehicles. If these projections materialize, we believe there will be growth in the consumption of our vehicle fuels in our key customer and geographic markets, and our goal is to capitalize on this growth if and when it materializes. In that event, we expect our operating costs and capital expenditures would increase in connection with any growth of our business in the future.
Our Performance
Overview. Our gross revenue mostly consists of volume-related revenue, station construction sales, and AFTC revenue. Our revenue can vary between periods due to a variety of factors, including, among others, the amount and timing of vehicle fuel sales, natural gas commodity prices, station construction sales, sales of Environmental Credits, and recognition of government credits, grants and incentives, such as AFTC. In addition, our volume-related revenue has been and may continue to be subject to increased fluctuations as a result of our entry into certain commodity swap arrangements in October 2018, because the changes in fair value of these and certain other derivative instruments, including existing and anticipated fueling contracts under our Zero Now truck financing program, are included in volume-related revenue.
Our cost of sales can also vary between periods due to a variety of factors, including fluctuations in natural gas commodity prices, station construction and labor costs, as well as the other factors that impact our revenue levels described above.
In addition, our performance in certain periods has been affected by transactions or events that have resulted in significant cash or non-cash gains or losses. Such gains or losses may not recur regularly, in the same amounts or at all in future periods and, with respect to non-cash gains and losses, do not impact our liquidity.
These significant fluctuations in our operating results may render period-to-period comparisons less meaningful, especially given the current uncertainties related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, and investors in our securities should not rely on the results of one period as an indicator of performance in any other period. Additionally, these fluctuations in our operating results could cause our performance in any period to fall below the financial guidance we may have provided to the public or the estimates and projections of the investment community, which could negatively affect the price of our common stock.
See “Results of Operations” below for more information about our performance in 2019 and 2020.
Volume. The amount of RNG and conventional natural gas, in the form of CNG and LNG, that we delivered decreased by 4.6% from 2019 to 2020 due to the effect of COVID-19.
While total volume declined due to the effect of COVID-19, the amount of RNG we sell for vehicle fuel, which is delivered in the form of CNG or LNG, has experienced rapid growth in recent years, and increased by 7% from 2019 to 2020. We believe the increased demand for RNG is attributable to the dramatic reduction in the amount of climate-harming greenhouse gas that can be achieved through the use of RNG and pressure from politicians, regulators, non-governmental organizations and the investment community directed at companies to reduce their contributions to climate change. To the extent demand for RNG continues to increase, we expect our expanded supply agreement with bp, discussed under “2018-2020 Developments” above, could increase our volume-related revenue due to increased volumes of RNG vehicle fuel sold and increased generation of RINs and LCFS Credits. In addition, such an increase in RNG demand could also result in more robust competition for supplies of RNG, including from other vehicle fuel providers, gas utilities (which may have distinct advantages in accessing RNG supply, including potential use of ratepayer funds to fund RNG purchases if approved by a utility’s regulatory commission) and other users and providers. We expect to invest in production projects to help ensure that we have adequate supply of RNG, and we are pursuing development and ownership of livestock waste ADG projects on our own and with partners including Total and bp.
Environmental Credits. When we sell RNG and conventional natural gas for use as a vehicle fuel, we are eligible to generate RINs and LCFS Credits, which we then seek to sell to third parties.
The markets for RINs and LCFS Credits have been volatile and unpredictable in recent periods, and the prices for these credits have been subject to significant fluctuations. For example, in 2020 market prices for RINs were as high as approximately $2.13 and as low as approximately $0.80. Additionally, the value of RINs and LCFS Credits, and consequently the revenue levels we may receive from our sale of these credits, may be adversely affected by changes to the federal and state programs under which these credits are generated and sold, prices for and use of oil, diesel or gasoline, the inclusion of additional qualifying fuels in the programs, increased production levels of other fuels in the programs, or other conditions. Further, our ability to generate revenue from sales of these credits depends on our strict compliance with these federal and state programs, which are complex and can involve a significant degree of judgment. If the agencies that administer and enforce these programs disagree with our judgments, otherwise determine we are not in compliance, conduct reviews of our activities or make changes to the programs, then our ability to generate or sell these credits could be temporarily restricted pending completion of reviews or as a penalty, permanently limited or lost entirely, and we could be subject to fines or other sanctions. Any of these outcomes could force us to purchase credits in the open market to cover any credits we have contracted to sell, retire credits we may have generated but not yet sold, reduce or eliminate a significant revenue stream or incur substantial additional and unplanned expenses.
Risk Management Activities
From time to time, we enter into fuel sales contracts that require us to sell CNG or LNG to our customers at a fixed price. These contracts expose us to the risk that the price of natural gas commodity may increase above the natural gas commodity cost component included in the price at which we are committed to sell the natural gas to our customers.
In an effort to mitigate the volatility of our earnings related to any futures contracts and to reduce our risk related to our fixed price sales contracts, we operate under a hedging policy pursuant to which we purchase futures contracts to hedge our exposure to variability in expected future cash flows related to a particular fixed price contract or bid. Subject to the conditions set forth in the policy, we purchase futures contracts in quantities reasonably expected to effectively hedge our exposure to cash flow variability related to fixed price sales contracts entered into after the date of the policy. Unless otherwise agreed in advance by our board of directors and the derivatives committee thereof, we will conduct our futures contract activities and enter into fixed price sales contracts only in accordance with our hedging policy.
Due to the restrictions of our hedging policy, we expect to offer few fixed price sales contracts to our customers. If we do offer a fixed price sales contract, we anticipate including a price component that would cover our estimated cash requirements over the duration of the underlying futures contracts. The amount of this price component will vary based on the anticipated volume and the natural gas price component to be covered under the fixed price sales contract.
In October 2018, in support of our Zero Now truck financing program, we executed two commodity swap contracts with Total Gas & Power North America, an affiliate of Total and THUSA, for a total of five million diesel gallons annually from April 1, 2019 to June 30, 2024. These commodity swap contracts are intended to manage risks related to the diesel-
to-natural gas price spread in connection with the natural gas fuel supply commitments we have made and expect to make in our current and anticipated fueling agreements with fleet operators that participate in the Zero Now program.
Critical Accounting Policies
This discussion is based upon our consolidated financial statements included in this report, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates and may result in material effects on our operating results and financial position.
We believe the critical accounting policies discussed below affect our more significant estimates made in preparing our consolidated financial statements. See Notes 1 and 2 for more information about these and our other significant accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
In general, revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for the goods or services. To achieve that core principle, a five-step approach is applied: (1) identify the contract with a customer, (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (5) recognize revenue allocated to each performance obligation when we satisfy the performance obligation. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is the unit of account for revenue recognition.
We recognize revenue on various products and services.
Our volume-related revenue primarily consists of sales of RNG and conventional natural gas, in the form of CNG and LNG, O&M services, and RINs and LCFS Credits in addition to changes in fair value of our derivative instruments.
Fuel and O&M services are sold pursuant to contractual commitments over defined goods-and-service delivery periods. These contracts typically include a stand-ready obligation to supply natural gas and/or provide O&M services daily based on a committed and agreed upon routine maintenance schedule or when and if called upon by the customer.
We recognize fuel and O&M services revenue in the amount to which we have the right to invoice. We have a right to consideration based on the amount of GGEs of natural gas dispensed by the customer and current pricing conditions, which are typically billed to the customer on a monthly basis. Since payment terms are less than a year, we have elected the practical expedient which allows us to not assess whether a customer contract has a significant financing component.
We sell RIN Credits and LCFS Credits to third parties that need the credits to comply with federal and state requirements. Revenue is recognized on these credits when there is an agreement in place to monetize the credits at a determinable price.
Changes in fair value of derivative instruments relates to our commodity swap and certain customer fueling contracts under our Zero Now truck financing program. The contracts are measured at fair value with changes in the fair value recorded in our consolidated statements of operations in the period incurred. The amounts are classified as revenue because our commodity swap contracts are used to economically offset the risk associated with the diesel-to-natural gas price spread resulting from existing and anticipated customer fueling contracts under our Zero Now truck financing program.
Station construction contracts are generally short-term, except for certain larger and more complex stations, which can take up to 24 months to complete. For most of our station construction contracts, the customer contracts with us to provide a significant service of integrating a complex set of tasks and components into a single station. Hence, the entire contract is accounted for as one performance obligation.
We recognize station construction revenue over time as we perform under these contracts because of the continual transfer of control of the goods to the customer, which typically controls the work in process. Revenue is recognized based on the extent of progress towards completion of the performance obligation and is recorded proportionally as costs are incurred. Costs to fulfill our obligations under these contracts typically include labor, materials and subcontractors’ costs, other direct costs and an allocation of indirect costs.
Refinements of estimates to account for changing conditions and new developments are continuous and characteristic of the process. Many factors that can affect contract profitability may change during the performance period of the contract, including differing site conditions, the availability of skilled contract labor, the performance of major suppliers and subcontractors, and unexpected changes in material costs. Because a significant change in one or more of these estimates could affect the profitability of these contracts, the contract price and cost estimates are reviewed periodically as work progresses and adjustments proportionate to the cost-to-cost measure of progress are reflected in contract revenues in the reporting period when such estimates are revised as discussed above. Provisions for estimated losses on uncompleted contracts are recorded in the period in which the losses become known.
In certain contracts with our customers, we agree to provide multiple goods or services, including construction of and sale of a station, O&M services, and sale of fuel to the customer. These contracts have multiple performance obligations because the promise to transfer each separate good or service is separately identifiable and distinct. This evaluation requires significant judgment and the decision to combine a group of contracts or separate the combined or single contract into multiple performance obligations could change the amount of revenue recognized in one or more periods.
We allocate the contract price to each performance obligation using best estimates of the standalone selling price of each distinct good or service in the contract. The primary method used to estimate the standalone selling price for fuel and O&M services is observable standalone sales, and the primary method used to estimate the standalone selling price for station construction sales is the expected cost plus a margin approach because we sell customized customer-specific solutions. Under this approach, we forecast expected costs of satisfying a performance obligation and then add an appropriate margin for the good or service.
AFTC is considered variable consideration because it can either increase or decrease the transaction price based on volumes of vehicle fuel sold. Additionally, AFTC is not recognized as revenue until it is authorized through federal legislation, which also provides a determinable price. We recognize revenue in the period the credit is authorized through federal legislation.
We collect and remit taxes assessed by various governmental authorities that are imposed on and concurrent with revenue-producing transactions between us and our customers. These taxes may include, among others, fuel, sales and value-added taxes. We report the collection of these taxes on a net basis and they are excluded from revenue and cost of goods sold.
Impairment of Goodwill and Long-Lived Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of costs incurred over the fair value of the net assets of acquired businesses. We assess our goodwill using either a qualitative or quantitative approach to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit is less than its carrying value. We are required to use judgment when applying the goodwill impairment test, including, among other considerations, the identification of reporting unit(s), the assessment of qualitative factors, and the estimation of fair value of a reporting unit in the quantitative approach. We determined that we are a single reporting unit for the purpose of goodwill impairment tests. We perform the impairment test annually on October 1, or more frequently if facts or circumstances change that would indicate that the carrying amount may be impaired.
The qualitative goodwill assessment includes the potential effect on a reporting unit’s fair value of certain events and circumstances, including its enterprise value, macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, and other relevant entity-specific events. If it is determined, based upon the qualitative assessment, that it is more likely than not that the reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount, then a quantitative impairment test is performed. Alternatively, we may bypass the qualitative assessment for a reporting unit and directly perform the quantitative assessment.
The quantitative assessment estimates the reporting unit's fair value based on its market capitalization plus an assumed control premium as evidence of fair value. The estimates used to determine the fair value of the reporting unit may change based on results of operations, macroeconomic conditions stock price fluctuations or other factors. Changes in these estimates could materially affect our assessment of the fair value and goodwill impairment for the reporting unit.
For our most recent goodwill impairment test, which was our annual test performed on October 1, 2020, we performed a quantitative impairment assessment for the reporting unit as described above. In this test, the fair value of the reporting unit substantially exceeded its carrying value.
We evaluated the volatility in the market price of our common stock subsequent to our annual test date through December 31, 2020, and considered whether there were any other events or circumstances that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of our reporting unit below its carrying value on a sustained basis, and concluded it was not more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit decreased below its carrying value, on a sustained basis. As a result, an interim impairment test was not considered necessary during the three months ended December 31, 2020.
If a significant decline in the market price of our common stock and our market capitalization were sustained, or if other events or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of our reporting unit below its carrying value, on a sustained basis, then we may perform impairment tests more frequently, and it is possible that our goodwill could become impaired, which could result in a material charge and adversely affect our results of operations.
We review the carrying value of our long-lived assets, including property and equipment and intangible assets with finite useful lives, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. Events that could result in an impairment review include, among others, a significant decrease in the operating performance of a long-lived asset or asset group or the decision to close a fueling station. Impairment testing involves a comparison of the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows of the asset or asset group to its carrying amount. If the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows exceeds the carrying amount, then no impairment exists. If the carrying amount exceeds the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows, then a second step is performed to determine the amount of impairment, if any, to be recognized. An impairment loss is recognized to the extent that the carrying amount of the asset or asset group exceeds its fair value. The fair value of the asset or asset group is based on estimated discounted future cash flows of the asset or asset group using a discount rate commensurate with the related risk. The estimate of future cash flows requires management to make assumptions and to apply judgment, including forecasting future sales and expenses and estimating useful lives of the assets. These estimates can be affected by a number of factors, including, among others, future results, demand and economic conditions, many of which can be difficult to predict.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are computed using the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred income taxes are recognized by applying enacted statutory tax rates applicable to future years to differences between the tax bases and financial carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities. The impact on deferred taxes of changes in tax rates and laws, if any, are applied to the years during which temporary differences are expected to be settled and are reflected in the consolidated financial statements in the period of enactment. Valuation allowances are established when management determines it is more likely than not that deferred tax assets will not be realized. When evaluating the need for a valuation analysis, we use estimates involving a high degree of judgment including projected future U.S. GAAP income and the amounts and estimated timing of the reversal of any deferred tax assets and liabilities.
We have a recognition threshold and a measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. The amount recognized is measured as the largest amount of benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We recognize potential accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefit in income tax expense.
We operate within multiple domestic and foreign taxing jurisdictions and are subject to audit in these jurisdictions. These audits can involve complex issues, which may require an extended period of time to resolve. Although we believe
that adequate consideration has been given to these issues, it is possible that the ultimate resolution of these issues could be significantly different than originally estimated.
Fair Value Measurements
We have established a framework that follows the authoritative guidance for fair value measurements with respect to assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis and non-recurring basis. Under the framework, fair value is defined as the exit price, or the amount that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants, as of the measurement date. The framework also establishes a hierarchy for inputs used in measuring fair value that maximizes the use of observable inputs and minimizes the use of unobservable inputs by requiring that the most observable inputs be used when available. Observable inputs are inputs market participants would use in valuing the asset or liability and are developed based on market data obtained from sources independent of our Company. Unobservable inputs are inputs that reflect our assumptions about the factors market participants would use in valuing the asset or liability and are developed based upon the best information available in the circumstances. The hierarchy consists of the following three levels: Level 1 inputs are quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities; Level 2 inputs include quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets, quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active, and inputs (other than quoted prices) that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly; Level 3 inputs are unobservable inputs for the asset or liability. Categorization within the valuation hierarchy is based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement.
Our significant uses of fair value measurements include the valuation of commodity swaps and customer contracts, and warrants, all of which require significant judgment.
Recently Adopted Accounting Changes and Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Standards.
See Note 1 for information about recently adopted accounting changes and recently issued accounting standards.
Results of Operations
The discussions below compare our results of operations in 2020 and 2019. Historical results are not indicative of the results to be expected in the current period or any future period.
2020 Compared to 2019
The table below presents, for each period, each line item of our statement of operations data as a percentage of our total revenue for the period. The narrative that follows provides a comparative discussion of certain of these line items between periods.
Revenue. Revenue decreased by $52.3 million to $291.7 million for 2020, from $344.1 million for 2019. This decrease was primarily due a decrease in volume-related revenue and lower AFTC revenue, partially offset by the favorable change in fair value of our commodity swap and customer contracts entered into in connection with our Zero Now truck financing program and an increase in station construction sales.
Volume-related revenue, excluding the effect of the change in fair value of our commodity swap and customer contracts entered into in connection with our Zero Now truck financing program, decreased by $37.2 million between periods, primarily attributable to COVID-19 which resulted in a decrease in gallons delivered and a lower effective price per gallon delivered. Volume-related revenue was favorably impacted by $8.7 million as a result of the change in fair value of our commodity swap and customer contracts entered into in connection with our Zero Now truck financing program, as we recognized an unrealized loss of $6.6 million in 2019 compared to an unrealized gain of $2.1 million in 2020 (see Note 7 for more information).
Our effective price per gallon charged decreased by $0.06 per gallon to $0.64 per gallon in 2020 compared to $0.70 in 2019, excluding the effect of the change in fair value of derivative instruments discussed above. Our effective price per gallon is defined as revenue generated from selling RNG and conventional natural gas and any related Environmental Credits and providing O&M services to our vehicle fleet customers at stations we do not own and for which we receive a per-gallon or fixed fee, all divided by the total GGEs delivered less GGEs delivered by non-consolidated entities, such as entities that are accounted for under the equity method. The decrease in our effective price per gallon was due to decreases
in natural gas prices and the fuel price mix, which is based on the variation of fuel types and locations where we deliver fuel.
Station construction sales increased by $3.5 million between periods, due to increased construction activities.
AFTC revenue decreased by $27.3 million between periods due to our recognition in 2019 of AFTC revenue for the vehicle fuel we sold in 2018 and 2019. In 2020, we recognized AFTC revenue for the vehicle fuel we sold in 2020.
Cost of sales. Cost of sales decreased by $26.7 million to $185.4 million in 2020, from $212.1 million in 2019. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in gallons delivered during 2020 and a lower effective cost per gallon. These decreases were partially offset by a $0.5 million increase in the cost of station construction activities.
Our effective cost per gallon decreased by $0.05 per gallon to $0.42 per gallon in 2020 compared to $0.47 per gallon in 2019. Our effective cost per gallon is defined as the total costs associated with delivering our fuels, including commodity costs, transportation fees, liquefaction charges, and other site operating costs, plus the total cost of providing O&M services at stations that we do not own and for which we receive a per-gallon or fixed fee, including direct technician labor, indirect supervisor and management labor, repair parts and other direct maintenance costs, all divided by the total GGEs delivered less GGEs delivered by non-consolidated entities, such as entities that are accounted for under the equity method. The decrease in our effective cost per gallon was due to decreases in commodity prices and transportation costs.
Change in fair value of derivative warrants. Change in fair value of derivative warrants, all of which were issued by our subsidiary, NG Advantage, decreased from income of $1.0 million in 2019, to income of $0.0 million in 2020 due to a change in the estimated fair value. The warrants expired unexercised on July 2, 2020.
Selling, general and administrative. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased by $4.9 million to $68.5 million in 2020, from $73.4 million in 2019. This decrease was primarily driven by reduced activities and cost reductions due to the effect of COVID-19, including lower advertising and travel expenses.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization decreased by $1.9 million to $47.7 million in 2020, from $49.6 million in 2019, primarily due to a lower amount of depreciable assets.
Interest expense. Interest expense decreased by $0.2 million to $7.3 million in 2020, from $7.6 million in 2019. This decrease was primarily due to a reduction of outstanding indebtedness between periods, partially offset by a $1.2 million loss on extinguishment of debt that is included in interest expense.
Other income (expense), net. Other income (expense), net, changed from income of $2.0 million in 2019 to income of $3.0 million in 2020, primarily due to gains recorded from disposal of certain assets.
Loss from equity method investments. Loss from equity method investments increased by $0.0 million to $0.2 million in 2020, from $0.1 million in 2019, primarily due to the operating results of SAFE&CEC S.r.l. being negatively affected by the COVID-19 pandemic partially offset by improved operating results from MCEP.
Gain from sale of certain assets of subsidiary. In 2020, we recorded a gain of $1.1 million compared to a gain of $7.5 million in 2019 as a result of the satisfaction of specified performance criteria in each of 2019 and 2020 related to the assets sold in the bp Transaction in accordance with the related Amended Asset Purchase Agreement.
Gain from formation of equity method investment. In 2020, we recorded a gain of $0.7 million related to the release of costs accrued in satisfaction of commitments made in connection with the CEC Combination. There was no comparable gain or loss in 2019.
Income tax expense. Income tax expense decreased by $0.5 million to $0.3 million in 2020 from $0.9 million in 2019, primarily due a decrease in deferred taxes associated with goodwill and a reduction in the Company’s expected state tax expense.
Loss attributable to noncontrolling interest. In 2020, we recorded a $1.7 million loss for the noncontrolling interest in the net loss of NG Advantage, compared to a $7.2 million loss for 2019. The Company’s relevant noncontrolling interest in NG Advantage represented a 35.4% minority interest during 2019 and a 6.7% minority interest during 2020.
Seasonality and Inflation
To some extent, we experience seasonality in our results of operations. Some of our customers tend to consume more of our vehicle fuels in the summer months, when buses and other fleet vehicles use more fuel to power their air conditioning systems, which typically translate to an increased volume of fuel delivered in the summer months. In addition, natural gas commodity prices tend to be higher in the fall and winter months, due to increased overall demand for natural gas for heating during these periods.
Historically, inflation has not significantly affected our operating results; however, costs for construction, repairs, maintenance, electricity and insurance are all subject to inflationary pressures, which could affect our ability to maintain our stations adequately, build new stations, expand our existing facilities or pursue additional facilities, and could materially impact our operating costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Liquidity is the ability to meet present and future financial obligations through operating cash flows, the sale or maturity of investments or the acquisition of additional funds through capital management. Our financial position and liquidity are, and will continue to be, influenced by a variety of factors, including the level of our outstanding indebtedness and the principal and interest we are obligated to pay on our indebtedness, which could be influenced by the potential discontinuance of LIBOR for certain of our debt instruments that tie interest rates to this metric; the amount and timing of any additional debt or equity financing we may pursue; our capital expenditure requirements; any merger, divestiture or acquisition activity; and our ability to generate cash flows from our operations. We expect cash provided by our operating activities to fluctuate as a result of a number of factors, including our operating results and the factors that affect these results, including the amount and timing of our vehicle fuel sales, station construction sales, sales of RINs and LCFS Credits and recognition of government credits, the effects of COVID-19, grants and incentives, if any; fluctuations in commodity, station construction and labor costs; Environmental Credit prices; variations in the fair value of certain of our derivative instruments that are recorded in revenue; and the amount and timing of our billing, collections and liability payments, as discussed under “Key Trends-Our Performance” above.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities. Cash provided by operating activities was $61.0 million in 2020, compared to $12.3 million in 2019. The increase in cash provided by operating activities was primarily attributable to AFTC revenues, partially offset by other changes in working capital resulting from the timing of receipts and payments of cash in 2020, and $7.8 million used to terminate a contract between NG Advantage and bp.
Investing Activities. Cash provided by investing activities was $24.2 million in 2020, compared to cash used in investing activities of $1.5 million in 2019. The change was primarily attributable to an increase in net maturities of short-term investments in 2020 compared to 2019 and lower capital expenditures, partially offset by lower proceeds from property and equipment disposals and lower net earn-out proceeds received in connection with the bp Transaction.
Financing Activities. Cash used in financing activities was $18.7 million in 2020, compared to cash provided by financing activities of $7.7 million in 2019. Cash used in financing activities in 2020 was primarily attributable to an increase in repayments of debt instruments and finance lease obligations due to repayment of the 7.5% Notes and repurchases of common stock, partially offset by proceeds received from debt instruments. Cash provided by financing activities in 2019 was primarily attributable to proceeds from debt instruments, partially offset by repayments of debt instruments and finance lease obligations.
Capital Expenditures, Indebtedness and Other Uses of Cash
We require cash to fund our capital expenditures, operating expenses and working capital and other requirements, including costs associated with fuel sales; outlays for the design and construction of new fueling stations; additions or other modifications to existing fueling stations; RNG production facilities; debt repayments and repurchases; repurchases of common stock; purchases of heavy-duty trucks that use our fuels; additions or modifications of LNG production facilities; supporting our operations, including maintenance and improvements of our infrastructure; supporting our sales and marketing activities, including support of legislative and regulatory initiatives; financing vehicles for our customers; any investments in other entities; any mergers or acquisitions, including acquisitions to expand our RNG production capacity; pursuing market expansion as opportunities arise, including geographically and to new customer markets; and to fund other activities or pursuits and for other general corporate purposes.
Our business plan calls for approximately $27.5 million in capital expenditures in 2021. These capital expenditures primarily relate to the construction of fueling stations, IT software and equipment and LNG plant costs and we expect to fund these expenditures primarily through cash on hand and cash generated from operations.
In addition, NG Advantage may spend up to $0.4 million in 2021 to purchase additional equipment in support of its operations and customer contracts. Although NG Advantage has sought financing from third parties for capital expenditures, we have provided and may continue to provide financing for these capital expenditures.
We had total indebtedness, consisting of our debt and finance leases, of approximately $89.2 million in principal amount as of December 31, 2020, of which approximately $4.5 million, $54.5 million, $9.8 million, $10.4 million, $1.7 million and $8.3 million is expected to become due in 2021, 2022, 2023, 2024, 2025 and thereafter, respectively. Importantly, $50.0 million of such indebtedness was “Preformation Funding” provided by bp to fund capital costs and expenses incurred prior to formation of the bpJV. All such Preformation Funding, including accrued interest thereon, will be contributed to the bpJV, at which time it will no longer be outstanding indebtedness. We will be required to repay the Preformation Funding, including accrued interest at LIBOR plus 4.33%, if the bpJV is not formed by April 30, 2022. Based on outstanding debt balances and applicable interest rates as of December 31, 2020, we expect our total interest payment obligations relating to our indebtedness to be $2.3 million for the year ending December 31, 2021. We plan to and believe we are able to make all expected principal and interest payments in the next 12 months.
We intend to make payments under our various debt instruments when due and pursue opportunities for earlier repayment and/or refinancing if and when these opportunities arise.
Further, in 2021 we anticipate deploying up to approximately $100.0 million to develop dairy RNG production projects and up to approximately $75.0 million for fueling stations that will support long-term contracted RNG fueling volume.
Sources of Cash
Historically, our principal sources of liquidity have consisted of cash on hand, cash provided by our operations, including, if available, AFTC and other government credits, grants and incentives, cash provided by financing activities, and sales of assets. As of December 31, 2020, we had total cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments of $138.5 million, compared to $106.1 million as of December 31, 2019.
We expect cash provided by our operating activities to fluctuate depending on our operating results, which can be affected by the factors described above, as well as the other factors described in this MD&A and Item 1A. “Risk Factors” of this report.
In October 2018 and January 2019, we entered into agreements to implement our Zero Now truck financing program, which, as of December 31, 2020, permit us to incur up to an additional $94.9 million of indebtedness through the beginning of January 2022, obligate us to make certain interest and other fee payments in connection with this debt and THUSA’s related guaranty (which payments will vary in amount but will be owed by us regardless of the revenue we may receive from the program), and subject us to potential additional payments in connection with related commodity swap
arrangements. We are permitted to use any proceeds we receive under these agreements solely to fund the incremental cost of trucks purchased or financed by operators that participate in the Zero Now program. See “Recent Developments” and “Key Trends” above and Note 12 of this report for more information.
Subject to the following paragraph, we believe our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments and anticipated cash provided by our operating and financing activities will satisfy our business requirements for at least the 12 months following the date of this report. Subsequent to that period, we may need to raise additional capital to fund any planned or unanticipated capital expenditures, investments, debt repayments, share repurchases or other expenses that we cannot fund through cash on-hand, cash provided by our operations or other sources. Moreover, we may use our cash resources faster than we predict due to unexpected expenditures, the effects of COVID-19, or higher-than-expected expenses, in which case we may need to seek capital from alternative sources sooner than we anticipate. The timing and necessity of any future capital raise would depend on various factors, including our rate and volume of, and prices for, natural gas fuel sales and other volume-related activity, the effects of COVID-19, new station construction, debt repayments (either before or at maturity) and any potential mergers, acquisitions, investments, divestitures or other strategic relationships we may pursue, as well as the other factors that affect our revenue and expense levels as described in this MD&A and elsewhere in this report.
If we deploy additional capital to develop dairy RNG production projects and fueling stations to support contracted RNG fueling volume as described above under “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Capital Expenditures, Indebtedness and Other Uses of Cash,” we will be required to raise significant additional capital during 2021.
We may raise additional capital through one or more sources, including, among others, obtaining equity capital, including through offerings of our common stock or other securities, obtaining new or restructuring existing debt, selling assets, or any combination of these or other potential sources of capital. We may not be able to raise capital when needed, on terms that are favorable to us or our stockholders or at all. Any inability to raise necessary capital may impair our ability to develop and maintain fueling infrastructure, invest in strategic transactions or acquisitions or repay our outstanding indebtedness and may reduce our ability to support and build our business and generate sustained or increased revenue.
Contractual Obligations
The table below represents the scheduled maturities of our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020. This table excludes certain potential contractual obligations because they may involve future cash payments that are considered uncertain and cannot be estimated because they vary based upon future conditions; however, the exclusion of these obligations should not be construed as an implication that they are immaterial, as they could significantly affect our short- and long-term liquidity and capital resource needs depending on a variety of future events, facts and conditions.
(1) Consists of long-term debt to finance acquisitions and equipment purchases, including future interest payments. For our variable-rate debt (which consists of the SG Facility and the bp Loan, each as defined in Note 12), we have assumed an interest rate of 1.4% (LIBOR plus 1.30%) and 4.6% (LIBOR plus 4.33%), respectively, as of December 31, 2020.
(2) Consists of finance lease obligations to finance equipment purchases, including future interest payments.
(3) Consists of various space and ground leases for our Boron Plant, office spaces and fueling stations as well as leases for equipment.
(4) Represents our estimates for long-term and quarterly natural gas purchase contracts with a take-or-pay commitment.
(5) Represents our estimates for one long-term natural gas supply contract for our subsidiary NG Advantage, which entered into an arrangement with bp for the supply, sale and transportation of CNG through March 2022.
(6) Consists of our obligations to fund various fueling station construction projects, net of amounts funded through December 31, 2020 and excluding contractual commitments related to station sales contracts.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had the following off-balance sheet arrangements that have had, or are reasonably likely to have, a material current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenue or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources:
● Outstanding surety bonds for construction contracts and general corporate purposes totaling $29.4 million;
● One long-term natural gas purchase contract with a take-or-pay commitment, the amount of which is shown under “Contractual Obligations” above;
● Quarterly fixed price natural gas purchase contracts with take-or-pay commitments, the amount of which is shown under “Contractual Obligations” above;
● One long-term natural gas sale contract with a fixed supply commitment, the amount of which is shown under “Contractual Obligations” above, along with a guaranty agreement; and
● One long-term natural gas sale contract with a fixed supply commitment.
We provide surety bonds primarily for construction contracts in the ordinary course of our business, as a form of guarantee. No liability has been recorded in connection with our surety bonds because, based on historical experience and available information, we do not believe it is probable that any amounts will be required to be paid under these arrangements for which we will not be reimbursed.
As of December 31, 2020, we had one long-term natural gas purchase contract with a take-or-pay commitment, which requires us to purchase minimum volumes of natural gas at index-based prices and expires in June 2022. Additionally, as of December 31, 2020, we had quarterly fixed-price natural gas purchase contracts with take-or-pay commitments extending through June 2023.
NG Advantage has entered into an arrangement with bp for the supply, sale and reservation of a specified volume of CNG transportation capacity until March 2022. In connection with the arrangement, on February 28, 2018, we entered into a guaranty agreement with NG Advantage and bp, which was amended in June 2020, in which we guarantee NG Advantage’s payment obligations to the customer in the event of a default by NG Advantage under the supply arrangement, in an amount up to $15.0 million plus related fees. Our guaranty is in effect until thirty days following our notice to bp of termination.
In addition, as of December 31, 2020, we had a fixed supply arrangement with UPS for the supply and sale of 170.0 million GGEs of RNG through March 2026.