ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations, estimates and assumptions concerning events and financial trends that may affect our future operating results or financial position. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections titled “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Unless the context otherwise requires, for purposes of this section, the terms “we,” “us,” “the Company” or “our” are intended to mean the business and operations of Clene Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Business Overview
We are a clinical-stage pharmaceutical company pioneering the discovery, development, and commercialization of novel, clean-surfaced nano (CSN) therapeutics. CSN therapeutics are comprised of atoms of transition elements that, when assembled in nanocrystalline form, possess unusually high, unique catalytic activities not present in those same elements in bulk form. These nanocatalytic activities drive, support, and maintain beneficial metabolic and energetic intercellular reactions within diseased, stressed, and damaged cells.
Our patent-protected, proprietary position affords us the potential to develop a broad and deep pipeline of novel CSN therapeutics to address a range of diseases with high impact on human health. We began in 2013 by innovating an electrochemistry drug development platform that draws from advances in nanotechnology, plasma and quantum physics, material science, and biochemistry. Our platform process results in nanocrystals with faceted structures and surfaces that are free of the chemical surface modifications that accompany other production methods. Many traditional methods of nanoparticle synthesis involve the unavoidable deposition of potentially toxic organic residues and stabilizing surfactants on the particle surfaces. Synthesizing stable nanocrystals that are both nontoxic and highly catalytic has overcome this significant hurdle in harnessing transition metal catalytic activity for human therapeutic use.
Our clean-surfaced nanocrystals exhibit catalytic activities many fold higher than multiple other commercially available nanoparticles, produced using various techniques, that we have comparatively evaluated. We now have multiple drug assets currently in development and/or clinical trials for applications in neurology, infectious disease, and oncology. Our development and clinical efforts are currently focused on addressing the high unmet medical needs in two areas: first, those related to central nervous system disorders including Multiple Sclerosis (“MS”), Parkinson’s Disease (“PD”) and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (“ALS”); and second, those related to the pandemic caused by COVID-19, a highly infectious viral respiratory disease with serious and sometimes fatal co-morbidities.
On December 30, 2020, Chelsea Worldwide, Inc., our predecessor company, consummated the previously announced business combination (referred to as the “Reverse Recapitalization”) pursuant to a merger agreement, dated as of September 1, 2020 (the “Merger Agreement”), by and among Clene Nanomedicine, Inc. (“Clene Nanomedicine”), Tottenham Acquisition I Limited (“Tottenham” or “TOTA”), the public entity prior to the Reverse Recapitalization, Chelsea Worldwide Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly owned subsidiary of Tottenham (“PubCo”), Creative Worldwide Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly owned subsidiary of PubCo (“Merger Sub”), and Fortis Advisors LLC, a Delaware limited liability company as the representative of our shareholders (“Shareholders’ Representative”). Prior to the Reincorporation Merger discussed below, Tottenham was incorporated in the British Virgin Islands as a blank check company for the purpose of entering into a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities.
The Reverse Recapitalization was effected in two steps: (i) Tottenham was reincorporated to the state of Delaware by merging with and into PubCo (the “Reincorporation Merger”); (ii) promptly following the Reincorporation Merger, Merger Sub was merged with and into Clene Nanomedicine, resulting in Clene Nanomedicine being a wholly owned subsidiary of PubCo (the “Acquisition Merger”). On the Closing Date, PubCo changed its name from Chelsea Worldwide Inc. to Clene Inc. and listed its shares of common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (“Common Stock”) on Nasdaq under the symbol “CLNN.” As a result of the Reverse Recapitalization, Clene Nanomedicine became a wholly owned direct subsidiary of Clene Inc. For periods prior to the closing of the Reverse Recapitalization on December 30, 2020, the disclosure in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations has been updated to give effect to the Reverse Recapitalization.
On February 16, 2021, we filed a registration statement on Form S-1 to register 4,541,481 shares of Common Stock underlying outstanding warrants that we had previously issued. The SEC has not yet declared this registration statement to be effective. We will receive an aggregate gross proceed of $30.7 million if all of these warrants are exercised. In addition, the registration statement on Form S-1 will register the sale by certain selling stockholders of 23,251,553 shares of our Common Stock. We will not receive any proceeds from the sales by the selling shareholders. In conjunction with the preparation of the registration statement on Form S-1, we incurred offering costs of $27,000, which will be recognized as an expense within general and administrative expenses on consolidated statement of operations in the first quarter of 2021.
We currently have no drugs approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for commercial sale and have not generated any revenue from drug sales. We have never been profitable and have incurred operating losses in each year since inception. We began supplying low dose dietary supplements to 4Life, LLC, one of our shareholders, and had minimal direct sales of our rMetx™ ZnAg Immune Boost dietary supplement product. Our total operating losses were $20.2 million and $16.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Substantially all of our operating losses resulted from research and development expenses and administrative expenses. As of December 31, 2020 we had an accumulated deficit of $153.6 million.
We expect to continue investing in product development, sales and marketing and customer support for our products and expect to incur additional losses in the future to fund our operations and conduct product research and development. We also recognize the need to raise additional capital to fully implement our business plan. The long-term continuation of our business plan is dependent upon the generation of sufficient revenues from our products to offset expenses and capital expenditures. In the event that we do not generate sufficient revenues and are unable to obtain funding, we will be forced to delay, reduce, or eliminate some or all of our research and development programs, product portfolio expansion, commercialization efforts or capital expenditures, which could adversely affect our business prospects, ability to meet long-term liquidity needs or we may be unable to continue operations.
Impact of the COVID-19 Coronavirus Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic, which began in December 2019 and has spread worldwide, has caused many governments to implement measures to slow the spread of the outbreak. The outbreak and government measures taken in response have had a significant impact, both direct and indirect, on businesses and commerce, as worker shortages have occurred, supply chains have been disrupted, and facilities and production have been suspended. The future progression of the pandemic and its effects on our business and operations remain uncertain. The COVID-19 pandemic may affect our ability to initiate and complete preclinical studies, delay the initiation of future clinical trials, disrupt regulatory activities, or have other adverse effects on our business and operations. In particular, we and our clinical research organizations (“CROs”) may face disruptions that may affect our ability to initiate and complete preclinical studies, cause manufacturing disruptions, or create delays at clinical trial sites. The pandemic has already caused significant disruptions in the financial markets, and may continue to cause such disruptions, which could impact our ability to raise additional funds to support our operations. Moreover, the pandemic has significantly impacted economies worldwide and could result in adverse effects on our business and operations.
We are monitoring the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and financial statements. While the COVID-19 pandemic has led to various research restrictions and paused certain of our clinical trials, these impacts have been temporary and to date we have not experienced material business disruptions or incurred impairment losses in the carrying values of our assets as a result of the pandemic. We are not aware of any specific related event or circumstance that would require us to revise the estimates reflected in our financial statements. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition, including planned and future clinical trials and research and development costs, will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, including as a result of new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19, the actions taken to contain or treat it, and the duration and intensity of the related effects.
Reverse Recapitalization with Tottenham and Clene Nanomedicine
On December 30, 2020, we completed the previously announced Reverse Recapitalization, pursuant to which Tottenham was reincorporated and merged with and into PubCo with PubCo surviving the merger in connection with the Reincorporation Merger and the Merger Sub was merged with and into Clene Nanomedicine, resulting in Clene Nanomedicine being a wholly owned subsidiary of PubCo. On the closing of the Reverse Recapitalization, PubCo changed its name from Chelsea Worldwide Inc. to Clene Inc.
At the closing of the Reverse Recapitalization, Clene Inc. acquired 100% of the issued and outstanding Clene Nanomedicine common stock, in exchange for 54,339,012 shares of Clene Inc. Common Stock issued to the Clene Nanomedicine common shareholders, among which 2,716,958 shares of the Clene Inc. Common Stock are to be issued and held in escrow to satisfy any indemnification obligations incurred under the Merger Agreement.
At the closing of the Reverse Recapitalization, each stock option of Clene Nanomedicine common stock was cancelled and the holders thereof in exchange received 0.1320 newly issued stock options of our Common Stock, which is 95% of the exchange ratio determined in the Merger Agreement. Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, we issued 370,101 of restricted stock units (“RSUs”) to the option holders which complements the 5% closing payment shares held in escrow for Clene Nanomedicine common shareholders discussed above. In addition, we issued 1,136,961 RSUs to option holders to complement the earn-out payments that would contingently be issued to certain current Clene Nanomedicine’s shareholders upon the achievement of milestones. See “Earn-out Share” for the milestones detail.
Immediately after giving effect to the Reverse Recapitalization and the PIPE offering discussed in below, there were 59,526,171 shares of Common Stock issued and outstanding, and warrants to purchase 5,566,363 shares of Common Stock issued and outstanding.
The transaction was accounted for as a “reverse recapitalization” and Tottenham was treated as the “acquired” company for accounting purposes. Accordingly, for accounting purposes, the Reverse Recapitalization was treated as the equivalent of Clene Nanomedicine issuing shares for the net assets of Tottenham, accompanied by a recapitalization. The net assets of Tottenham were recorded at historical costs, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded. Reported amounts from operations included herein prior to the Reverse Recapitalization are those of Clene Nanomedicine.
The PIPE Offering
Prior to the completion of the Reverse Recapitalization on December 30, 2020, we entered into subscription agreements on December 28, 2020, with various investors (the “PIPE”). Pursuant to the subscription agreements, we issued 2,239,500 shares of our Common Stock (the “PIPE Shares”) at a price of $10.00 per share with net proceeds of $22.2 million. The purpose of the PIPE is to fund general corporate expenses. In addition, investors in the PIPE offering will also receive warrants to purchase a number of shares equal to one-half (1/2) of the number of PIPE Shares, for an aggregate total of 1,119,750 shares of our Common Stock, at an exercise price of $0.01 per share (the “PIPE Warrants”), subject to a 180-day holding period.
Basis of Presentation and Consolidation
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) and include the accounts of the Company and its wholly owned subsidiaries, Clene Nanomedicine, a subsidiary incorporated in Delaware, Clene Australia Pty Ltd (“Clene Australia”), a subsidiary incorporated in Australia, and dOrbital, Inc., a subsidiary incorporated in Delaware, after elimination of all significant intercompany accounts and transactions.
Key Factors Affecting Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations, financial condition and the period-to-period comparability of our financial results are principally affected by the following factors:
Earn-out Shares
In connection with the Reverse Recapitalization, certain of Clene Nanomedicine’s current shareholders and Tottenham’s former officers and directors and the Sponsor (collectively, the “Initial Shareholders”) are entitled to receive earn-out payments (collectively, referred to as “Earn-out Shares”) based on achieving milestones discussed below. The earn-out payments (the “Contingent Earn-out”) have been classified as liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2020 and will be initially measured at fair value and remeasured subsequently in each reporting period. The change in fair value of the contingent earn-out will be recorded in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
The Clene Nanomedicine contingent earn-out provision includes (i) Milestone 1 that is based on achieving a certain volume-weighted average price of the shares of the Company Common Stock within three years after the closing of the Reverse Recapitalization or the change of control price equaling or exceeding a certain price if a change of control transaction occurs within the three years following the closing of the Reverse Recapitalization, (ii) Milestone 2 that is based on achieving a certain volume-weighted average price of the shares of the Company Common Stock within five years after the closing of the Reverse Recapitalization or the change of control price equaling or exceeding a certain price if a change of control transaction occurs within the five years following the closing of the Reverse Recapitalization, and (iii) Milestone 3 that is based on completing by December 30, 2021 a randomized placebo-controlled study for treatment of COVID-19 coronavirus.
The Initial Shareholders contingent earn-out provision includes Milestone 1 and Milestone 2 listed above. Upon the consummation of the Reverse Recapitalization, Clene Nanomedicine and the Initial Shareholders are entitled to receive up to 8,346,185 and 750,000 shares of the Company’s Common Stock, respectively.
The estimated fair value of the contingent consideration was determined using a Monte Carlo simulation that simulated the future path of the Company’s stock price over the earn-out period. The assumptions utilized in the calculation are based on the achievement of certain stock price milestones including projected stock price, volatility, and risk-free rate. For potential payments related to a product development milestone, the fair value was determined based on the Company’s expectations of achieving such a milestone and the simulated estimated stock price on the expected date of achievement.
Contingent earn-out payments involve certain assumptions requiring significant judgment and actual results may differ from assumed and estimated amounts.
Research and Development Expenses
The discovery and development of novel drug candidates require a significant investment of resources over a prolonged period of time, and a core part of our strategy is to continue making sustained investments in this area. As a result of this commitment, our pipeline of drug candidates has been advancing and expanding, with two clinical-stage drug candidates currently being investigated.
We anticipate that our research and development expenses will increase significantly due to the increase in clinical trial expenses incurred to develop our drug candidates, expenses incurred for payments to CROs, principal investigators and clinical trial sites, costs of materials to support our clinical trials and preclinical studies, costs associated with preclinical activities, share awards granted to our research and development personnel and salaries for our expanding research and development personnel headcount. Our research and development expenses are affected by the timing and advancement of our existing product pipeline as well as the timing and quantity of new drug programs commenced.
Since inception, we have dedicated significant resources to our research and development activities. Our research and development expenses were $15.2 million and $9.6 million, representing 74.8%, and 58.6% of our total operating expenses in 2020 and 2019, respectively. As we continue to advance our clinical programs for our drug products, we expect our research and development expenses to increase in absolute amounts and to continue to represent a significant percentage of our total operating expenses.
Funding for Our Operations
Since our inception, we have dedicated substantially all of our resources to the development of our drug candidates. We have financed our operations principally through proceeds from the issuance of preferred stock, issuance of common stock upon exercise of common stock options, convertible promissory notes, issuances of notes payable, and the consummation of the Reverse Recapitalization.
Since our inception and through the date of this Annual Report, we have funded our operations primarily with proceeds from the following sources:
● gross proceeds of $87.2 million from sales of our preferred stock and other equity financing;
● gross proceeds of $28.1 million from borrowings under convertible promissory notes;
● gross proceeds of $0.6 million through external lenders; and
● gross cash proceeds of $31.7 million through the Reverse Recapitalization and the PIPE offering.
In February 2021, we filed a registration statement on Form S-1 to register 4,541,481 shares of Common Stock underlying outstanding warrants. We will receive aggregate gross proceeds of $30.7 million if all of these are exercised. In addition, we received $0.5 million from a Michael J. Fox Foundation grant in January 2021 which provides for our preclinical research funding.
We have also been awarded grants from various other organizations, including the U.S. Congressionally Directed Medical Research Program administered by the Department of Defense, the National Multiple Sclerosis Society, and FightMND, a not-for-profit registered charity in Australia, who together have issued us grants totaling approximately $2.6 million. We also receive indirect financial support for one of the clinical studies in which we participate, the Healey ALS Platform Trial, administered by the Massachusetts General Hospital, which is conducting a study of our CNM-Au8 drug candidate along with other drugs in a platform trial, at significantly lower costs to us than we would otherwise incur if we were to conduct a comparably designed study on our own at reasonable market rates.
The net cash used in our operating activities was $18.9 million and $13.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $59.3 million. We expect that the cash on hand as of December 31, 2020 will be sufficient to fund our operations for a period extending beyond twelve months from the date the consolidated financial statements are issued. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we may exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we anticipate. See “- Liquidity and Capital Resources.” We expect our expenses to increase significantly in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance the clinical development of our clinical-stage drug products and continue research and development of our preclinical drug products and initiate additional clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for, these and other future drug products. As we continue to grow and expand, we will incur more expenses relating to regulatory compliance and sales and marketing personnel as we prepare to commence commercialization once we obtain regulatory approval of our drug products.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our administrative expenses consist primarily of staff costs, agency and consulting fees, utilities, rent and general office expenses, and share grants. We recorded administrative expenses of $5.2 million and $6.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We anticipate that our administrative expenses will further increase in future periods to support increases in our research and development activities and as we continue to rapidly advance the clinical programs of our drug products and expect to commercialize our products once we receive regulatory approval. These increases will likely include increased headcount, increased share compensation charges, expanded infrastructure and increased insurance expenses. We also anticipate increasing legal, compliance, accounting and investor and public relations expenses associated with being a public company.
Grants and Government Tax Incentives
We received grants issued by non-government entities related to income which have future related costs expected to be incurred and require us to comply with conditions attached to the grants. These non-government grants related to income are recognized in profit or loss as an offset to research and development expenses when funding has been received and related costs have been incurred. We received tax incentives from the Australian government in the form of cash subsidies for research and development activities related to clinical trial activities conducted by our Australian subsidiary, which are recognized as other income upon compliance with certain conditions. We recognized $0.8 million and $0.1 million of grant funding against research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We recognized $3.2 million and $0.6 million of other income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, that we classified as Australia research and development credit.
Commercialization of Our Drug Candidates
Our business and results of operations depend on our ability to commercialize our drug candidates, if approved for marketing. Our pipeline is comprised of four drug candidates ranging from pre-clinical to late-stage clinical programs, including two drug candidates at the clinical stage or IND stage. Although we currently do not have any drug candidates approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenue from drug product sales, we expect to commercialize one or more of our drug products in the coming years as they move toward the final stages of development. While we began selling our ZnAg Immune Boost product online in May 2020, we anticipate revenue generated from sales of this dietary supplement will be small compared to our operating expenses as well as the revenue we expect to generate from future sales of our drug candidates for which we are currently conducting clinical trials.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Because all our drug candidates are still at clinical stage, we did not generate any revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019. We generated an immaterial amount of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, which we separate as product revenue and royalty revenue. Product revenue is generated under our dietary supplement segment from 4Life, LLC, a related party, related to supply agreements for the low dose mineral supplement KHC46 and a low dose zinc-silver solution, two dietary (mineral) supplements that we began supplying during this period. We also generated minimal product revenue from sales of rMetx™ ZnAg Immune Boost during this period.
Royalty revenue is paid to us by 4Life, LLC, under an exclusive and royalty-bearing license agreement relating to sales of KHC46 only. For more details on this agreement, see Item 1. Business - License Arrangements.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development costs are charged to operations as incurred. We account for nonrefundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities initially as an asset and then as expenses when the goods have been received or when the service has been performed rather than when the payment is made.
We had research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 of $15.2 million and $9.6 million, respectively. Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred by us for the discovery and development of our drug candidates. Research and development costs include payroll and personnel expenses, including salaries and related benefits and stock-based compensation for employees engaged in research and development functions, clinical trial supplies, fees for clinical trial services, consulting costs, and allocated overhead, including rent, equipment, utilities, depreciation, insurance, and facilities maintenance costs. We expect our research and development expenses to increase as more of our drug candidates progress through their clinical trials.
Historically, substantially all of our research and development expenses relate to CNM-Au8, our lead asset. Drug candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to per patient clinical trial site fees for larger studies, the costs of opening and monitoring clinical sites, CRO activity, and manufacturing expenses. We expect that our research and development expenses will increase in connection with our clinical development activities in the near term and in the future.
Clinical trial costs, including clinical trial supplies and fees for clinical trial services, are charged to research and development expense as incurred. Our clinical trial accrual process seeks to account for expenses resulting from obligations under contracts with CROs, consultants, and under clinical site agreements in connection with conducting clinical trials. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiations, which vary from contract to contract and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided to us under such contracts. We reflect the appropriate trial expenses in the consolidated financial statements by matching the appropriate expenses with the period in which services and efforts are expended. In the event advance payments are made to a CRO, the payments will be recorded as a prepaid asset, which will be expensed over the period of time the contracted services are performed.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist of employee salary and benefits, share-based compensation expenses, professional fees for legal, consulting and audit services and business development activities, facility, travel expenses, rental fees and other administrative expenses. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase as we continue to grow and expand.
Other Income (Expenses)
Other income (expenses) consists of interest expenses, interest income, gains from the termination of a lease arrangement, changes in fair value of preferred stock warrant liability, changes in fair value of derivative liability, change in fair value of contingent earn-out, a research and development credit received from the Australian government, foreign exchange gain, loss on disposal of assets, and loss on extinguishment of convertible notes.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Revenue
We generated revenue of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 while no revenue was generated for 2019. $0.2 million of our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was product revenue from supply agreements with a related party for KHC46 and a low dose zinc-silver solution, two dietary supplements that we began supplying during this period. We also generated minimal product revenue from sales of rMetx™ ZnAg Immune Boost during this period. In addition, $30 thousand of our revenue during the same period was royalty revenue from a license agreement with the same related party.
Operating Expenses
Cost of Sales
We incurred cost of sales of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 relating to production and distribution costs for the sales of our KHC46 and low dose zinc-silver solution dietary supplement products through supply agreements we have entered into with a related party while no cost of sales was incurred for 2019.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $15.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $9.6 million for 2019. During these periods, substantially all of our research and development expenses were related to the development and clinical trials of CNM-Au8. This increase of $5.6 million, or 59.0%, was primarily due to the progression of our drug candidates through the clinical development process, including increased enrollment into the REPAIR-PD and the REPAIR-MS studies, and calendar payments due for our participation in the Healey-ALS Platform Trial. These efforts resulted in greater associated costs and manufacturing expenses in support of these trials.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $6.8 million for 2019. This decrease of $1.6 million, or 23.9% was primarily due to decreased expenses relating to efforts to list our shares on an international public exchange during 2019, which were subsequently abandoned. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a small increase in employee salary and benefits, shares based-compensation expenses due to the growth of our business and professional expenses related to fund raising activities.
Other Income (Expenses)
Other income (expenses), net for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 included the following:
(i) recognized interest expense of $1.0 million and $0.1 million, respectively, due to an increase in the fair value of the Company’s notes payable. As of December 31, 2020, the fair value of the Company’s notes payable is determined based on the closing price of CLNN shares listed on the Nasdaq.
(ii) recognized expense of $14.6 million and $0.4 million relating to the changes in fair value of preferred stock warrant liability, respectively. The increase of $14.2 million in association with the changes in fair value of preferred stock warrant liability was primarily a result of the increase in the value of outstanding warrants as the estimated value of our company and the likelihood of a liquidation event increased due to consideration of the Reverse Recapitalization. Upon the consummation of the Reverse Recapitalization, we determined that the warrants qualify for classification as permanent equity and we reclassified the resulting warrant liability to additional paid-in capital. No change in fair value of preferred stock warrant liability will be recorded going forward.
(iii) recognized Clene Nanomedicine contingent earn-out liability of $64.7 million upon the closing of the Reverse Recapitalization and subsequently remeasured the contingent earn-out liability to the fair value of $52.1 million at the reporting date. The change in fair value of our Clene Nanomedicine contingent earn-out of $12.6 million was primarily a result of the decrease of the closing price of CLNN shares listed on the Nasdaq for $9.01 per share on December 31, 2020 from $10.82 per share on December 30, 2020 when we recognized the Clene Nanomedicine contingent earn-out liability at inception.
(iv) recognized Initial Shareholders contingent earn-out liability of $7.4 million upon the closing of the Reverse Recapitalization and subsequently remeasured the contingent earn-out liability to the fair value of $5.9 million at the reporting date. The change in fair value of our Initial Shareholders contingent earn-out of $1.5 million was primarily a result of the decrease of the closing price of CLNN shares listed on the Nasdaq for $9.01 per share on December 31, 2020 from $10.82 per share on December 30, 2020 when we recognized the Initial Shareholders contingent earn-out liability at inception.
(v) recognized income of $3.2 million and $0.6 million relating to a research and development credit received from the Australian government, respectively. We recognized Australian research and development credit in an amount equal to the qualifying expenses incurred in each period multiplied by the applicable reimbursement percentage. The increase in research and development credit is the result of increased research and development activities during the year ended December 31, 2020.
(vi) recognized expense of $0.5 million due to loss of extinguishment of convertible notes, while not recording any similar expenses in 2019.
Comprehensive Loss
As a result of the foregoing, we incurred a comprehensive loss of $19.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a comprehensive loss of $16.2 million for 2019.
Taxation
United States
We are incorporated in Delaware in the U.S. and subject to statutory U.S. federal corporate income tax at a rate of 21% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. We are also subject to state income tax in Utah and Maryland, at a rate of 4.95% and 8.25%, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. We recorded a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets due to the uncertainty as to whether such assets will be realized resulting from our three-year cumulative loss position and the uncertainty surrounding our ability to generate pre-tax income in the foreseeable future. This valuation allowance was $22.1 million and $16.8 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Australia
Our wholly owned subsidiary, Clene Australia Pty Ltd, was established in Australia on March 5, 2018 and is subject to corporate income tax at a rate of 27.5%. Clene Australia total income tax expense was $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. In 2019, Clene Australia had no taxable income and therefore, no provision for income taxes was required. We recorded $3.2 million as other income in 2020 for a refund of research and development credits pertaining to Clene Australia Pty Ltd for the 2020 and 2019 tax year. We recorded $0.6 million as other income in 2019 for a refund of research and development credits pertaining to Clene Australia Pty Ltd for the 2018 tax year.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act permits an emerging growth company (“EGC”) such as us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period under the JOBS Act until the earlier of the date we (1) are no longer an emerging growth company or (2) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest to occur of: (1) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have more than $1.07 billion in annual revenue; (2) the date on which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer,” which would occur if the market value of our equity securities held by non-affiliates exceeds US$700 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter; (3) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period; and (4) the last day of the fiscal year ending after the fifth anniversary of Tottenham’s initial public offering, or August 6, 2023.
We may choose to early adopt any new or revised accounting standards whenever such early adoption is permitted for public companies.
Smaller Reporting Company Status
We are a Smaller Reporting Company (“SRC”) as defined in Item 10(f)(1) of Regulation S-K. Smaller reporting companies may take advantage of certain reduced disclosure obligations, including, among other things, providing only two years of audited financial statements. We will remain a smaller reporting company until (1) the market value of our Common Stock held by non-affiliates exceeds $250 million as of the end of the second fiscal quarter and our annual revenues exceed $100 million during the previous fiscal year, or (2) the market value of our Common Stock held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the end of the second fiscal quarter.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, we have incurred annual net losses from our operations. Substantially all of our losses have resulted from the funding of our research and development programs and general and administrative expenses associated with our operations. We incurred net losses of $19.3 million and $16.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our loss from operations was $20.2 million and $16.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We have financed our operations principally through proceeds from the sale of preferred stock, the sale of preferred stock warrants and the sale of convertible notes that have converted into shares of preferred stock, and through the funds we raised from the consummation of the Reverse Recapitalization and the PIPE offering. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we raised an aggregate of $69.5 million and $5.5 million, respectively, consisting of net proceeds from issuances of preferred stock, common stock upon exercise of common stock options, convertible promissory notes, notes payable, the Reverse Recapitalization and the PIPE offering. In February 2021, we filed a registration statement on Form S-1 to register 4,541,481 shares of Common Stock underlying outstanding warrants. We will receive aggregate gross proceeds of $30.7 million if all of these are exercised.
The net cash used in our operating activities was $18.9 million and $13.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $59.3 million. We expect that the cash on hand as of December 31, 2020 will be sufficient to fund our operations for a period extending beyond twelve months from the date the consolidated financial statements are issued. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we may exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we anticipate. We expect our expenses to increase significantly in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance the clinical development of our clinical-stage drug products and continue research and development of our preclinical drug products and initiate additional clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for, these and other future drug products. As we continue to grow and expand, we will incur more expenses relating to regulatory compliance and sales and marketing personnel as we prepare to commence commercialization once we obtain regulatory approval of our drug products.
Our ability to continue as a going concern may require obtaining additional funding to finance operations. As part of our ongoing business plans, we will continue seeking funding through equity financing and may seek debt financing or other capital sources. We may not be able to obtain financing on acceptable terms, or at all. The terms of any financing may adversely affect the holdings or the rights of our shareholders. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on acceptable terms, we would be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate research and development programs and commercialization efforts.
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for relevant periods:
Use of Funds
Our primary use of cash in all periods presented was to fund our research and development, regulatory and other clinical trial costs, and related supporting administration. Our prepaid expenses and other current assets, accounts payable and accrued expense balances in all periods presented were affected by the timing of vendor invoicing and payments, and impacted the cash provided by, or used in, operations. We have no commitments for capital expenditures as of the end of the latest fiscal period.
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $18.9 million of cash for the year ended December 31, 2020, which resulted from a net loss of $19.3 million, adjusted for (i) non-cash items of $3.7 million, which primarily consisted of depreciation expense of $1.0 million, stock-based compensation expenses of $0.8 million, changes in the fair value of preferred stock warrant liability of $14.6 million, changes in fair value of the Clene Nanomedicine contingent earn-out of $12.6 million, changes in fair value of the Initial Shareholders contingent earn-out of $1.5 million, loss on extinguishment of convertible notes of $0.5 million and increase in interest accrued on notes payable and accretion of debt discount of $0.9 million, and (ii) a net decrease in operating assets and liabilities of $3.3 million. The net decrease in operating assets and liabilities was primarily attributable to an increase in inventory of $0.2 million, an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $2.9 million due to the increase in Australia research and development credit receivable and prepayments to CROs and other vendors, $0.3 million decrease in accounts payable, $0.2 million increase in income tax payable related to the Australian entity, $0.3 million decrease in accrued liabilities due to the timing of vendor invoicing and payments, $0.1 million decrease in payable to related parties, $0.3 million increase in deferred income tax, $0.1 million increase in deferred revenue from related parties, and $0.1 million decrease in operating lease obligations.
Net cash used in operating activities was $13.2 million of cash for the year ended December 31, 2019, which resulted from a net loss of $16.2 million, adjusted for (i) non-cash items of $1.8 million, which primarily consisted of depreciation of $0.8 million, stock-based compensation expenses of $0.4 million and changes in fair value of preferred stock warrant liability of $0.4 million, and (ii) a net increase in operating assets and liabilities of $1.2 million. The net increase in operating assets and liabilities was primarily attributable to (1) an increase in accrued liabilities of $1.9 million relating to accrued professional fees, (2) a decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $0.4 million relating to prepayments for clinical studies, and (3) a decrease in payment of operating lease obligations of $0.2 million relating to our leased office space.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.4 million and $0.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which in each instance was related to purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $69.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which primarily resulted from (i) funds raised in connection with the Reverse Recapitalization, net of transaction costs, of $5.6 million, (ii) net proceeds from the PIPE transaction of $22.2 million, (iii) proceeds from the issuance of Series D preferred Stock, net of issuance costs, of $35.1 million, (iv) proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes payable of $6.1 million, (v) proceeds from the issuance of notes payable of $0.6 million and (vi) proceeds from issuance of common stock upon exercise of common stock options of $0.1 million partially offset by payments on our finance lease obligations of $0.2 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which primarily resulted from (i) proceeds from issuance of Series C Preferred Stock, net of issuance costs, of $8.1 million and (ii) proceeds from the issuance of notes payable of $0.6 million and was partially offset by (a) payments of notes payable of $3.0 million and (b) payments of finance lease obligations of $0.2 million.
Debt Obligations
In February 2019, we entered into a loan agreement with the Department of Housing and Community Development, a principal department of the State of Maryland, pursuant to which Maryland agreed to provide a $0.5 million term loan. Amounts outstanding under the loan bear simple interest at an annual rate of 8.00%. Repayment of the full balance outstanding is due on February 22, 2034. This loan establishes “Phantom Shares,” based on 119,906 shares of our common stock (based on 863,110 Series C Preferred Shares prior to the Reverse Recapitalization), determined at issuance. The Loan Agreement states the repayment amount is to be the greater of the balance of principal and accrued interest or the Phantom Shares value. We determined that the note should be accounted for at fair value. We record the fair value of the debt at the end of each reporting period. In order to value the note, we consider the amount of the simple interest expense that would be due and consider the value of Phantom Shares. Upon the closing of the Reverse Recapitalization and as of December 31, 2020, the fair value of the Maryland note payable is now determined based on the closing price of CLNN shares listed on the Nasdaq. Expenses of $0.5 million and $34 thousand were recognized during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The fair value of $1.1 million and $0.5 million of principal and accrued interest is included in long-term notes payable as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
In April 2019, the Company entered into a loan agreement (the “2019 Cecil Loan”) with Cecil County, Maryland (“Cecil”). Pursuant to the 2019 Cecil Loan, Cecil agreed to provide a $0.1 million term loan. Amounts outstanding under the 2019 Cecil Loan bear simple interest at an annual rate of 8.00%. Under the 2019 Cecil Loan, the Company has agreed to affirmative and negative covenants to which it will remain subject until maturity. These covenants include providing information about the Company and its operations; limitations on the Company’s ability to retire, repurchase, or redeem the Company’s common or preferred stock, options, and warrants other than per the terms of the securities; and limitations on the Company’s ability to pay dividends of cash or property. There are no financial covenants associated with the Loan Agreement. Events of default under the Loan Agreement include failure to make payments when due, insolvency events, failure to comply with covenants, and material adverse effects with respect to the Company. The Company is not in violation of any affirmative or negative covenants. Repayment of the full balance outstanding is due on April 30, 2034. The 2019 Cecil Loan establishes “Phantom Shares,” based on 23,981 shares of the Company’s common stock (based on 172,622 Series C Preferred Shares prior to the Reverse Recapitalization), determined at issuance. The 2019 Cecil Loan states the repayment amount is to be the greater of the balance of principal and accrued interest or the Phantom Share value. The Company determined that the note should be accounted for at fair value. The Company records the fair value of the debt at the end of each reporting period. Upon the closing of the Reverse Recapitalization and as of December 31, 2020, the fair value of the 2019 Cecil Loan is now determined based on the closing price of CLNN shares listed on the Nasdaq. In order to value the note, the Company considers the amount of the simple interest expense that would be due and considers the value of Phantom Shares. Expense of $0.1 million and $6 thousand was recognized during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The fair value of $0.2 million and $0.1 million of principal and accrued interest is included in long-term notes payable as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
In February through July 2020, we issued convertible promissory notes (the “2020 Convertible Notes”) in an aggregate principal amount of $6.1 million, bearing interest at an annual rate of 5%. The 2020 Convertible Notes were convertible at the earlier of (i) one year, at which point the notes would be convertible into Series C preferred shares at the Series C preferred share issuance price, and (ii) next equity financing of no less than $10.0 million, at which point the notes would be convertible into shares issued in the next equity financing at 90% of the per share issuance price of the next equity financing. The redemption feature at the next equity financing met the requirements of an embedded derivative to be bifurcated and recorded at fair value. We bifurcated the embedded feature at issuance and recorded a derivative liability of $0.7 million at inception in conjunction with a discount on debt to be amortized over the life of the note. We recognized interest expense of $0.2 million, including amortization of debt discount of $0.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, in connection with the 2020 Convertible Notes. We also identified two other embedded features in these convertible promissory notes that were not bifurcated, which were the conversion into Series C preferred shares upon maturity and the redemption upon a liquidation event. On August 11, 2020, in connection with our issuance and sale of Series D Preferred Stock prior to the Reverse Recapitalization, all of the outstanding principal and accrued interest under the 2020 Convertible Notes, totaling $6.9 million, was automatically converted into 1,497,135 shares of Series D Preferred Stock at a price equal to 90% of $4.60 per share, the per share price paid in cash by investors in the Series D preferred stock financing. We accounted for the conversion of the 2020 Convertible Notes as a debt extinguishment and recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt of $0.5 million within other income (expense), net in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss. As of the date of conversion, the unamortized discount on the 2020 Convertible Notes was $0.5 million. The loss on extinguishment was calculated as the difference between (i) the fair value of the 1,497,135 shares of Series D Preferred Stock issued to settle the 2020 Convertible Notes of $6.9 million and (ii) the carrying value of the 2020 Convertible Notes, including the principal balance of the 2020 Convertible Notes of $6.1 million and accrued but unpaid interest of $76 thousand, net of the unamortized debt discount of $5.7 million, plus the then-current fair value of derivative liability associated with the 2020 Convertible Notes at the time of the extinguishment of $0.7 million.
In May 2020, the Company entered into a note payable in the amount of $0.6 million (the “PPP Note”) under the Paycheck Protection Program of the CARES Act (the “PPP”). As amended, the PPP permits forgiveness of amounts loaned for payments of payroll and other qualifying expenses within 24 weeks of receipt of loaned funds, given that at least 60% of the total loan is used for payroll. Amounts not forgiven by the PPP have a repayment period of five years. The Company expects the full $0.6 million balance of the PPP Note to be forgiven. The Company will record any forgiveness after approval by the issuer. Until then, the PPP balance is included in long-term notes payable as of December 31, 2020. On January 11, 2021, the U.S. Small Business Administration notified the Company that the Company’s PPP loan of $0.6 million had been forgiven. As a result, we will record a gain of $0.6 million in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss in our first quarter of 2021.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table sets forth our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
We have made an accounting policy election not to recognize leases with an initial term of 12 months or less within our consolidated balance sheet and to recognize those lease payments on a straight-line basis in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss over the lease term.
We enter into agreements in the normal course of business with CROs for clinical trials and with vendors for preclinical studies and other services and products for operating purposes, which are cancelable at any time by us, subject to payment of our remaining obligations under binding purchase orders and, in certain cases, nominal early termination fees. These commitments are not deemed significant.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the period presented, we did not have, and we currently do not have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, such as relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, which are often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, established for the purpose of facilitating financing transactions that are not required to be reflected on our balance sheets.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis, and our actual results may differ from these estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, contractual milestones and other various factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
Our most critical accounting policies are summarized below. See Note 2 to the Accountant’s Report included elsewhere in this Annual Report for a description of our other significant accounting policies.
Contingent Earn-out
In connection with the Reverse Recapitalization and pursuant to the Merger Agreement, we agreed to issue additional shares to Clene Nanomedicine’s common shareholders immediately prior to the Reverse Recapitalization and to the initial shareholders of Tottenham a certain amount of our Common Stock upon our achieving certain milestones. In accordance with ASC 815 - Derivatives and hedging, the Earn-out Shares are not indexed to our Common Stock and therefore are accounted for as a liability with the changes in fair value recorded as a component of other income (expense), net in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. The contingent earn-out liabilities were initially measured at fair value upon the closing of the Reverse Recapitalization and are subsequently remeasured to fair value at each reporting date.
Our contingent earn-out liabilities contain unobservable inputs that reflect our own assumptions. We used a Monte Carlo analysis to simulate the future path of our stock price over the earn-out period. The assumptions utilized in the calculation are based on the achievement of certain stock price milestones such as projected stock price, volatility and risk-free rate. For potential payments related to the product development milestone, the fair value was determined based on our expectations of achieving such milestone and the simulated estimated stock price on the expected date of achievement. Our significant unobservable inputs upon the closing of the Reverse Recapitalization and as of December 31, 2020 were as follows: (i) 85% of expected stock price volatility, (ii) risk-free interest rate of 0.4%, and (iii) expected term of 5 years.
We believe our assumptions are reasonable based on available information, our experience, knowledge, and judgments. These estimates can be affected by factors that are difficult to predict including future (i) CLNN closing price per share on the Nasdaq, (ii) estimated stock price volatility over the earn-out period, and (iii) risk free rates. Changes in assumptions and estimates used in our analysis, or future results that vary from assumptions used in the analysis, could affect the fair value of the contingent earn-out and could result in material changes in future periods.
Valuation of Warrants to Purchase Preferred Stock
Prior to the Reverse Recapitalization with Tottenham, we accounted for freestanding warrants to purchase shares of preferred stock as liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet at their estimated fair value as the underlying redeemable convertible preferred stock was considered contingently redeemable and may obligate us to transfer assets to the holders at a future date upon the occurrence of a deemed liquidation event. At the end of each reporting period, changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants to purchase shares of preferred stock were recorded in change in fair value of preferred stock warrant liability in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. Immediately prior to the close of the Reverse Recapitalization, all of the outstanding Clene Nanomedicine preferred stock was converted to our Common Stock and the Clene Nanomedicine preferred stock warrants to purchase Clene Nanomedicine preferred stock were converted to warrants to purchase our Common Stock. Upon conversion, we assessed the features of the warrants and determined that they qualify for classification as permanent equity upon the closing of the Reverse Recapitalization. We remeasured the warrants to fair value one final time upon the close of the Reverse Recapitalization and recognized a loss of $14.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, within other income, (expense), net on the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. Upon the closing of the Reverse Recapitalization, the preferred stock warrant liability was reclassified to additional paid-in capital.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, change in the estimated fair value of the preferred stock warrant liability was $0.4 million.
Our preferred stock warrant liabilities contain unobservable inputs that reflect our own assumptions. We used a Black-Scholes valuation model to value the preferred stock warrant liability during 2020 and we used an option pricing model to value the preferred stock warrant liability during 2019. The following table summarizes our significant unobservable inputs as at the dates indicated:
Our board of directors determines the fair value of the preferred stock by considering a number of objective and subjective factors, including third-party valuations, valuations of comparable companies, sales of redeemable convertible preferred stock, sales of Common Stock to unrelated third parties, operating and financial performance, the lack of liquidity of our capital stock, and general and industry-specific economic outlook. We estimated the volatility of our preferred stock based on comparable peer companies’ historical volatility. The risk-free interest rate for periods within the contractual life of the warrants is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the valuation date. We have no plans to declare any future dividends. The determination of the fair value of the preferred stock warrant liability could change in future periods based upon changes in the value of our preferred stock and other assumptions, as presented above.
Stock-based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation arrangements with employees in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 718-10, Compensation - Stock Compensation. ASC 718 requires the recognition of compensation expense, using a fair value-based method, for costs related to all share-based payments including stock options. We grant equity awards under our stock-based compensation plan, which may include stock options and restricted common stock.
Prior to the consummation of the Reverse Recapitalization, our determination of the fair value of stock options on the date of grant utilized the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and was impacted by Clene Nanomedicine’s common stock price as well as changes in assumptions regarding a number of subjective variables. These variables include, but are not limited to, the expected term that options will remain outstanding, the expected common stock price volatility over the term of the option awards, risk-free interest rates, and expected dividends.
After the closing of the Reverse Recapitalization, our board of directors determined the fair value of each share of Common Stock underlying stock-based awards based on the closing price of our Common Stock as reported by Nasdaq on the date of grant. RSUs that have a market condition are associated with the achievement of certain stock price milestones. The fair value of the RSUs with market conditions are determined using a Monte Carlo valuation model. The assumptions utilized in the Monte Carlo valuation model include projected stock price, volatility and risk-free rate based on the achievement of certain stock price milestones.
The fair value is recognized over the period during which an optionee is required to provide services in exchange for the option award and service-based RSUs, known as the requisite service period (usually the vesting period), on a straight-line basis. For the RSUs with market conditions, the fair value is recognized over the period based on the expected milestone achievement dates as the derived service period (usually the vesting period), on a straight-line basis. For the RSUs with performance conditions, the grant date fair value of these awards is the market price on the applicable grant date, and compensation expense will be recognized when the conditions become probable of being satisfied. The Company will recognize a cumulative true-up adjustment once the conditions become probable of being satisfied as the related service period had been completed in a prior period.
We recognize stock-based compensation expense for the portion of awards that have vested. Stock compensation expense is recorded in research and development and general and administrative expenses based on the classification of the work performed by the grantees. Stock-based compensation expense recognized at fair value includes the impact of estimated forfeitures. In 2017, we adopted new accounting guidance from the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) on stock compensation, or Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-09, as described in “Recently Adopted Accounting Standards” below and have elected to account for forfeitures as they occur, rather than estimating expected forfeitures.
The following table sets forth stock-based compensation for the periods presented:
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $2.4 million of unrecognized stock-based compensation costs related to non-vested awards which is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 2.04 years.
Stock Options
The following sets forth the outstanding common stock options and related activity for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Prior to the consummation of the Reverse Recapitalization, the exercise price of the stock options granted was based on the fair market value of the common shares of the Company as of the grant date as determined by the Board of Directors, with input from the Company’s management. The Board of Directors determined the fair value of the common stock at the time of grant of the options by considering a number of objective and subjective factors, including third-party valuation reports, valuations of comparable companies, sales of redeemable convertible Preferred Stock, sales of common stock to unrelated third parties, operating and financial performance, the lack of liquidity of the Company’s capital stock, and general and industry-specific economic outlook.
Stock options are valued using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Since the Company has limited trading history of its Common Stock, the expected volatility is derived from the average historical stock volatilities of several unrelated public companies within the Company’s industry that the Company considers to be comparable to its own business over a period equivalent to the expected term of the stock option grants. The risk-free interest rate for periods within the contractual life of the stock options is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of the grant. The expected dividend is assumed to be zero as the Company has never paid dividends and has no current plans to do so. The expected term represents the period that stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. For option grants that are considered to be “plain vanilla,” the Company determines the expected term using the simplified method. The simplified method deems the term to be the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the options. For other option grants, the Company estimates the expected term using historical data on employee exercises and post-vesting employment termination behavior taking into account the contractual life of the award.
The assumptions used to calculate the value of the stock option awards granted in 2020 and 2019 are presented as follows:
The weighted average grant-date fair values of options granted for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $2.3923 and $1.5806, respectively.
Restricted Stock Units
On December 30, 2020, we granted the following shares of restricted common stock under the 2020 Stock Plan:
● 370,101 shares to various employees and non-employee directors, which vest on June 30, 2021, subject to the employee’s continuous employment through such vesting date. The award represents 5% of the converted stock options under 2014 Stock Plan as a result of the Reverse Recapitalization and complements the 5% closing payment shares held in escrow for Clene Nanomedicine common shareholders. The grant-date fair value of these awards was $4.0 million.
● 454,781 shares to various employees and non-employee directors, which were eligible to vest based on certain market conditions, subject to the employee’s continuous employment through such vesting date. The award complements the Milestone 1 earn-out share entitlement of Clene Nanomedicine shareholders and vests based on the same market condition. The grant-date fair value of these awards, using a Monte Carlo simulation, was $4.3 million. Based on the outcome of the market condition as of the December 31, 2020 measurement date, no shares were vested.
● 341,090 shares to various employees and non-employee directors, which were eligible to vest based on certain market conditions, subject to the employee’s continuous employment through such vesting date. The award complements the Milestone 2 earn-out share entitlement of Clene Nanomedicine shareholders and vests based on the same market condition. The grant-date fair value of these awards, using a Monte Carlo simulation, was $3.5 million. Based on the outcome of the market condition as of the December 31, 2020 measurement date, no shares were vested.
● 341,090 shares to various employees and non-employee directors, which were eligible vest based on certain performance conditions tied to the completion of the COVID-19 coronavirus treatment study, subject to the employee’s continuous employment through such vesting date. The award complements the Milestone 3 earn-out share entitlement of Clene Nanomedicine shareholders and vests based on the same performance condition. The grant-date fair value of these awards was $3.7 million based on a weighted average grant date fair value of $10.82 per share. The Company did not recognize compensation expense because the occurrence of achieving this milestone was not probable. As of the December 31, 2020, no shares were vested.
The following table summarizes the restricted common stock activity during the year ended December 31, 2020:
The assumptions used to calculate the value of the restricted stock units granted in 2020 in the Monte Carlo valuation model include projected stock price, volatility and risk-free rate based on the achievement of certain stock price milestones. Our significant unobservable inputs as of December 31, 2020 were as follows: (i) 85% of expected stock price volatility, (ii) risk-free interest rate of 0.4%, and (iii) expected term of 5 years.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in the consolidated financial statements or in our tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined on the basis of the differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded in the provision for income taxes. We assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income and, to the extent we believe, based upon the weight of available evidence, that it is more likely than not that all or a portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized, a valuation allowance is established through a charge to income tax expense. Potential for recovery of deferred tax assets is evaluated by estimating the future taxable profits expected and considering prudent and feasible tax planning strategies.
We account for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in the consolidated financial statements by applying a two-step process to determine the amount of tax benefit to be recognized. First, the tax position must be evaluated to determine the likelihood that it will be sustained upon external examination by the taxing authorities. If the tax position is deemed more-likely-than-not to be sustained, the tax position is then assessed to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the consolidated financial statements. The amount of the benefit that may be recognized is the largest amount that is more-likely-than-not to be realized upon ultimate settlement. The provision for income taxes includes the effects of any resulting tax reserves, or unrecognized tax benefits, that are considered appropriate as well as the related net interest and penalties.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and result of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.